Traveller's Joy
Sweet Violet
WILD FLOWERS
of the British Isles
Bluebell
Tritilfary
Cowslip
Meadow Crane's-biU
I
BRITAIN
An Official Handbook
HER MAJESTY THE Q U E E N
BRITAI N
An Official Handbook
PREPARED BY
THE CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION
i960 EDITION
LONDON
HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
© Crown copyright 1959
Printed and published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
To be purchased from
York House, Kingsway, London w.c.2
423 Oxford Street, London w.l
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh 2
109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff
39 King Street, Manchester 2
Tower Lane, Bristol 1
2 Edmund Street, Birmingham 3
80 Chichester Street, Belfast
or through any bookseller
Obtainable in the United States of America
from the British Information Services,
45 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, N.Y.
Price £i 5s. od. net
Printed in England
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION ix
I. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 7
II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
General Survey 24
The Monarchy 25
Parliament 29
The Privy Council 4°
Her Majesty’s Government 42
Government Departments 46
The Civil Service 64
Local Government 69
The Law 77
Treatment of Offenders 91
The Police Service 99
The Fire Service 103
III. DEFENCE
The Defence System 108
The Fighting Services 116
Home Defence 127
IV. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services 131
National Insurance and Related Services 133
Health 144
Education 157
Youth Services i73
V. HOUSING AND PLANNING
Problems and Administration 179
Housing 179
Town and Country Planning 185
VI. THE CHURCHES i93
VII. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Promotion of the Sciences 201
The Promotion of the Arts 221
Page
VIII. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Background 239
The Structure of the Economy 241
IX. INDUSTRY
Organisation and Production 250
Agriculture 2^S
Fisheries 2^9
Forestry 294
Fuel and Power 299
Water Supply 31?
Building and Contracting 321
Manufacturing Industries 324
X. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Shipping 354
Inland Transport 3^3
Civil Aviation 377
The Post Office 386
XL LABOUR
Manpower 393
Government Employment and Training Services 398
Terms of Employment and Working Conditions 403
XII. FINANCE
Public Finance 424
Banking and Private Finance 435
XIII. TRADE
Overseas Trade 444
The Balance of Payments 460
Internal Trade 471
XIV. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 477
XV. THE PRESS 487
XVI. SPORT 496
APPENDIX British Currency and Currency Exchange Rates,
Weights and Measures, and Conversion Tables 512
BIBLIOGRAPHY 516
INDEX 548
vi
DIAGRAMS
Page
Birth Rates and Death Rates 10
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 10
Percentage Change in Population since 1901 by Age Group 12
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 26
Organisation of the National Health Service in England and Wales 147
Increase in Expenditure on the Gross Domestic Product 1954-1958 242
Supply of Goods and Services in 1935 and 1957 243
Production and National Income Trends 1900-58 245
Public and Private Fixed Investment 1954 and 1958 245
Unemployment Rates (Great Britain) 1922-58 397
Earnings, Wage Rates and Retail Prices 416
The United Kingdom Budget 1959-60 433
Changes in the Volume of Trade 1947-58 446
Balance of Payments on Current Account 1954-58 462
Reserves of Gold and Convertible Currencies 1945-58 464
Overseas Sterling Holdings 1945-58 465
The sources of the pre-war figures for the graph of Production and National Income
Trends are: Production Index, T. S. Ridley in Economica, February 1955; National
Income Index, A. R. Prest in Economic Journal, March 1948.
MAPS
United Kingdom: Physical 3
United Kingdom: Agriculture 268
The United Kingdom fold-in map
PHOTOGRAPHS
Her Majesty the Queen frontispiece
facing page
An English Village: Muker in Swaledale, Yorkshire 22
The Highlands of Scotland: Loch Shiel 22
Belfast Docks, Northern Ireland 23
Wales: Tremadoc Bay and the Snowdon Range 23
Television for Traffic Control 38
A Juvenile Court 38
Road Safety Lesson 38
Her Majesty the Queen Opening Parliament 39
Some British Birds 118
H.M.S. Tiger 119
The Victor B2 Bomber Aircraft 119
The Blue Streak Ballistic Missile 119
The Saladin Armoured Car 119
H.M. Submarine Porpoise 119
vii
facing page
Meals-on-Wheels !34
District Nurse I34
Students at Northampton College of Advanced Technology, London 135
A College Tutorial at Cambridge University 135
The Hovercraft I9°
Oxygen Unit for Cancer Treatment 19°
The President of the Royal Society and Research into Virus Structure 190
England’s New Towns betiveen pages 190 and 191
Children’s Mobile Library 191
Opera Interval at Glyndebourne 191
Hereford Cows 310
Aberdeen Angus Bull at Perth 310
British Hydrocarbon Chemicals Plant, Grangemouth 311
Rolls-Royce Altitude Test Plant, Derby 311
Berkeley Nuclear Power Station under Construction 311
The Vickers Vanguard Airliner 326
Short SC 1 Vertical Take-off Aircraft 326
Fairey Rotodyne Vertical Take-off Aircraft 326
Westland Westminster Heavy-duty Helicopter 326
Armstrong Whitworth Argosy Aircraft 326
Mobile Oil-drilling Platform 327
Vickers Vigor Tractor 3 27
Acrow Jet Dredger 327
Rapier Walking Dragline 327
BBC Television Centre under Construction 486
A BBC Television Broadcast 486
Safety at Sea 4&7
Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud Saloon Car 502
Jaguar Drophead Coupe Car 502
Triumph Herald Car 502
Cooper Climax Car 502
The London-Birmingham Motorway under Construction 502
Throwing the Weight at the Highland Games 503
Peter Radford, Sprinter 5°3
Miss Pat Smythe Riding Mr. Pollard 5°3
Norman Sheil, Cyclist S°3
Ian Black, Swimmer 5°3
Arthur Rowe Putting the Shot 5°3
Acknowledgment for photographs is made to the following: Pye Ltd. (traffic control, facing p. 38);
de Havilland Propellers Ltd. {Blue Streak, facing p. 119); the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food (meals-on-wheels, facing p. 134); St. Thomas’s Hospital, London (oxygen unit, facing
p. 190); The Guardian (library, facing p. 191); the British Petroleum Co. Ltd. (chemicals plant,
facing p. 311); the AEI-John Thompson Nuclear Energy Co. Ltd. (Berkeley Power Station, facing
p.311); the Shell Transport and Trading Co. Ltd. (oil-drilling platform, facing p. 327); Ransomes
and Rapier Ltd. (walking dragline, facing p. 327); the AEI Lamp and Lighting Co. Ltd. (lighthouse
lenses, facing p. 487); the Marconi International Marine Communication Co. Ltd. (radar unit,
facing p. 487); and Aerofilms Ltd. (BBC centre, facing p. 486, and motorway, facing p. 502).
The frontispiece photograph is by Mr. Donald McKague and the drawings of wild flowers on
the end-papers are by Mr. Frederick Huntley.
viii
INTRODUCTION
Britain: an official handbook, i960, is the eleventh in the series
prepared and extensively revised each year by the Reference Division of the
Central Office of Information with the co-operation of other Government
departments and of many national organisations.
The handbook, which is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided
by the British Information Services in many countries, was at first only
available overseas in a limited free edition. In 1954 it was placed on sale
throughout the world and it has since become widely known as an established
work of reference.
Britain: an official handbook, i960, which covers events up to
September 1959, gives, like its predecessors, a factual account of the admini¬
stration and the national economy of the United Kingdom. It describes the
activities of many of the national institutions, both official and unofficial, and
shows the part played by the Government in the life of the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt to
cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The factual
and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and other
authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to the
United Kingdom as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland,
and Northern Ireland are also given separately when these are available.
The arrangement of chapters in this edition follows that of previous years.
A new feature, however, is the addition of a chapter on sport, covering briefly
the principal sports and games practised in Britain and the various governing
bodies concerned.
Readers who require more detailed information on the United Kingdom
should consult the Annual Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of
Statistics, issued by the Central Statistical Office, and also other Government
publications and standard works of reference, some of which are listed in
the bibliography at the end of the handbook. Readers are asked to note that
the Central Office of Information reference documents listed in the biblio¬
graphy as free and marked with an asterisk are available free of charge only
at United Kingdom Information Offices overseas; they can, however, be
obtained in the United Kingdom from the Reference Division, Central Office
of Information, on payment of a small charge.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September 1959
ix
I. THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe with a
total area of about 121,600 square miles. The largest islands are Great Britain
proper (comprising the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland) and Ireland
(comprising Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the southern coast
of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the Isles of
Scilly; off North Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by numerous
islands and to the far north are the important groups of the Orkneys and Shetlands.
All these form administrative counties or parts of counties of the mainland, but the
Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and
France have a large measure of administrative autonomy and are not part of
England, Wales or Scotland.
England (excluding the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border), has a total
area (including inland water) of 50,327 square miles and is divided into 40 geo¬
graphical or 49 administrative counties; Wales (including Monmouthshire), with
a total area of 8,017 square miles, has 13 counties; Scotland, including its 186
inhabited islands, has a total area of 30,411 square miles and is divided into 33
counties; and Northern Ireland, consisting of six counties, has a total area of
5,459 square miles. Together, these countries constitute the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland with a total area of 94,214 square miles.
The total land area of the United Kingdom (excluding inland water) is 93,018
square miles: England, 50,051; Wales and Monmouthshire, 7,966; Scotland,
29,795; and Northern Ireland, 5,206 square miles.
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they refer
to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together for many
administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which comprises England,
Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom as a whole. The position is further
complicated by the fact that the county of Monmouth is sometimes included with
England. United Kingdom statistics and other data sometimes include the Isle of
Man, 227 square miles, and the Channel Islands, 75 square miles, which are
strictly not part of the United Kingdom, but are dependencies of the Crown. Since
southern Ireland became independent, official statistics do not normally refer to
the British Isles as a whole.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British
mainland (the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 600 North passes through the
Shetland Islands. The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet Head,
near John o’ Groats, is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o° passes through
the old Observatory of Greenwich (London), while the easternmost point of
England is nearly i° 45' East and the westernmost point of Ireland is approxi¬
mately io° 30' West. It is just under 600 miles in a straight line from the south coast
of Britain to the extreme north and rather over 300 miles across in the widest part.
Owing to the numerous bays and inlets no point in the British Isles is as much as
75 miles from tidal water.
1
2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less than
50 fathoms (300 feet)—because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the
north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 600 feet
to 3,000 feet. These shallow waters are important because they provide excellent
fishing grounds as well as breeding grounds for the fish. The North Atlantic Current,
the drift of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads
out over the shelf and its ameliorating effect on the air is thus magnified. The effect
of tidal movement is also increased by the shallowness of the water.
Geology and Topography
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main geological
periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant to weather, and
have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south and east, and the
island can therefore be divided roughly into two main regions, Lowland Britain and
Highland Britain.
In Lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern England
have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and rising to chalk
and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet above sea level. The
boundaries of this region run roughly from the mouth of the Tyne in the north-east
of England to the mouth of the Exe in the south-west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and moors
of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands, which
extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the Lake District
in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the Pennines, almost the
wrhole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of England coinciding approxi¬
mately with the counties of Devon and Cornwall. Highland Britain contains all the
mountainous parts1 of Great Britain and extensive uplands lying above one
thousand feet. This high ground, however, is not continuous but is interspersed
with valleys and plains. Geologically the mountains and hills consist mainly of
outcrops of very old rocks (archaean and palaeozoic), while the top strata in the
valleys and plains are mainly more recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those
in the northern and western parts of Lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal measures
which have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion. The outcrops
and shallow seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted were found on
the edge of the plains and up the valleys leading to the high land. Most of the
present deep coal workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors of
present-day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice Age, and
at one period or another during this time the whole of Britain north of a line joining
the river Thames and the Bristol Channel was covered by ice caps and ice sheets.
The ice naturally accumulated on the higher ground and swept from the mountains
of Scotland, northern England and Wales any loose rock or soil which had previously
been formed, so that, when the ice eventually disappeared, the hills stood out as
barren rocky areas, while a thick mantle of glacial debris—boulders, boulder-clay,
sands and gravels—lay distributed widely over the lower ground. The ice had
blocked up previous drainage channels and left large lakes, which have since
gradually dried up, leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of
great fertility.
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4>4°6 feet; in Wales, Snowdon, 3>56o
feet; and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District, Cumberland), 3,210 feet. The
highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
3
UNITED KINGDOM
Physical
Atlantic
|| Land over
if 600 ft.
A Peaks
A Ben Nevis 4,406 ft.
B Snowdon 3,560 ft.
C Scafell 3,210 ft.
D Slieve Donard 2,796 ft.
North Sea
River Thames
English Chan
isles oF.y Land
S C I L L \ End The Lizard
4 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by the
ice sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption of the
previous natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses of Ireland are irregularly
placed around central lowlands; in the higher parts the moorland vegetation
resembles that of the higher parts of Highland Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety of
scenery and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances, particularly on
the coasts. The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach the coast in towering
cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as along much of the west
coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are notable features in other parts
of the varied coastline: the granite cliffs of Land’s End; the limestone masses
and slates of the Pembrokeshire coast in South Wales; the red sandstone of
St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast; and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye
and the island of Staffa in the Inner Hebrides. Even around Lowland Britain
there are striking contrasts. In some parts the soft, white limestone the chalk
forms the world-famous white cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight,
while other parts of the south and south-east coastline have beaches of sand or
shingle. The eastern coast of England between the Humber and the Thames
estuary is for the most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches
of it have been protected against the sea by embankments. These have occasionally
been breached, as in the flood disaster of January 1953, which was caused by
the abnormal concurrence of violent gales and exceptionally high tides.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of the
sand and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the short
British rivers1 valuable as natural harbours.
Climate
Britain has a temperate and equable climate. It lies in middle latitudes to
the north-west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but as the prevailing
winds are south-westerly the climate is largely determined by that of the eastern
Atlantic, although occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may bring
a cold, dry, continental type of weather which, once established, may persist for
many days or even weeks. The weather from day to day is controlled mainly by a
succession of depressions from the Atlantic which, moving in a generally easterly
or north-easterly direction, pass over or near the British Isles. During the summer
months the Azores high pressure system usually extends its influence north¬
eastwards towards north-west Europe, and the depressions take a more northerly
course, often passing entirely to the north of the British Isles.
Winds. In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from
the south-east and east the least; easterly winds occur about half as often as south¬
westerly ones although they are appreciably more frequent in the spring than at
any other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction may differ markedly
from the general direction owing to local topography. Winds are generally stronger
in the north than in the south of the British Isles, stronger on the coasts than
inland, and stronger in the west than in the east. The strongest winds usually occur
in the winter; the average speed at Lerwick, Shetland Islands, varies from about
22 m.p.h. in January to about 14 m.p.h. in August, while at Kew Observatory, on
the western outskirts of London, the average speed varies from about 10 m.p.h. in
January to about 7 m.p.h. in August. The stormiest region of the British Isles is
iThe longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only 210 and 200
miles long respectively.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
5
along the north-west coast with over 30 gales a year; south-east England and the
east Midlands are the least stormy, with gales occurring on about 2 days a year
inland and on some 15 to 20 days on the Channel coast.
Temperature. Near sea level the mean annual temperature ranges from 470 F. in
the Hebrides to 520 F. in the extreme south-west of England; it is slightly lower
in the eastern part of the country in the same latitude. The mean monthly
temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetlands), ranges from 390 F.
during the winter (December, January and February) to 530 F. during the summer
(June, July and August): the corresponding figures for Jersey (Channel Islands),
in the extreme south, are 430 F. and 63° F. The average range of temperature
between winter and summer varies from 150 F. to 230 F., being greatest inland
in the eastern part of the country. During a normal summer, the temperature
occasionally rises above 8o° F. in the south, but temperatures of 90° F. and
above are infrequent. Extreme minimum temperatures depend to a large extent on
local conditions, but 20° F. may occur on a still, clear winter’s night, io° F. is rare,
and o°F. or below has been recorded only during exceptionally severe winter periods.
Rainfall. The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches,
while England alone has about 34 inches. The geographical distribution of annual
rainfall is largely governed by topography and exposure to the Atlantic, the
mountainous areas of the west and north having far more rain than the plains of the
south and east. Between 150 and 200 inches of rain fall on the summits of Snowdon
and Ben Nevis during the average year, whereas some places in the south-east of
England record less than 20 inches. Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the
year, but, on the average, March to June are the driest months and October to
January the wettest, the former period of four months having about 60 per cent of
the rainfall of the latter. A period of as long as three weeks without rain is ex¬
ceptional, and is usually confined to limited areas. The spring and summer of 1959,
however, were unusually dry and sunny, and many areas, especially in southern,
central and eastern England, enjoyed a number of rainless periods of three weeks
or more.
Sunshine. The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general
decrease from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the mean
daily duration of sunshine varies from five and a half hours in western Scotland to
seven and a half hours in the extreme south-east of England; during the months of
shortest daylight—November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum,
with an average of half an hour a day in the Highlands of Scotland and in the Peak
District (Derbyshire) and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
Soil and Vegetation
Many parts of the surface of Highland Britain have only thin, poor soils, with
the result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands of Scotland,
the Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in parts of north-east
and south-west England. In most areas the farmer has cultivated only the valley
lands and the plains where soils are deeper and richer; villages and towns are often
separated by uplands with few if any habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of poor soil or rocky land, almost the whole
of Lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area except where
there are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land drainage systems have
been developed through the centuries to bring under cultivation the fertile soil of
the low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and similar areas in East Anglia.
6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of natural
vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably covered the
greater part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands, thin forests of
Scots pine on higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open moorland. In the
course of the centuries nearly all the forests have been cleared and woodlands now
occupy only about 7 per cent of the surface of the country. Midland Britain
appears to be well wooded because of the numerous hedgerows and isolated
trees. The greatest density of woodland occurs in the north and east of Scotland,
in some parts of south-east England and in Monmouthshire on the Welsh border.
The most common trees are oak, beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of woods,
fens and marshes, foreshores and cliffs, chalk downs and the higher slopes of moun¬
tains; the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country, which consists
mainly of heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton grass in the wetter parts.
Most of Britain, however, is agricultural land, of which about a third is arable and
the rest pasture and meadow, a varied semi-natural vegetation composed of
indigenous grasses and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges or stone walls and, especially in
the mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents a pattern of contrasting
colour. The cool temperate climate of Britain and the even distribution of rainfall
ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry up, grassland is green throughout
the year and full of wild flowers from spring to autumn; there is scarcely a month in
which some flowers may not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
Fauna
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western
Europe, though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals, including
the wolf, the bear, the boar and the Irish elk, have become extinct; but red deer,
protected for sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish Highlands and on Exmoor
in the counties of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are found in Scotland and in
the wooded areas of southern England, and fallow deer (which are not indigenous)
have been introduced into parks and are wild in some districts. The badger, a noc¬
turnal animal, is rarely seen; there are foxes in most rural areas, and otters are found
along many rivers and streams. Both common and grey seals may be seen on various
parts of the coast, though not usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals
include mice, rats, voles, shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey
more numerous than the native red), hares, rabbits (a serious farming pest before
their decimation by myxomatosis in the years 1954 and 1955), weasels and stoats.
There are about 430 species of birds, including many song-birds. About 230
species are resident and the rest are regular visitors to Britain. The chaffinch and
the blackbird are probably the most numerous and are widely and evenly distri¬
buted, but sparrows usually predominate near houses, and huge flocks of starlings,
which gather at certain seasons, sometimes congregate in London and other
large towns. In general, the number of small birds has been on the increase for
several decades owing to their success in adapting themselves to a man-made
environment and also to their more considerate treatment by the public. The
number of large birds, on the other hand, has tended to decline, except for game
birds which are specially preserved, such as pheasants and partridges, and the red
grouse which is found in moorland areas.
The many species of gulls and other sea-birds which nest round the coast often
fly far inland in search of food or shelter in rough weather. The drainage and
reclamation of marsh lands have diminished the natural habitat of duck, geese and
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
other aquatic birds. Such birds, however, now frequent reservoirs, gravel pits and
sewage farms in addition to the nature reserves and bird sanctuaries which the
Government is establishing on an increasing scale. Many of the rarer species of
birds are protected by law.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three species
of snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of lizards,
including the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented by three
species of newts and five species of frogs and toads. Of these, only one species of
newt and the common viviparous lizard are indigenous; the other species of
reptiles and amphibians that are now firmly established came to Britain from
Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
River and lake fish include salmon, trout, sea-trout, perch, roach, dace, grayling
and pike.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small, in
the British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly (3 to 4 inches)
and the stag beetle (2J inches). The insect fauna in Britain is less varied than that
of continental Europe and lacks a number of common European species. With
modern methods of pest control, extensive insect damage to crops or timber and
serious outbreaks of diseases commonly spread by insect vectors are exceptional
in Britain.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the
people who inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long succession
of invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of Europe were the
Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian Vikings who, after settling
in northern France, intermarrying with the French, and assimilating the French
language and customs, crossed to England and conquered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the rela¬
tive importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans, Anglo-Saxons
and the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the present English,
Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over most of England and
the Lowlands of Scotland the language which soon came to predominate was
English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and Norman-French, while the use of
Celtic languages persisted in Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, the Highlands of
Scotland and in Ireland (see p. 18).
The available records do not permit of any precise estimates of the size of popula¬
tion or of the extent or direction of population movement until the beginning of
the nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the end of the eleventh
century the population of Great Britain was about two million, while at the end
of the seventeenth century a reasonable contemporary estimate put the population
of England and Wales at 5^ million and that of Scotland at about one million.
The main factor in this gradual growth of population was a slow natural increase,
the rate of which was retarded in Britain, as in all countries before the development
of medical science, by high death rates and, in particular, by very high infant and
maternal mortality. Immigration from the continent of Europe was an influence
at certain times, for example, that of Flemish weavers in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British
people—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths, marriages,
occupations, language and family structure—is relatively plentiful and reliable.
B
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
8
Most of it is derived from two main sources: the regular flow of vital statistics,
i.e. statistical information based on statutory registration of births, marriages and
deaths, and the periodic census of population which gives a national snapshot at a
particular moment of time.
The Compilation of Vital Statistics
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is carried
out by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as registrars of
marriages. In England and Wales, there are about five hundred superintendent
registrars in charge of registration districts and about twelve hundred registrars
in charge of sub-districts. Registrars and superintendent registrars are appointed
by the county, county borough and metropolitan borough councils but they act
under the instruction of the Registrar General for England and Wales, who is in
charge of a central Government department, the General Register Office, concerned
with regulating the registration of births, deaths and marriages, with planning and
carrying out population censuses, and with the compilation and analysis of
population and vital statistics. There are corresponding authorities1 and similar
arrangements (differing only in detail) in Scotland, Northern Ireland, the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
In England and Wales, there is a legal obligation for births, deaths and marriages
to be registered. The responsibility for giving information to a local registrar about
a birth is placed first on the parents of the child (the mother where the child is
illegitimate), then on the occupier of the house and any person present at the birth,
on the person in charge of the child or on any person finding a new-born child.
Similarly, information for the registration of a death must be given by a relative
present at the death or in attendance during the last illness or, in their absence,
by any other relative residing or being in the sub-district where the death occurred,
by the occupier or an inmate of the house or by any person finding or taking charge
of the body or arranging for its disposal. The doctor who attended the deceased
during his last illness must issue a certificate giving the cause of death and deliver
it at once to the registrar. Deaths of persons not receiving medical attention, deaths
the cause of which is unknown and unnatural, and accidental or violent deaths
must be reported to a coroner (see p. 85).
Marriages are registered immediately after the ceremony. In general, marriages
according to religious rites are entered in registers held by the officiating clergyman
or some other person appointed by the religious body concerned. Some religious
marriages, and all civil marriages (which are solemnised in superintendent
registrars’ offices) are attended and registered by registrars of marriages.
Certified copies of all entries of births, deaths and marriages are sent quarterly
to the General Register Office.
In Scotland, there are no superintendent registrars but for each of nearly 1,000
registration districts there is a registrar of births, deaths and marriages. Some 300
of these registrars may conduct civil marriages in their offices. Duplicate registers
are transmitted annually to the Registrar for Scotland after inspection by district
examiners. In the 184 registration districts of Northern Ireland, only live births
are registered (whereas both live and still births are registered in Great Britain)
and certain supplementary information (collected in Great Britain primarily for
fertility studies) is not required. Roman Catholic marriages in Northern Ireland
1 The various authorities are: the General Register Office, Somerset House, London, the
General Registry Office, Edinburgh; the General Register Division of the Ministry ot
Finance of the Government of Northern Ireland; the Governments of Jersey, ot Guernsey
and its associated islands, and of the Isle of Man.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 9
are registered on the authority of a certificate completed at the time of the ceremony,
instead of being recorded in a bound register immediately the ceremony is over.
The Census
Censuses of the people of Great Britain were taken regularly every ten years from
1801 to 1931. There was no census between 1931 and 1951, but a count of the
population by age and sex was a by-product of the national registration which was
instituted at the outbreak of the second world war in September 1939.
Censuses were taken on 8th April, 1951, by the appropriate authorities in the
United Kingdom, the islands of the British seas and the Irish Republic. This
was the first simultaneous population count covering all these areas since the
censuses of 1911. The co-operation of the Irish Republic in arranging a simul¬
taneous census was of particular value, owing to the considerable sea and land
traffic and the movement of population between that country and the United
Kingdom. All the reports based on these censuses have now been published.
The short demographic account of the United Kingdom given in this chapter is
based mainly on census reports and on the regular returns of births, marriages and
deaths, though some use has been made of other special investigations, including
the Reports of the Royal Commission on Population.1
Total Population
The enumerated population of the United Kingdom at the censuses taken on
8th April, 1951, was, to the nearest thousand, 50,225,000, excluding 158,000 persons
in the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands, which are not strictly parts of the
United Kingdom.
The population had increased by about 2J million since mid-1939, by about
4 million since 1931, by about 6 million since 1921 and by about 43 million—or
about sevenfold—since 1700. The main causes of this increase were a progressive
reduction in death rates and a continuance of high birth rates into the beginning
of the twentieth century. The population is still increasing, though relatively slowly,
and at mid-1958 the home population of the United Kingdom (i.e. those people
actually in the United Kingdom at that time) was estimated at 51,680,000.
The population density of the United Kingdom is one of the highest in the
world. It was approximately 533 persons per square mile at the time of the 1951
censuses, and had risen to 548 persons per square mile at mid-1958.
Birth and Death Rates. For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate
was about 35 per thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just
over 20 per thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 30 years of the
century, but the natural increase of the population changed but little. It rose from
12 per thousand in 1851 to 15 per thousand in 1881, and fell to 11 per thousand in
1901.
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age groups,
produced a population of low average age. At each successive census the population
of any age group exceeded the corresponding figure at the preceding census, while
the short expectation of life further reduced the ratio of older to younger persons.
When, therefore, death rates in all age groups fell by an average of about 33 per
cent, as they did between 1880 and 1910, the results were a very low general death
rate, which helped to maintain the population increase in spite of a fall in the birth
rate, and a gradual increase in the average age of the population.
1This commission was appointed in March 1944; its main report was published in
March 1949.
IO Britain: an official handbook
After the first world war the birth rate fell to less than half the nineteenth-century
rate. Even so, the population continued to increase slowly, though its average age
rose more rapidly (see diagram p. 12).
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained
nearly stationary at around 12 per thousand of the population though death rates
have continued to fall heavily in every age group, particularly among pre-school
children, school children, and adults in their thirties and forties, with a consequent
lengthening of the expectation of life from about 50 years at birth in 1900 to 1910
to about 70 years at birth in 1955 to 1957- From 1933 onwards the birth rate
steadied itself up to the outbreak of the second world war, after which all orderly
movement was interrupted by the disturbed conditions of the war years. The 1947
birth rate (20-7 per thousand of the population) was the highest since 1921, but the
1948, 1949, 1950 and 1951 birth rates were progressively lower, though higher than
pre-war. From 1951 to 1956, the birth rate remained fairly steady and slightly
higher than before the war, at about 15^ to 16 per thousand of the population,
since 1956 it has risen, and was 16-8 per thousand in 1958 (see diagrams below).
BIRTH RATES AND DEATH RATES
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
I I
Mortality Causes. The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition,
rising standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in per¬
sonal hygiene, public and private schemes to make the health services generally
available, and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain on mothers
and enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant and
maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main acute
infectious diseases of childhood is less than one-hundredth and mortality from
tuberculosis is less than one-thirtieth of the rate prevailing in the mid-nineteenth
century. Infant mortality (i.e. deaths of infants under one year old per thousand
live births) has fallen by about 80 per cent since 1900. Between 1934 and 1942
maternal mortality was nearly halved, and is now only about one-seventh of the
1934 rate. The reported mortality from many of the chronic diseases of middle and
old age, such as cancer of the lung and coronary thrombosis, has risen during the
twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the improvement in diag¬
nosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet discovered effective measures to
combat some of these diseases, and improvement in positive health does not
always bring increased immunity or resistance to them.
Fertility Trends. The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and
the early part of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of
the family (i.e. the number of children born per married couple) caused by the
spread of deliberate family limitation. Couples married a hundred years ago pro¬
duced on the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline seems to
have set in with those married in the 1860s, and continued steadily until, with the
couples married in the late 1920s, the average family size had been reduced to
between 2-2 and 2-1. The decline then stopped, and the figure has remained stable
in spite of the disturbance of the war years; the latest data suggest a slight increase.
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20 and
30 years later, had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to replace
the original generation, while those born at the beginning of the present century had
only about 70 per cent of the number of children needed for replacement. Since
then the figure has been rising again and may reach full replacement with the
generations born during the second world war. But the rise has been due more to
the increased proportion of children surviving to adult life and of women getting
married than to the small increase in family size.
At first the decline in family size was most marked among the professional and
salaried classes. Among couples married between 1900 and 1930 the families of
manual workers were about 40 per cent larger than those of non-manual workers,
but this class difference appears to have been diminishing. The decline in family
size has been slower in Scotland and Northern Ireland than in England and Wales.
Age Distribution. The first effect of the fall in the birth rate was to reduce the
number of children, and therefore the ratio of dependent population to working
population. This ratio was at a minimum in the 1930s. Since then the continuous
fall in death rates and the low inter-war birth rates have been increasing the propor¬
tion of elderly people, and thus reducing the proportion of the working population
to the total population. The small age groups born between the wars have been
coming to maturity. The size of the age groups reaching retirement age increases
yearly, as these groups were born during a period of rapidly expanding population.
The continuing fall of death rates in all age groups has still further increased the
number of old persons. Moreover, the higher birth rates after 1942 have arrested
12
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the compensating fall in the number of dependent children and have further
reduced the ratio of working to dependent population.
At mid-1958 the age distribution of the United Kingdom was estimated as
follows:
Under 15 . . . • 23-3 per cent
15 to 64 . . . • 65-1 per cent
65 and over . . . . n*6 per cent
An unusually large proportion of the population of the United Kingdom (about
14-5 per cent) is now between 45 and 55 years of age. Assuming a continued fall
in death rates and net emigration of 27,000 people a year from the usual age groups,
it can be estimated that:
(1) over the next 15 years the population of working age will increase slowly;
(2) the number of old people (over 65) will increase over the next 30 years by
rather more than 2% million.
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN POPULATION SINCE 1901
BY AGE GROUP
1901 = 0
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
13
Sex Ratio. Total live births of boys currently exceed those of girls by about 6 per
cent, but owing to the higher infant mortality rate among boys, and the higher male
death rates in all age groups, women have, until recently, outnumbered men in
every age group from adolescence onwards and in the total population. Their
predominance increases with age and is now over 60 per cent among persons over
70 years of age.
The fall in mortality has affected the sex ratio by increasing the proportion of old
persons in both sexes, which has made female predominance in those age groups a
weightier factor in the sex ratio of the population as a whole. At the same time
there has been a slight rise in the proportion of boys among children under 15 years
of age, and the ages at which males outnumber females extend beyond adolescence
to about 24 years. There is thus no longer a surplus of women at the usual ages of
marriage.
The proportion of females to males in the total population has not varied greatly,
however, as these two effects have counterbalanced each other. At present there are
between seven and eight per cent more females than males.
Migration. Since the beginning of the nineteenth century, net migration has been
markedly outward. In that period, about 25 million persons born in the British Isles
are estimated to have emigrated to the United States and Commonwealth countries
overseas. On the other hand, large numbers of Europeans, mainly Russians,
Poles, Germans and Hungarians, have entered the British Isles during the last
80 years. The net loss by migration since 1871 from the present area of the United
Kingdom is about 3J million. During the inter-censal period 1931-51 the balance
of migration to and from the United Kingdom was inward for the first time
in the past century. The net gain to the United Kingdom from civilian migration
was about half a million, a net gain of three-quarters of a million to England and
Wales being offset by net losses from Scotland and Northern Ireland. This net gain
was the balance between a large outward movement mainly of British subjects
emigrating to Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, and a larger
inward movement consisting chiefly of British subjects returning home during the
1930s and of aliens from Europe, including about a quarter of a million refugees1
seeking sanctuary in Britain. There was also considerable net immigration from
the Irish Republic. Taking only the period 1946-51 the balance of migration by
sea (figures for air transport are not available) was outward owing to the high net
outflow (some 65,000 a year) to Commonwealth countries overseas. In 1952 this
net outflow reached a peak of 87,000, but it was subsequently reduced, chiefly
owing to increased immigration into Britain from other parts of the Common¬
wealth, particularly the West Indies, and the total balance of migration to and
from all countries for the years 1952 to 1956 was certainly small. Exceptionally
high migration began towards the end of 1956, partly due to a sudden surge in the
flow of emigration to Canada, and also to an influx of British repatriates from
Egypt, and of some 21,000 Hungarian refugees,1 of whom over 14,000 have remained
in Britain. Migration in 1957, both inward and outward, was over 200,000, if
migrants by air are included. Preliminary estimates of emigration in 1958 place it
much lower—under 140,000—and it seems likely that immigration was also reduced.
1 The total number of refugees who have come to Britain in the past twenty-five years
has been estimated at about 330,000, of whom 80,000 came before the second world war.
In the immediate future, however, Britain’s principal contribution to the solution of
refugee problems is likely to be its financial support of the international effort. Britain
was the originator of the plan for the World Refugee Year, which was inaugurated in
June 1959, in accordance with a resolution sponsored by the United Kingdom in the
General Assembly of the United Nations in December 1958.
14
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Birthplace and Nationality. At the 1951 census, some 1-7 million persons in the
United Kingdom were reported as having been born outside it. About a fifth ot
them had been born in other independent Commonwealth countries or in United
Kingdom dependencies, about a third in the 26 counties of southern Ireland (now
the Irish Republic), and nearly half in foreign countries, notably Poland, Germany,
Russia and the United States. The number born in the overseas Commonwealth
and in the Irish Republic had increased by about one-third and two-thirds,
respectively since 1931, and the number born in foreign countries had approxi¬
mately doubled. In view of the high levels of immigration, it is probable that the
number of persons living in the United Kingdom, but born elsewhere, has increased
further since 1951. An important factor in recent years has been immigration from
the West Indies, West Africa and Pakistan. Immigrants from those countries at
present living in Britain are estimated to number some 200,000.
Less than one per cent of persons were of alien nationality at the time of the 1951
census’ the remainder were either citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies
or of other Commonwealth countries, or were British protected persons or citizens
of the Irish Republic. . . .„
Under the British Nationality Act, 1948, with insignificant exceptions, persons
who are born, or whose fathers were born, in the United Kingdom or a colony ot
the United Kingdom or in a United Kingdom registered ship or aircraft are
citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies. Citizenship may also be acquired:
by descent (subject to certain requirements) from a paternal grandfather born in
the United Kingdom and Colonies or from a more remote paternal ancestor in
the male line; by registration, for citizens of Commonwealth member countries
or of the Irish Republic, for minor children and for women married to citizens of
the United Kingdom and Colonies; by adoption under the Adoption Act, i95°>
and by naturalisation. The requirements for the grant of a certificate of naturalisa¬
tion include five years’ residence in the United Kingdom or Colonies or five years
Crown service, good character, a sufficient knowledge of English and the intention
to reside in the United Kingdom or a colony or to remain in Crown service.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizenship
bv acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another country; nor
does a woman who is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies lose her
citizenship by marriage to an alien. Indeed, a citizen cannot be deprived of his
citizenship against his will except in very exceptional circumstances (for example,
if he has obtained naturalisation or registration as a citizen by fraud). Any man
or woman who is a citizen is, however, at liberty to renounce citizenship if he or
she possesses or acquires the nationality or citizenship of another country.
Declarations of renunciation are very infrequent.
Citizens of the other independent Commonwealth countries are British subjec s
(or alternatively Commonwealth citizens) in the United Kingdom. They are free
to enter and remain in the United Kingdom without restrictions of any kind
Similar treatment is extended to citizens of the Irish Republic who, in the United
Kingdom, are not aliens.
Regional Distribution and Trends
The distribution of the population of the British Isles by country and major
administrative region as enumerated at the 1951 censuses, at certain previous
censuses back to 1841, and as estimated at mid-1957, 18 shown in Tables 1 and 2.
The populations of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland and of each
of the principal regions of England were in every case greater in 195? than in 1951
and in 1951 than in 1931, whereas in the period 1921-31 the populations of Wales,
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
IS
TABLE 1
Populations 1841-1958(a)
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
W The figures for 1841, 1871, 1901, 1931 and 1951 (with the exception of those in¬
dicated in (b) and (d) below) are for populations enumerated in censuses. The figures for
1958 are mid-year estimates to the nearest thousand. The figures for Scotland and Northern
Ireland are rounded from estimates in units and this may lead to apparent small discrep¬
ancies in the totals.
(W Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1937, but not in 1931).
(c) Military and Naval personnel are not included in these figures.
(d) Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1936, but not in 1931).
(<0 These figures take no account of migration.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
16
Scotland and Northern Ireland had declined. Between 1931 and 1951, the greatest
increases were in the eastern, southern, midland and south-western regions of
England, and in Northern Ireland. The smallest increase was in Wales. Since 1951
the main increases have been in the eastern, southern and north midland regions of
England. . ,
The population of the United Kingdom taken as a whole is predominantly urban
and suburban. During the nineteenth century, when the labour demands of newly
developing industry drew great numbers from the countryside to the towns, the
urban element continuously and rapidly outgrew the rural element. At the end of
the nineteenth century, 75 per cent of the British population was living within the
boundaries of urban administrative areas and the large conurbation1 was already
the dominant type of British community. By 1911, the economic and social limits of
these conurbations extended far beyond the administrative boundaries of the cities
which formed their core, owing to the building of outer suburbs which linked up
neighbouring towns. Since 1921, nearly 40 per cent of the population has lived in
the seven great conurbations whose centres are the cities of London, Manchester
(South East Lancashire), Birmingham and Wolverhampton (West Midlands),
Glasgow (Central Clydeside), Leeds and Bradford (West Yorkshire), Liverpool
(Merseyside), and Newcastle upon Tyne (see Table 2, pp. U-18);
During the twentieth century, the general character of urbanisation changed, the
later increases in urban areas being relatively much smaller and much more due to
the natural growth of the towns than to the influx of population from rural areas.
Moreover, two new and decided trends became apparent: first, the outer rings of
conurbations and the suburbs of large cities began to increase in population much
more rapidly than the large cities themselves; secondly, there was a considerable
migration, particularly of young adults, to the expanding new light industries and
suburban residential areas springing up in and around London and Birmingham.
This movement was intensified by the heavy unemployment of the inter-war years
which affected with particular severity the textile and heavy engineering industries
of Northern England, South Wales and Scotland.
The combined effect of these two trends was that the outer rings of the London
and Birmingham conurbations increased most in population, while the remoter
country areas and some industrial towns of Northern England, Wales and Scotland
declined. In urban areas in England and Wales, the medium-sized towns of between
50,000 and 100,000 inhabitants increased most rapidly, while the populations of
very large and very small towns tended to decline.
The second world war halted suburban building and for a time reduced the
population of conurbations and large cities, but by the end of the war many people
had returned to the neighbourhood of their pre-war homes. At the 1951 census
many large cities and towns had larger populations than in i939> but the popula¬
tions of others, notably London, were smaller. The decrease in the County of
London was about two-thirds of a million, and in spite of an increase in the popu¬
lation of the outer ring, the population of Greater London,2 8,348,023, was 380,000
less than in 1939. Since 1951, this decline has continued, while the populations of
many urban and rural areas surrounding Greater London have continued to increase
1 An area of urban development where a number of separate towns have grown into each
other or become linked by such factors as a common industrial or business interest or a
common centre for shopping or education.
2 Greater London (an area of 721-6 square miles) coincides with the metropolitan and
city police districts. It consists of the administrative county of London (117 square
miles, comprising the City of London and 28 metropolitan boroughs), the county of
Middlesex and parts of the counties of Surrey, Hertfordshire, Essex and Kent.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
17
TABLE 2
Distribution of the Population (a)
Thousands
Area in
square
miles(fe)
1921
1931
1939(c)
1951
1958(c)
Urban and rural districts
England and Wales:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Scotland:
Cities and burghs
Landward areas . .
Northern Ireland:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Standard regions of
England and Wales
Northern
East and West Ridings
North Western
North Midland
Midland
Eastern
London and
South Eastern
Southern
South Western
Wales
Conurbations
Greater London
South East Lancashire
West Midlands
Central Clydeside
West Yorkshire
Merseyside . .
Tyneside
Cities
Belfast
Birmingham . .
Bradford
Bristol
Cardiff
Coventry
Edinburgh . .
Glasgow
Kingston upon Hull
Leeds
Leicester
8,240-5
50,104-5
416-3
29,378-6
78-5
5,159-5
7,470-7
3,962-7
3,083-0
6,303-8
5,024-9
7,263-9
4,190-5
4,846-3
8,183-5
8,015-8
721-6
379-6
268-8
326-5
480-9
148-5
90-1
23
79
39
41
23
29
50-
60-4
22-4
59-8
26-5
30,035
7,851
3,311
1,572
638(J)
6\%d)
3,020
3,731
6,023
2,746
3,503
2,224
9,486
1,954
2,544
2,656
7,488
2,361
1,773
1,638
1,614
1,263
816
415(rf)
919
286
377
221
128
420
1,034
287
458
234
31,952
8,000
3,362
1,481
678(d)
602(d)
3,038
3,929
6,197
2,939
3,743
2,433
10,330
2,135
2,615
2,593
8,216
2,427
1,933
1,690
1,655
1,347
827
438(J)
1,003
298
397
227
167
439
1,088
314
483
239
34,183
7,277
3,525
1,482
684
611
3,003
3,976
6,237
3,065
3,987
2,691
11,046
2,317
2,673
2,465
8,728
2,421
2,079
1,783
1,658
1,357
825
439
1,053
288
419
226
220
472
1,128
318
497
263
35,336
8,422
3,563
1,534
728
643
3,141
4,097
6,447
3,378
4.423
3,098
10,906
2,649
3,021
2,599
8,348
2.423
2,237
1,758
1,693
1,382
836
444
1,113
292
443
244
258
467
1,090
299
505
285
36,185
8,924
3,648
1,521
772
630
3,202
4,134
6,485
3,532
4,605
3,516
11,006
2,908
3,106
2,615
8,222
2,416
2,281
1,791
1,688
1,383
848
436
1,095
288
438
253
281
467
1,079
301
512
278
Continued overleaf
Britain: an official handbook
TABLE 2 (contd.)
Distribution of the Population (a)
Thousands
Cities—contd.
Liverpool
Manchester . .
Newcastle upon Tyne
Nottingham ..
Sheffield
Stoke on Trent
Area in
square
miles(6)
42-7
42-6
17-3
25-3
61-9
33-1
1921
803
730
275
263
491
240
1931
856
766
283
269
512
277
1939(c)
822
728
293
279
522
271
1951
789
703
292
306
513
275
1958(c)
762
677
272
313
499
271
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
(d) The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given for cities relate to the areas as these were defined m
year noted at the head of each column. The figures for regions and conurbations, however,
relate as nearly as possible to areas as constituted in IQS1-
(6) Area at the date of the 1951 census of population.
(c) Mid-year estimate.
(d) 1926 and 1937 census figures.
very rapidly. There has also been a tendency for other large towns of over 250,000
inhabitants to decline in population, while towns of between 50,000 and 100,000
inhabitants have grown rapidly. . .
Table 2 shows the distribution of the population by urban and rural districts
and the populations of the standard administrative regions, of the seven major
conurbations and of 17 large cities, some of which are the principal cities included
in the conurbations.
Language
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language pre¬
dominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic, is the first
language of the majority of the population in most of the western counties
and was spoken by 29 per cent of the population at the time of the 1951 census.
In Scotland, in 1951, nearly 100,000 persons, mainly in Ross and Cromarty,
Inverness, Argyll, and Lanark, spoke the Scottish form of Gaelic, while a few
families in Northern Ireland spoke the Irish form of Gaelic. The Manx and Cornish
varieties of Celtic are no longer effectively living languages, although, in the Isle of
Man, Manx is spoken by a few people, and is used in addition to English for certain
official pronouncements. , . , •
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French patois
is still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official language o
Jersey, used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French and English are
used in the courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now used for almost all
official proceedings.
SOCIAL PATTERNS
A general summary of trends in social organisation, similar in scope to the fore¬
going summary of population trends, is not practicable. It may be useful, however,
1 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included
in the counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
19
to review some of the evidence relating to the structure of British households and
the extent and use of leisure in Britain in order to provide a background to the
information given in later chapters on such matters as town planning, housing, and
transport.
Number and Composition of Households
In Great Britain, as in other countries, most people live as members of private
households (usually families). Less than 5 per cent of the population was enumer¬
ated by the censuses of 1911, 1921, 1931 and 1951 in institutions such as hotels,
schools, and hospitals.
In 1911 there were about nine million private households1 in Great Britain. By
1951, according to the censuses of England and Wales, and of Scotland, there were
about 14! million households, an increase of about 60 per cent. This expansion,
so much more rapid than the 19 per cent increase in the total population for the
same period, was, in fact, of the same order as the increases in the numbers of
persons over 24 years old and of married persons. In other words, the increasing
age of the population meant more but smaller families. The average size of house¬
holds in Great Britain fell from 4-5 persons in 1911 to 3-2 in 1951. In England and
Wales the number of persons living in households of one or two persons almost
trebled between 1911 and 1951. At the end of this period such households
constituted about 40 per cent of private households and comprised about 20 per
cent of the population in private households. In 43 per cent of families of two
persons, the head of the household was 60 years of age or over.
It has been difficult to increase the number of separate dwelling-places (houses
or flats) sufficiently rapidly to overtake the increasing number of private house¬
holds, and this difficulty was aggravated by the suspension of house-building and
the destruction of property during the second world war. In 1951, there were only
some 13-7 million structurally separate dwelling-places in Great Britain, and about
2 million households shared a home. About 70 per cent of the dwellings were
houses of four to six rooms (mainly terraced or semi-detached houses), while
20 per cent were of three rooms or less (mainly flats). The proportion of small
dwellings was greatly above average in Scotland, where there were many slum
tenements, and considerably above average in London.
Of the 14^ million private households in Great Britain in 1951, 11J million were
estimated according to the 1951 census one per cent sample tables (based on an
analysis of a representative one per cent sample of census returns in Great Britain)
to be of the simplest type, comprising married couples or widowed persons with
their children, if any, or persons living alone. More specifically, they comprised
3-2 million married couples with no children, 900,000 widowed persons living
alone, 6-9 million married couples or widowed persons with children of any age,
600,000 single persons living alone. Over a third of all married couples living alone
were 60 years old or over; less than a quarter of the married couples under 40 years
of age in these simplest types of household had no children. Some three-quarters of
the single persons living alone and almost all widowed and divorced persons living
alone were over 40 years old, and about two-thirds of all persons living alone were
60 years of age or over.
Only 2 million households contained persons less closely related to the head than
parent or brother or sister, or contained non-relatives. In nearly half of these
households, a second family—a married couple or a woman with children—was
living with the first family, usually the parents. Of the remaining i-i million house-
Counting persons living alone as one-person households.
20 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
holds which contained some unrelated or distantly related persons (numbering
i-24 million), 300,000 households consisted of only two persons.
Over 8 million households (57 per cent of all households) were estimated in the
1951 census sample tables to be without children under 16, while another 3-1
million contained only one child. .
It was estimated that in 1951 there were 180,000 households in Great Britain
employing a total of 205,000 resident domestic servants, of whom 178,000 were in
England and Wales. This compares with an estimate of 706,800 resident domestic
servants in England and Wales in 1931.
Over half of the resident domestic servants in 1951 worked in small households
(of not more than three persons including the servant), while more than a quarter
were acting as the sole servant and household companion to one person of over
40 years of age. Already in 1951, a large proportion of resident domestic servants
and possibly the majority of those working for families with children—were girls
from Ireland or from continental Europe, many of whom were attracted by the
opportunity to see Britain or to learn English. Since 1951, the number of girls
from overseas coming to take resident domestic posts has increased.
In the years since 1951, considerable changes in the numbers, size and com¬
position of households may have taken place. No firm information on trends is
available but, in view of the extent of house-building and the continued increase in
the number of old people it is likely that the average size of households has
continued to decrease. .
The small average size of households does not imply that wider family and kin¬
ship ties are without strength and social significance. Indeed, a study, published in
I9S7>1 stressed the importance of the mutual help of relatives and neighbours in
the long-established and balanced communities living in the more crowded parts of
East London. The survey, which also covered a suburban area of Greater London,
noted the dangers of weakening such ties when households are moved out to more
congenial suburban surroundings.
Work and Leisure
The great majority of British males over 15 years of age are in full-time gainful
employment, and the majority of females are either housewives or in full-time
gainful employment. In many cases housewives also undertake part-time or even
full-time employment. .
Agreed hours of full-time work for the majority of occupations are usually trom
42 to 46 hours a week. Actual weekly hours worked by men average a little longer
owing to overtime working, and actual hours worked by women and girls average
a little less. In addition, the journey to and from work is often long. The 1951
census showed that three-quarters of the 1J million persons working in central
London lived outside it and that many travelled in from the fringes of Greater
London and some from farther away. A sample survey of travel in Greater London,
made in 1954, showed that 89 per cent of workers in Greater London made regular
journeys to work and that 56 per cent used public transport. The average time
taken by such persons was 39 minutes each way, though for workers in central
London it was 47 minutes each way.
There is also often a long journey for housewives to the main shopping centre
in both urban and rural areas. According to a sample survey made in 1946, it
averaged about 18 minutes each way, and in many rural areas took much longer.
In most areas there are, of course, a few shops much closer at hand.
1 Family and Kinship in East London, by Michael Young and Peter Willmott.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
A sample survey made in 1947 showed that only 6 per cent of housewives
employed any paid help, and only 1 per cent1 had a resident servant. Such surveys
confirm, what would in any case be readily deduced from everyday experience, that
housewives have less leisure and considerably fewer periods of continuous leisure
of over one hour than other persons in Britain, in spite of the growth of the habit of
eating some meals away from home and the spread of labour-saving devices.
Two households in every three now have a vacuum cleaner, one in three a washing
machine and about one in eight a refrigerator.
Compared with earlier generations, however, most people today have more
leisure. In many industries and services, hours of work are usually arranged to
give a five-day week, and most employees are entitled to two weeks’ continuous
holiday a year in addition to the statutory public holidays. About half of the popula¬
tion take at least a week’s holiday away from home every year, mostly in July and
August. Some two-thirds of these spend their holiday by the sea in Britain. A
relatively small but rapidly increasing number of holiday-makers go abroad: over
three million in 1958, including just over one million to the Channel Islands and
to the Irish Republic; in the same year, 1,258,000 overseas tourists (including
345,000 from the United States) came to visit Britain.
At least a quarter of the adult population is interested in playing or going to
watch outdoor sports.2 Sporting interests are becoming increasingly varied (see
Chapter XVI) but Association football and cricket are still the most popular. Much
of the gambling with small stakes, which is practised at least occasionally by three
adults out of four, is on the results of sporting events, mainly horse and greyhound
racing and football matches (through the football pools, see p. 497).
The spread of television has added a vast new audience of indoor spectators to
the crowds who go to watch sporting events and great national occasions. By mid-
1959, about two-thirds of the families in Britain (and a somewhat higher proportion
of the large families) had a television set; viewers are fairly evenly distributed among
all sections of the population, irrespective of income or occupation. The number
of television licences has increased fourfold since 1953 and is still increasing rapidly.
Rising standards of living and, in particular, the widely distributed ownership of
television sets and motor vehicles have affected leisure habits in many ways, both
good and bad, and have provided new and varied opportunities for recreation and
entertainment.
There were some 8 million licensed motor vehicles in the summer of 1958, of
which over 4^- million were private cars and i | million were motor cycles (including
motor scooters). Many cars and some motor cycles are used partly, if not primarily,
for business purposes. During the summer, however, roads to the sea and the
country and to sporting events are usually thronged (and sometimes jammed) with
cars, especially on fine Saturdays and Sundays. The spread of car ownership,
making many people more independent of public transport, is leading to a new and
more scattered distribution of houses, and is changing the siting requirements of
factories, shops and offices, as well as the whole pattern of leisure activities.
During the past twenty years, the real incomes of manual workers, and particularly
of unskilled workers and young workers under eighteen years of age, have risen
rapidly both in absolute terms and in relation to the incomes of non-manual workers.
1 This estimate has been shown to be approximately correct by the analysis of house¬
holds employing servants made in the 1951 census sample tables (see p. 20).
2 A social survey of Derby made in 1953 showed that half the adult population in that
town, including two-thirds of the men, were at least occasional spectators of sporting
events, and that over one-fifth, including over half those under 25 years of age, actually
participated, most of them regularly.
22
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
At the same time, opportunities for education and promotion, already considerable,
have widened. An investigation of occupational and social mobility made ten years
ago found that, if occupations were classified by social status into seven groups,
only one man in three had the same social status as his father. More than half the
people in the two top groups (‘professional and administrative and manageiia
and executive’) were the sons of men who had held less important positions, whi e
onlv a quarter of the sons of unskilled workers were themselves in occupations in
that category. In consequence, social distinctions based on occupation have become
less clear cut, and differences in the ways of life of manual and non-manual workers
are much less pronounced. Many manual workers’ families have acquired habits
and tastes which were formerly regarded as‘middle-class’.
Such social changes often call for difficult adjustments. Many families of un¬
skilled and semi-skilled workers, for example, suddenly find themselves with p en y
of money to spend when their children leave school for work at fifteen years of age;
while the families of most non-manual and many skilled manual workers forgo
the extra income in order to continue their children’s education. The high earnings
of young workers, however, have influenced the status and outlook of adolescents
generally. ‘Teenage’ society with sufficient coherence, independence and spending
power to establish its own customs, tastes and fashions is a feature of present-day
Britain; and, as in many other countries, the activities of groups of teenagers
without adequate parental control attract more attention than formerly and a
serious social problem in certain areas.
The chief long-term effects of television, according to recent investigations, are
to widen tastes and stimulate new interests and to provide a substitute for the
former habit of going regularly to watch favourite sporting events and other
entertainments. One result has been a marked fall m attendances at cinemas and,
to a lesser extent, at football matches, formerly the main entertainments of large
sections of the community. The cinema remains, however, the most popular form
of indoor entertainment outside the home. To young men and women and older
children, cinema-going is a social occasion, and probably at least half of em go
often as once a week. , . ..   
Attendances at theatres are much smaller, though most people visit then
occasionally. There are only some 500 theatres in the country compared with
some 4,000 cinemas. Nevertheless, there is an enthusiastic and growing public
not only for plays but for ballet, opera and concerts. , . .
Dancing is popular, especially with those under twenty-five years of age, and it is
thought that about five million people go dancing every week. There have been
estimated to be some 45° regular dance halls in the United Kingdom which open
three times a week or more and employ a manager, and between 4,°°° and 5)°oo
recognised schools of ballroom dancing. Public dances are also often held m other
halls, while many of the clubs and societies which abound in Britain hold dances
from time to time in their own or hired premises. In addition, Scottish and Enghs
traditional dances have their own wide and increasing following, while since the
war, there has been a very large increase in attendance at ballet and other stage
dancing classes (mainly by young girls). About three-quarters of a million pairs
of ballet shoes are sold annually. . , , , ^ 1
Clubs and societies, which may be primarily social or devoted to some particula
purpose, range from small informal groups to great national and Internationa
organisations with branches throughout the country. Organisations of nationa
importance in social life and in the promotion of social gatherings include, m
addition to those connected with religious denominations, the Working Men s
Clubs and Institutes, the Townswomen’s Guilds and the Women s Institu es.
The Scottish Highlands: Loch Shiel. Prince Charles raised his standard here in 1745.
Belfast Docks: entrance to the capital of Northern Ireland.
The Coast of Wales: Tremadoc Bay, Merionethshire, and the Snowdon Range.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
23
There are some 3,470 clubs, with over two million members (mainly but not
entirely men), affiliated to the Working Men’s Club and Institute Union. These
clubs are primarily social and recreational, though they also arrange lectures and
classes. Over 2,000 Townswomen’s Guilds, with a total membership of about
250,000, are affiliated to the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds. The guilds
are both educational and social in purpose, and they co-operate in many public
welfare activities. The declared objective of the National Federation of Women’s
Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; the institutes make an important
contribution to rural life by providing meeting places for countrywomen and by
organising social gatherings. There are in villages throughout England and Wales
some 8,400 institutes with over 450,000 members, while in Scotland and Northern
Ireland there are Women’s Rural Institutes with similar aims and interests.
In spite of the growth of social clubs, one traditional social rendezvous, the
public house, has maintained and even increased its popularity both in towns and
in villages, although there has been a marked decrease in drunkenness and in
consumption of alcohol per head since the nineteenth century; the recent rise in
drunkenness among adolescents, though serious, is on a relatively small scale. The
public house attracts a very wide circle of casual customers (both men and women)
as well as many ‘regulars’, who meet for a drink and a chat, and perhaps to play some
traditional public house game or to watch television. A rival feature of urban life is
the coffee bar. A characteristic of many of these coffee bars, which stay open until
late at night and are popular as a rendezvous for young people, is their modern decor.
On the other hand, many people, especially the married and the elderly, spend
much of their leisure at home—reading, listening to the radio or gramophone^
viewing television, entertaining their friends,1 looking after pets2 and pursuing
hobbies. Hobbies are, of course, innumerable in their variety, but many are
practical and contribute to the improvement of the home. About four out of five
families do most of their own decorating, while the sales of hand-tools and the
rapidly increasing sales of small power-tools and powered garden implements
testify to the extent and range of home carpentry and joinery and to the interest
and initiative that maintain Britain’s homes and gardens. Even in the towns many
houses have some garden, and the standard of both town and country gardens is
high. It is estimated that there are over 4,000 local horticultural societies in Britain.
The numerous flower and vegetable shows held in town and country are very popu¬
lar, and there is a large attendance at those held in London, particularly at the
annual Chelsea Flower Show.
A number of people, young and old, find their main free-time interest in some
form of sustained group activity connected, for example, with the churches, trade
unionism, politics, social welfare and reform, or with cultural pursuits, especially
amateur dramatics and music-making (see the Arts section of Chapter VII). People
with such interests are, of course, in a minority,3 but they constitute an important
and characteristic feature of British life and, indeed, an essential ingredient in the
working of British democracy.
1 Indications of the rise in the scale and standard of home entertaining are provided by
the increasing sales of table wines (double those of the 1930s) and of expensive foods,
and by the frequent newspaper and periodical features and broadcast programmes devoted
to cooking recipes.
2 There are some 4 million dogs in Britain, over 6 million cats and 8 or 9 million pet
birds (mainly budgerigars and canaries).
3 The figures from the Derby Survey showed that eight per cent of adults in that town
belonged to intellectual or cultural clubs or societies, eleven per cent were members of some
political party, thirteen per cent went to church every week (9 out of xo homes had a Bible),,
and three per cent held some church office.
C
II. GOVERNMENT AND
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical state, whose origins go back to the ninth
century when all England was unified under a Saxon king. Wales and Ireland
became part of the kingdom before the end of the thirteenth century, and the
English and Scottish thrones were dynastically united in the person of James I and
VI in 1603. In 1707, the Treaty for the Union of England and Scotland provided
that the two countries ‘should be forever united into one kingdom’, and one Parlia¬
ment (the Parliament of Great Britain) became the supreme authority in both
countries. In 1801, the authority of this Parliament was extended to the whole of
the United Kingdom by a provision of the Act for the Union of Great Britain and
Ireland, 1800, which joined the Irish Parliament to the Parliament of Great Britain.
In 1922, the United Kingdom was diminished by the separation of the 26 counties
of Southern Ireland (now the Irish Republic). Meantime, the Government of
Ireland Act, 1920, had enacted a constitution for Northern Ireland which per¬
petuated Northern Ireland representation in the United Kingdom Parliament as
the supreme authority and, at the same time, provided that country with its own
legislature and executive, to deal with domestic affairs.
Fundamental policies on major issues are adopted for the whole of the United
Kingdom; methods of government, however, are flexible and adapted to individual
needs. Thus, there is some measure of devolution in the administration of Welsh
affairs under a Cabinet Minister (who is Minister for Welsh Affairs) assisted by a
Minister of State, wTho spends most of his time in Wales; while Scotland, although
it has no separate Parliament, has its own system of law, its own courts, its own
established church, its own educational system, and its own Government depart¬
ments under the direction of the Secretary of State for Scotland, who is a leading
member of the United Kingdom Government. The Northern Ireland Government
departments are responsible to the Northern Ireland Parliament. T. he Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man (which are Crown dependencies, not part of the United
Kingdom) have their own legislative assemblies and systems of local administra¬
tion and of law, and their own courts. At the same time, they have a special
relationship with the United Kingdom because of their proximity to the mainland
and the antiquity of their connection with the Crown. They are treated as part of
the mainland for purposes of trade and postal communication and are territories
for whose international relations Her Majesty’s Government is responsible . They
are also formally subject to the United Kingdom Parliament.
The United Kingdom is thus a multi-national nation; it is also one of the member
nations of the Commonwealth, all of which (except the republics of India and
Pakistan and the Federation of Malaya) owe allegiance to the Crown. India, Pakistan
and Malaya accept the Queen as the symbol of the free association of the member
nations and, as such, as the head of the Commonwealth.
Each member nation of the Commonwealth has its own separate constitution,
governed by different laws and customs, and subject to different powers of change.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by common
24
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
25
law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions, which are not
part of the law of the land in that violation of them may lead to proceedings in a
court of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable to the machinery of govern¬
ment. The rules of the constitution have never been codified; principles and
practice are both alterable, and the rules of the constitution can be adapted to
changing conditions at any time by the passing of an Act of Parliament or by the
general acceptance of a new convention, without serious disturbance to existing
organs and forms.
The organs of government in the United Kingdom constitution are readily
distinguishable, although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They are:
(1) the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the
supreme authority in the realm;
(2) the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other Ministers of the
Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(b) Government departments, most of them under the control of ministers,
and all staffed by civil servants, who are responsible for administration at
the national level; (c) local authorities, who administer and manage many
services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards, which are severally
responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries or public
services, and which are subject to ministerial control in varying degrees;
and
(3) the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes, and
is independent of both the legislature and the executive.
This chapter will describe these three organs of government in some detail in
order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in spite of
interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle upon which
it was founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II is a descendant of
the Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the year 829.
According to the Royal Titles Act, 1953, the royal title in the United Kingdom is:
‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head
of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’. The form of the royal title is varied
for the other member nations of the Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the
Crown, to suit the particular circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the other member
nations of the Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, the Queen is
represented by a Governor-General appointed by the Crown on the advice of the
ministers of the country concerned. The functions of the Governor-General are to
fill the role of ceremonial head of the State and to exercise the prerogative powers
of the Crown in public administration according to the constitutional practice
obtaining in the country to which he is accredited. As the Queen’s representative,
the Governor-General is wholly independent of the United Kingdom Government;
he is often a national of the country in which he holds office. In the United Kingdom
dependencies the Queen is represented by Governors-General, Governors, High
Commissioners or Residents, who are appointed by the Crown, but who have, in
addition, varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United
THE ROYAL FAMILY
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1959
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901
. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
27
Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries concerned. In the
Channel Islands, and in the Isle of Man, the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-
Governor.
Succession
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement, 1701, which provided
that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most excellent
Princess Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’. Subsequent Succes¬
sion to the Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration; and although succession is
not bound to continue in its present line, it cannot now be altered (under a provision
of the Statute of Westminster, 1931) except by common consent of the member
nations of the Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide that
the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the Throne according to
their seniority, or, if there are no sons, the daughters in order of seniority. When a
daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the powers of the Crown are
vested in her as fully and effectively as though she were a king. By convention, the
consort of a king takes the rank and style of her husband; but the converse does not
apply, and the constitution has never attached any special rank or privileges to the
husband of the Queen-Regnant.
Accession
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession of
another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new Sovereign is
proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of the Privy Council are
summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Lord Mayor, aldermen and
other leading citizens of the City of London, and the High Commissioners in
London of the member nations of the Commonwealth are also invited to attend.
Coronation
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which
may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the same in
substance for nearly a thousand years, although the details have frequently been
modified to bring it into conformity with the customs of the time. The service used
at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was derived from that used at the
coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of repre¬
sentatives of the peers, the Commons and all the great public interests in the United
Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other Common¬
wealth countries, and of representatives of foreign States.
Acts of Government
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the
executive, an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in England
and Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland, the commander-in-chief of all the
armed forces of the Crown and the temporal head of the established Church of
England. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary process, during which many
restrictions on the royal prerogative have been imposed, these powers have changed
from being the weapon of the monarchy to being the means of giving effect to the
public will. Today, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which she
cannot constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The United King¬
dom is governed by Pier Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
1 The Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I.
2g BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation during
the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers without any
necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts of government which
require the participation of the Queen.
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; she opens the new
session with a speech from the throne; and she must give Royal Assent before a Bill
which has passed all its stages in both Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enact¬
ment. The Queen is ‘the fountain of justice’, and in spite of the fact that the
judiciary is now completely independent of the executive, ‘all jurisdictions of the
courts are either indirectly or immediately derived from the Crown’. As the foun¬
tain of honour’, the Queen confers peerages, knighthoods and other honours, and
she makes appointments to all important State offices, including those of judges,
officers in the armed forces, governors, and diplomats, and to all leading positions
in the established Church of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are
required before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In the realm
of international affairs, by virtue of her pre-eminence as head of the State, the
Queen has the prerogative power to conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory, to
declare war and to make peace. . . ,
Other prerogative powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by
Royal Charter; the construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of
infants and persons of unsound mind; the administration of chanties; coinage; the
grant of franchises, e.g., markets, ferries and fisheries; the rlfht^°ufeasuur®
and the sole right of printing or licensing others to print the Bible, the Book o
Common Prayer and State papers.
There is clear ministerial responsibility for all these acts of government, as is
shown in the three ways in which the royal will can, constitutionally, be expressed:
by Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice of the Privy Council ; by Order,
Commission or Warrant signed personally with the Queen’s initials and generally
bearing the signature of one or more responsible ministers; or by Proclamation,
Writs, Letters Patent, or other documents under the Great Seal affixed by the Lord
Chancellor in obedience to a Royal Warrant countersigned by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not
detract from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the smooth
working of government; for although the Queen has no personal authority and
must show complete impartiality in every field, she must be informed and con¬
sulted on every aspect of the national life. The Queen holds meetings of the Privy
Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other holders of office at home and
overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs
innumerable State papers. , ,
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has been
made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them it the
Sovereign is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of eighteen on accession to
the throne. The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act, 1953—laid down that the
first potential Regent should be the Duke of Edinburgh and thereafter the Princess
Margaret and then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event o
the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision is made for the
appointment of Counsellors of State (generally speaking, the wife or husband of
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of ihePnme Minister, a
few i.e. the Order of Merit, the Royal Victorian Order, the Most Noble Order of the
Garter, and the Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle, are conferred by the
Sovereign personally.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
29
the Sovereign and the four adult persons next in succession to the Crown1) to
whom the Sovereign may delegate by Letters Patent all royal functions except
those of dissolving Parliament (which may be done only with the express consent
of the Sovereign) and conferring peerages.
Ceremonial
Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the British
Isles, and in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered outlook of
both the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages are the same today
as they were many centuries ago. Royal marriages, the birth of royal children and
royal funerals are still marked by ancient ceremonial, although to a lesser degree
than in former days; and the birthday of the Sovereign, formerly the occasion of
many royal and public functions, is today officially celebrated early in June by
Trooping the Colour on the Horse Guards Parade. State banquets still take place
when a foreign monarch or head of State pays a visit to the United Kingdom;
investitures are still held at Buckingham Palace; and royal processions continue
to grace such social occasions as the Ascot Race Meeting, known as Royal Ascot,
and to add significance to the opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives in
state from Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating from
the fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal ordinances,
ancient usage, established custom and the public will. The Queen’s presence at
the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial, and charitable works of national
importance ensures nation-wide interest and support.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the House
of Lords and the House of Commons—which together represent all the elements
in the nation.
The three sections of Parliament in this sense are outwardly separate: they are
constituted on entirely different principles; they do different work in different
places and they meet only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the
coronation, or the opening of Parliament by the Queen in person, when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making
organ of State, however, Parliament is a corporate body and cannot legislate with¬
out the concurrence of all its parts (except in the case of measures passed under
the Parliament Acts, 1911 and 1949).
The Parliament at Westminster is representative of all the countries of the United
Kingdom; it can legislate for all the British Islands, for the United Kingdom, for
Great Britain, for England and Wales separately, or for Scotland alone. It is not,
however, the only legislature, for the Northern Ireland Parliament has power to
legislate in certain spheres, and within the British Islands the ancient legislatures
of the two Channel Island Bailiwicks (the States) and of the Isle of Man (the
Tynwald) legislate on domestic matters.2 Nevertheless, the Parliament at West-
1 The Regency Act, 1953, provided that Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
2 The legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man consist of the Queen, the
Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the
member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each
legislative measure before it becomes law.
30 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
minster retains supreme authority, and within practical limits there is nothing that
it cannot legally do. a
By the passing of the Parliament Act, 1911, the life of a United Kingdom
Parliament was fixed at five years (although it is usually dissolved and a general
election held before the expiry of the legal term); and since one Parliament cannot
bind its successor (for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not be sovereign
or supreme), each assembly has a period of time of up to five years during which it
may legislate exactly as it chooses. During its life, it can make or unmake any law;
it can destroy by statute the most firmly established convention of the constitution;
it can legalise past illegalities and thus reverse the decisions of the courts; and it
even has power to prolong its own life by legislative means beyond the normal
period of five years without consulting the electorate.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parliament is absolute. In practice, Parliament
does not exercise its supremacy in this way. In the first place, pressure of
business in recent decades has resulted in a large and increasing amount of delega¬
tion of legislative authority to ministers and of specific powers to local authorities
and to public corporations of various kinds. Powers delegated in this way could, of
course be withdrawn by Parliament, but existing demands on parliamentary time
make such a development extremely unlikely. Secondly, the system of party govern¬
ment in the United Kingdom effectively discourages Parliament from acting in too
arbitrary a fashion; any parliamentary majority which abused its powers would
almost certainly suffer severely at the hands of the electorate.
The Meeting of Parliament
A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with a
proclamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council. Such a
proclamation on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and, on the other
orders the issue of writs for the election of a new one and appoints the day and
place of its meeting.   r „ r
The resignation of a government usually entails the dissolution of Parliament.
Formerly the death of a Sovereign also involved dissolution, since Parliament meets
on the personal summons of the monarch. However, since the passing of the
Representation of the People Act, 1867, made the duration of Parliament
independent of the demise of the Crown, both Houses stand adjourned on such an
occasion only until their members have taken the oath of allegiance to the new
Sovereign, which occurs immediately after the Accession Council has made t le
order for proclamation. . . . .
The time between the meeting of a Parliament and its prorogation or dissolution
is called a session. Parliament is usually prorogued by a commission under the Great
Seal (see p. 28), which appoints the day and place of its meeting in a new session.
The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred by a subsequent
proclamation. The effect of a prorogation is at once to terminate all business until
Parliament is summoned again, when any measures not yet passed must be re¬
introduced, unless it has been decided that they are to be abandoned.
During the session, either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such
date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business. A re¬
assembly of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or by virtue of
powers specially conferred by each House on its Speaker.
The average length of a session is about 160 sitting days, divided by custom into
the following periods: one from November until Christmas lasting about 30 sitting
days, one from January to Easter of about 50 sitting days, one from Easter until
Whitsun of about 30 sitting days, and one from Whitsun until the end of July
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 31
lasting about 40 sitting days. Nowadays, the session is usually concluded with a
short period of about 10 sitting days in October, after the long summer recess.
The House of Lords
The House of Lords consists of nearly 900 peers, as follows: (1) princes of the
royal blood (who nowadays take no active part in proceedings), (2) 26 spiritual
lords (the two archbishops and 24 senior bishops of the Church of England), (3)
all hereditary peers (other than minors and those who have not proved their right
to a writ of summons) of England, Great Britain, and the United Kingdom,1
(4) 16 hereditary peers of Scotland elected from their own number for each Parlia¬
ment in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Union, 1707, (5) one
hereditary peer of Ireland elected for life,2 (6) nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
appointed under the provisions of the Appellate Jurisdiction Act, 1876, to assist
the House in the performance of its judicial functions (see pp. 82 and 85) and
holding their seats in the House for life, and (7) a number of life peers (including
life peeresses)3 created under the provisions of the Life Peerages Act, 1958.
Temporal peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred as a mark of distinc¬
tion by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages,
with the exception of the Scottish and Irish peerages, carry with them, for men over
21 years of age, a right to a seat in the House of Lords, but, according to standing
orders promulgated by the House in 1958, holders are asked, at the beginning of
each Parliament, whether they will attend the sittings of the House as often as
they reasonably can or whether they desire to be relieved of the obligation to
attend. If they do so desire, they are requested to apply for leave of absence,
either for the duration of the Parliament or for a shorter period, during which they
are not expected to attend the House.
Peers in constant attendance at the House of Lords are generally persons of
considerable experience, many of whom are elder statesmen and others who have
spent their lives in public service. They receive no salary for their parliamentary
work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses from their homes to the Palace
of Westminster (provided they attend at least one-third of the number of sittings),
and (with the exception of the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chairman of Committees
and any member in receipt of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office) they
may claim payment for expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the
House (except for judicial sittings) within a maximum of three guineas a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who sits on the
woolsack and is ex officio Speaker of the House. The Crown, by commission under
the Great Seal, appoints several peers to take their place on the woolsack in order
of precedence as deputy speakers in the absence of the Lord Chancellor. The first
of the deputy speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed
each session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House otherwise
directs. The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who is
charged with keeping the records of proceedings and judgments and who pro¬
nounces the words of assent to Bills; the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who
enforces the orders of the House; and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Lord
Chancellor.
1 Peerages created between 1707 (the Treaty for the Union of England and Scotland) and
1800 are peerages of Great Britain; those created since the Act for the Union of Great
Britain and Ireland, 1800, are peerages of the United Kingdom.
2 By the Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1800, the Irish peers were
entitled to elect 28 representatives, but since 1922 no new peers have been elected.
3 In August 1959, there were 19 life peers, of whom 4 were women.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
32
The House of Commons
The House of Commons is a popular assembly elected by an almost universal
adult suffrage and containing members from all sections of the community
regardless of income or occupation. There are at present 630 members of the House
of Commons (511 for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern
Ireland).
Members of the House of Commons receive a salary for their parliamentary work
and hold their seats during the life of a Parliament. They are elected either at a
general election, which takes place after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new
one summoned by the Sovereign, or at a by-election, which is held when a vacancy
occurs in the House as a result of the death or resignation of a member, or as a
result of the elevation of a member of the House of Commons to the House of
Lords. . .
The chief parliamentary officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is
elected by the members as president of the House immediately after a new Parlia¬
ment is formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of
Ways and Means, and the Deputy-Chairman, both of whom may act as Deputy
Speaker; these officers are elected by the House. In addition, there are the party
officials, i.e. the Government and Opposition Whips. Non-parhamentary or
permanent officers of the House, i.e. those who are not members of Parliament,
include the Clerk of the House of Commons, who is charged with such matters as
keeping the records, endorsing Bills and signing orders; the Serjeant-at-Arms,
who attends the Speaker in the House; and the Chaplain to the Speaker.
Parliamentary Electoral System
For electoral purposes, the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each
of which returns one member to Parliament. In order that the people shall at all
times be equitably represented by this means, permanent Boundary Commissions
for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland (established in 1944) keep con¬
stituencies constantly under review and submit periodic reports, either recommend¬
ing some alteration in boundaries if, for instance, movement of the population has
made this necessary, or recommending no change. Changes in the boundaries of
constituencies which came into effect for the iQSS General Election increased the
number of seats in the House of Commons from 625 to 630.
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained in three consolidating
statutes, the most important of which is the Representation of the People Act, 1949,
which repeals and re-enacts in a single statute previous legislation relating to the
franchise, the conduct of elections and corrupt and illegal electoral practices. The
other Acts are the House of Commons (Redistribution of Seats) Act, i949> ancl the
Election Commissioners Act, 1949. Under the provisions of these Acts, election to
the House of Commons is decided by secret ballot in which all United Kingdom
citizens (except members of the House of Lords) and all citizens of the Common¬
wealth and of the Irish Republic who are resident in the United Kingdom are
entitled to vote (although voting is not compulsory), provided that they are 21
years old or over, and unless they suffer any legal incapacity to vote. A register
containing the names of all electors is prepared for each constituency and published
yearly by registration officers who, in England and Wales, are usually the clerks
of local councils, and in Scotland are the lands valuation assessors. Electors
normally vote in person at polling stations especially established for the puipose,
although members of the armed forces, Crown servants of the United Kingdom
employed overseas, and the wives of such persons if resident overseas with their
husbands, may vote by proxy. Voting by post, or in certain cases by proxy, may
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
33
also be allowed if the voter cannot attend in person for such reasons as illness or
the nature of his work. All those whose names are on an electoral register are
entitled to stand as candidates for election, unless they are clergy of the Church
of England, the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland, or the Roman Catholic
Church; or are undischarged bankrupts; or fall within one of the categories expressly
precluded from standing as candidates under the House of Commons Disqualifica¬
tion Act, 1957, i.e. holders of judicial offices, civil servants, members of the regular
armed forces and the police forces, members of the legislature of any country or
territory outside the Commonwealth, or holders of other public offices listed in the
Act.
Parliamentary Privilege
Both Houses of Parliament enjoy certain privileges and immunities designed to
protect them from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out their duties. These
privileges apply collectively to both Houses and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown for the
Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the beginning of
each Parliament. These include freedom from arrest in civil proceedings for a
period of forty days before to forty days after a session of Parliament; freedom of
speech in debate; and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective privilege
of the House. Further privileges include the right of the House to control its own
proceedings (so that it is able, on the rare occasions when the public interest so
requires, to debate in secret); the right to pronounce upon legal disqualifications
for membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and the right to
penalise those who commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords are: freedom from civil arrest for peers as
for members of the House of Commons; freedom of speech in debate; freedom of
access to the Sovereign for each peer individually; and the right to commit for con¬
tempt. These privileges are not formally claimed by the Speaker as in the House
of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The Party System
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth cen¬
tury, and has now become an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political parties,
each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a general election,
these parties may all put up candidates for election; independent candidates may
also stand.1 The electorate then indicates, by its choice of candidate at the poll on
election day, which of the opposing policies it would like to see put into effect.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the majority
of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority of sup¬
porters in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition, the leader
of the majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign, usually on
the formal advice of the retiring Prime Minister; and its most outstanding members
in the House of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial appointments
on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official
Opposition with its own leader and its own council of discussion or ‘shadow
1 In the general election of May 1955, the choice was between Labour and Conservative
in most constituencies. Liberal candidates numbered 110. In a few constituencies, two of
the parties agreed to support the same candidate. The number of candidates representing
other political parties was very small.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
34
Cabinet’; while the members of any other parties or any Independents who have
been elected may support the Government or the Opposition according to their
party’s or their own view of the policy being debated at any given time.
In the general election which took place on the 26th May, 1955, 76-8 per cent
of the electorate voted, compared with 76-1 per cent in 1945, 84 per cent in 1950,
and 82-6 per cent in 1951. The number of votes cast for the principal parties is
shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3
Votes Cast at General Elections 1945-1955
Party
Labour (and
Co-operative) .
Conservative and
supporters
Liberal
Communist
Others (c). .
1945 (a)
11,992,292
9,960,809
2,245,319
102,780
677,749
1950 (a)
13,295,736
12,501,983
2,621,489
91,815
258,454
1951 (a)
13,948,385
13,724,418
730,551
21,640
177,329
1955
12,405,254(6)
13,310,891
722,402
33,144
288,038
(a) Figures for 1945, 1950 and 1951 exclude those few constituencies for which candi¬
dates were returned unopposed. All seats were contested in 1955.
(b) Includes Northern Ireland Labour (35,614).
(c) ‘Others’ include Welsh and Scottish Nationalists, Independent Labour, other
Independents, Irish Labour, Irish Nationalist, Irish Anti-Partitionist and Sinn Fein.
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the General
Elections of 1951 and 1955 is shown in Table 4.
TABLE 4
Seats Gained at General Elections in 1951 and 1955
(a) Two Irish Nationalists and one Irish Labour.
(b) A majority of 63 (excluding the Speaker) over all other parties. This was the first time
in 90 years that a government in office had been returned with an increased majority. Sinn
Fein candidates headed the poll in two Northern Ireland constituencies, but as they were
serving sentences of penal servitude (for taking part in an armed raid on an army barracks
in 1954) they were legally incapable of becoming members of Parliament. Ulster Unionist
candidates now represent both constituencies.
By August 1959, as a result of by-elections held since 1955, the Labour Party had gained
four seats—three from the Conservative Party and one from the Liberal Party, and the
Liberals had gained one seat from the Conservatives. Therefore, at that date, Conservatives
and their supporters held 342 seats, Labour 281, and the Liberals 6, and the Government
majority (excluding the Speaker) was 55 over all other parties.
1951
Conservative and supporters 320
Labour .. .. . . 295
Liberal . . . . . . 6
Others (a) .. . . . . 3
The Speaker . . . . 1
625
1955
Conservative and supporters 346(6)
Labour .. . . . . 277
Liberal . . . . . . 6
The Speaker . . . . 1
630
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
35
The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable extent
upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on by agreement:
that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must govern and therefore
accepts its decisions; and the majority agrees that the minority should criticise and
therefore sets time aside for that criticism to be heard. As far as is compatible with
effective government, the Prime Minister meets the convenience of the Leader of
the Opposition and the Leader of the Opposition meets the convenience of the
Prime Minister. Through the respective Whips there is a measure of agreement on
the subjects to be debated and on the time to be allowed; sometimes even on the
information to be provided and the proposed line of attack. In this way, Parliament
has a chance of hearing a full discussion on policy from every point of view.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local organisa¬
tions ; inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Whips, who in addition to their other
functions are expected to maintain the voting strength of their parties. For the
Government, this work is done by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury,
the Junior Lords of the Treasury, and the political officers of the Household—
the Treasurer, the Comptroller and the Vice-Chamberlain. The Opposition Whips
have no official position and are not paid from public funds, but their parliamentary
duties are the same.
The Functions of Parliament
The main functions of Parliament are (i) to make laws regulating the life of
the community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make avail¬
able finance for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds necessary
for the services of the State, and (3) to criticise and control the Government. By
custom, Parliament is also consulted before the ratification of certain international
treaties and agreements (in spite of the fact that the making of treaties is a royal
prerogative exercised on the advice of the Government which, strictly speaking,
is under no obligation to obtain parliamentary approval at all). In practice, there
are two types of agreement about which Parliament is consulted; treaties which
could not be implemented without legislation; and treaties of such political impor¬
tance that the Government feels obliged to arrange a debate on the matter before
becoming committed. In the case of other treaties requiring ratification, it is
customary to presume parliamentary acquiescence unless disapproval is expressed
within 21 days from the date on which the treaty was laid before Parliament.
Parliamentary Procedure
Parliamentary procedure1 is based on forms and rules, many of which date back
to the beginning of the sixteenth century and even earlier.
Each House has its own standing orders, but the system of debate is much the
same in the two Houses, except that in the House of Commons the Speaker has a
much greater measure of control. In the House of Lords, the office of Speaker could
be held by a commoner, since the woolsack on which the Lord Chancellor sits as
Speaker is technically outside the precincts of the House.2 In fact, the holder of the
office is always created a peer, but the office carries with it no inherent authority
to check or curtail debate. Such matters are decided by the general sense of the
House and not by rulings of its Speaker.
1 A review of House of Commons procedure by a select committee, was published in
February 1959 and debated in July 1959.
2 When the Lord Chancellor takes part in the debates of the House of Lords (as he
frequently does), he moves away from the woolsack.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
36
In the Commons, the Speaker has the prime duty of controlling debate. It is his
responsibility to see that parliamentary time is used to the best possible advantage
and, therefore, although he must carefully guard against abuse of procedure or any
infringement of minority rights, he has power to limit unreasonable obstruction and
his rulings on points of order cannot be challenged at the time. It is the duty of the
Speaker to allow or disallow a closure motion (i.e. a motion to curtail or end
discussion so that the matter may be put to the vote) and generally to enforce the
rules of debate of the House. In cases of grave and continuous disorder, he may
even adjourn the House or suspend the sitting.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the
Speaker, and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number of
votes is cast, the Speaker must give the decisive vote; he does this (if possible) in
such a way as to avoid change and leave the question to be debated on another
occasion. The procedure on voting in the House of Lords is similar to that in the
House of Commons, but the Speaker or chainnan has no casting vote. With the
exception of questions relating to Bills and delegated legislation, the House is
governed by the principle that unless there is a majority in favour, the question
is decided in the negative. When the House is sitting judicially (see pp. 82 and 85)
the question is put in such a way that, if the votes were equal, there would be no
interference with the order under appeal.
The Speaker of the House of Commons has the responsibility of deciding whether
a Bill is a Money Bill (i.e. a Bill dealing only with national taxation and finance,
which comes within the terms of the Parliament Act, 1911); and who, in case of
doubt, is the Leader of the Opposition. He is also responsible for such matters as
the decision whether a prima facie case has been made against persons accused of
breach of privilege; the issue of warrants for elections to fill vacancies in the House,
and the appointment of the chairmen of the standing committees.
All proceedings of either House are public, except on extremely rare occasions
(for example, the war-time secret sessions), and, except on those occasions, a
verbatim record is published daily in the official reports, Parliamentary Debates
{Hansard).
Parliamentary Committees
A committee of the whole House is the House itself, presided over by a chairman
instead of the Speaker, appointed to consider Bills in detail, clause by clause, and
also (in the House of Commons) the resolutions authorising the expenditure of
public money. The Committees of Supply and Ways and Means are committees
of the whole House of Commons whose chief function is to discharge the financial
duties of the House concerning the grant of public money and the levying of
taxation. . .
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of which exist
to a varying degree to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised
and complex work. They are:
(1) standing committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons as
necessary, for the consideration of Bills and other business committed to
them. With the exception of the Scottish Standing and Grand Committees1
(which deal with Public Bills and other matters relating to Scotland), each
standing committee consists of twenty members nominated by the Com-
1 The Scottish Standing Committee consists of thirty members for Scottish con¬
stituencies with up to twenty added members, and the Scottish Grand Committee contains
all the members for the Scottish constituencies, together with between ten and rirteen
others.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
37
mittee of Selection (a body of eleven members drawn from the three main
parties in the House at the beginning of each session) and up to thirty
additional members; in all cases the parties are represented in proportion
to their numbers in the House. The procedure of a standing committee is
generally similar to that of a committee of the whole House; and
(2) select committees, including joint select committees of both Houses, which
are appointed to inquire into and report to the House on special matters,
e.g., the Select Committees on Public Accounts, on Estimates, on Statutory
Instruments, and on the nationalised industries.
Various other committees exist to deal with Private Bill legislation. There are
also a number of unofficial committees, consisting either of one party or of members
of all parties, such as study groups concerning themselves with particular issues,
e.g., the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee; and parliamentary party com¬
mittees, e.g., the Labour Policy Committee, and the Conservative and Unionist
Members Committee, popularly known as the 1922 Committee—a committee of
Conservative members of Parliament, who are neither ministers nor, as a rule,
ex-ministers.
Legislation
Legislation can be initiated from either side of the House; but no Bill involving
taxation or the spending of public money can proceed very far unless the Govern¬
ment agrees to introduce a ‘financial resolution’ to cover it. This naturally gives
the Government the exclusive right of legislating over a wide field and, as a result,
most Public Bills are brought forward in this way. Members can, however, still
introduce Bills on their own initiative, and certain days in each session are expressly
set aside for this purpose. In addition, persons and bodies outside Parliament can
introduce Private Bills relating solely to matters of individual, corporate or local
interest.
Bills may be introduced in either House, unless they deal with finance or repre¬
sentation, when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule, however,
Bills likely to raise political controversy are introduced in the Commons, while
legislation of an intricate but non-financial nature is frequently introduced and
fully discussed in the Lords before being sent to the Commons, where it can then
be dealt with more speedily.
The process of passing a Public Bill is basically the same in the House of Lords
as in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal First Reading on introduc¬
tion; it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies between one and
several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it may be given a Second Reading
as the result of a debate on its general merits or principles. It is then referred for
detailed examination (in the Commons) either to a standing committee or, if the
House so decides, to the whole House sitting in committee; and, in the Lords, to
a committee of the whole House. When the committee stage is finished, the Bill is
reported to the House, and a further stage takes place during which the committee’s
amendments may be altered, additional amendments may be suggested and incor¬
porated, and, if necessary, the Bill may be recommitted to committee. Finally,
it is submitted for a Third Reading and, if passed, it is sent on from the Commons
to the Lords or from the Lords to the Commons (depending on its place of origin),
where it enters on the same course again. Any amendments which the second
House makes to the Bill must be agreed to by the first House, or a compromise
reached, before the Bill becomes law.
An exception to this procedure is made in the case of some financial Bills, such as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing taxation,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
38
and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the Supply Services
from the Consolidated Fund. As a general rule, these Bills are introduced in
the House of Commons upon resolutions in a committee of the whole House and
they may be initiated only by a Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are sent
to the Sovereign for Royal Assent, which is now usually given by commission.
The Sovereign’s right of veto has not been exercised since the early eighteenth
century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the Com¬
mons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; and they are
then returned to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent. However,
should any Lords Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would never reach the
Statute Book, for no debating time would be allotted to it—at any rate until a new
government came into power, when it might be revived. The Lords, on the other
hand are unlikely to be able to prevent a Bill passed in the Commons from becom¬
ing law. In the normal course of events, they either accept a Bill from the Commons
and return it unchanged; or they revise and improve it by amendments and return
it for the consideration of members of the other House, who frequently agree to the
amendments made. The Lords cannot require the Commons to agree to amend¬
ments; nor can they delay a Bill indefinitely. They have no powers in respect of
Money Bills; and since the passing of the Parliament Act, 1949, any other Bill which
has been passed by the House of Commons in two successive sessions may be
presented for Royal Assent without the consent of the Lords, provided that a year
has elapsed between the date of the Second Reading of the Bill in the Commons
and the date on which it is finally passed in that House. These limitations to the
powers of the Lords are based on the belief that the chief value of the Upper
House, which is a non-elected assembly, lies not in thwarting the elected House,
but in bringing the wide experience of its members into the legislative process.
Proceedings in the House of Lords give time for further reflection, and often elicit
new points of view.
Delegated Legislation
Delegated legislation, which is legislation not by Act of Parliament but by Orders
in Council, Orders, Warrants, Regulations and Rules, has been part of the parlia¬
mentary system for at least six hundred years. Parliament, however, made but
sparing use of its power to delegate legislation (except during a period of social,
political and economic change in the second half of the fifteenth and most of the
sixteenth centuries) until the end of the nineteenth century, when a changing
conception of the part to be played by the State in the life of the community
made inroads upon parliamentary time and thus caused the system to be adopted
on a more extensive scale. With the ever-increasing scope of Government activity
during the past sixty years, pressure on parliamentary time has become even more
acute; as a result, the system of delegated legislation has become generally accepted,
and there are at present few Acts of Parliament which do not contain provisions
for its use.
The system of delegated legislation empowers ministers and other authorities
to regulate administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. Its advantages
are said1 to be: (1) that it shortens and clarifies Bills before Parliament, thus
enabling Parliament to deal with a greater volume of business and to give fuller
1 From an official minute written in 1893 and quoted in Concerning English Administrative
Law, by Sir C. T. Carr. Oxford University Press. 1942. pp. 33_34-
A probation officer addresses
a London juvenile court (see
p. 83) on behalf of a young
offender.
1 A police sergeant gives a road
i safety lesson at a junior school
I in Cambridge.
L
sty the Queen opening Parliament on 28th October, 1958-
the first occasion on which the ceremony was televised.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
39
attention to matters of policy and principle which are its primary concern; (2) that
it encourages flexibility, in that administrative details can be worked out as and when
the necessity arises ‘with greater care and minuteness, and with better adaptation
to local and other special circumstances than they possibly can be during the
passage of a Bill through Parliament’; (3) that it is invaluable in an emergency, for
it is ‘the means by which the legislature can dispense with its own deliberative
procedure and arm the executive with power to take immediate action’; and (4)
that it provides a speedy, convenient and accurate means of giving effect to the
policy of Parliament.
In order to minimise the risk—inherent in the system—that delegated legislative
powers might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, such powers are
normally delegated to the Queen in Council or to authorities directly responsible to
Parliament, i.e. to Ministers of the Crown, to Government departments for which
ministers are responsible, or to organisations whose legislation is subject to con¬
firmation or approval by ministers who thereby become responsible to Parliament
for it. Moreover the Act which delegates legislative power generally defines the
precise limits of this power and, in the more important cases, gives Parliament the
right to confirm or annul the statutory instruments1 by which delegated legislation
is enacted. Certain Acts also require direct consultation with organisations which
will be affected by delegated legislation before such legislation is made.
The House of Commons is aided in its supervision of delegated legislation by
the reports of its Select Committee on Statutory Instruments, which always
indicate the unusual or unexpected use of a statutory power.
Parliamentary Control
Parliament’s function of controlling the Government in power is exercised in the
final analysis by the power of the House of Commons to pass a resolution of
‘no confidence’ in the Government, or to reject a proposal which the Government
considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’, and thus
to force the Government to resign.
The financial control necessary to ensure that money shall be spent only with the
authority of Parliament and for the purposes authorised by Parliament is described
in Chapter XII, Finance, pp. 424-7. Methods of general control are provided by:
(1) the institution of Question Time, which is a daily hour of parliamentary
time during which members may question any minister on matters for
which that minister is responsible, thus focusing the attention of the public
on the day-to-day processes of government;
(2) the practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates, in Committee of
Supply, has ceased to be a consideration of the financial requirements of
the Government and has become an occasion, initiated by the Opposition,
for the examination of some aspect of the Government’s administrative
policy which has been included in the Estimates;
(3) the practice of bringing on a debate later in the same day by moving the
adjournment of the House, which is permitted only if the matter is deemed
by the Speaker to be definite, urgent, of public importance, and to be the
responsibility of the Government, and if 40 members rise in their places
to support it, or 10 members rise and the House grants leave on a division;
1 Statutory instruments are made in accordance with the provisions of the Statutory'
Instruments Act, 1946, which repealed and replaced the Rules Publication Act, 1893.
Instruments of delegated legislation made under the Act of 1893 were known as ‘statutory
rules and orders’ (‘S.R. & O.’).
D
4o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(4) the right of members to raise any matter on the motion for the adjournment
of the House at the end of each day’s sitting; and
(5) the power of Parliament to confirm or annul some statutory instruments.
In addition, Government policy and action are fully discussed in the important
debates which take place during the proceedings at the opening of Parliament and
in the motion for the adjournment of the House before a recess.
Parliament and the Public
The public’s interest in the work of Parliament is shown by the queues which
form outside the Houses of Parliament for admission to the public galleries, by the
growth in the circulation of the daily official report {Hansard) which has increased
to nearly five times the pre-war figure, and by the large radio audience which listens
to two regular BBC programmes: Today in Parliament, a fifteen-minute summary
of the day’s proceedings in both Houses, broadcast each evening when Parliament
is sitting; and The Week in Westminster, a radio commentary on each week’s work,
given by members of Parliament from various political parties in turn.
The major news agencies and national newspapers have special parliamentary
correspondents to report on parliamentary activities. A television broadcast of the
State opening of Parliament was transmitted for the first time in 1958. The Hansard
Society for Parliamentary Government, an unofficial non-party educational society,
was founded in 1944 to promote interest in parliamentary affairs.
The Northern Ireland Parliament
The Parliament of Northern Ireland consists of the Sovereign, a Senate and a
House of Commons. The Sovereign is represented in Northern Ireland by a
Governor, who summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament in Her Majesty s
name; the Senate is composed of two ex officio senators (the Lord Mayor of Belfast
and the Mayor of Londonderry) together with 24 senators elected by the House of
Commons according to the principle of proportional representation; and the House
of Commons consists of 52 members, elected by a system of parliamentary franchise
similar to that which operates in Great Britain. The House, unless sooner dissolved,
continues in existence for a period of five years.
The Northern Ireland Parliament has power to make laws for the peace, order
and good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all matters except those
especially reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, i.e. the Crown or
succession to the Crown; foreign relations; defence; the postal services; the judi¬
ciary ; customs and excise; income and profits taxes; coinage; standards of weights
and measures; trade marks; submarine cables; wireless telegraphy; aerial naviga¬
tion; and lighthouses, buoys and beacons. The Northern Ireland Parliament is also
prohibited from making laws which would interfere with religious freedom, and
from taking property without compensation.
In consequence of these reservations, provision was made in the Government
of Ireland Act, 1920, for the continued representation of the Northern Ireland con¬
stituencies in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; in accordance with
this provision, 12 members are returned to Westminster.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet govern¬
ment developed, however, the Privy Council declined in importance; many of its
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
41
powers were transferred to the Cabinet, and much of its work was handed over to
newly created Government departments. The present-day Privy Council exists
mainly to give effect to policy decisions made elsewhere.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn of
the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy Council (which is
retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime
Minister as an honour to persons who have reached eminence in some branch of
public affairs in any country of the Commonwealth. In 1959, there were just under
300 Privy Counsellors.
Procedure and Functions
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and presided over
by the Sovereign or, in the absence of the Sovereign, by the Lord President.1 At
meetings where the Sovereign is present, three Privy Counsellors form a quorum,
but, as a rule, not fewer than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy
Council is called together only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign
announces his or her intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for the making of Orders in Council, of which
there are two kinds differing fundamentally in constitutional principle: those made
in virtue of the royal prerogative as, for example, when approving the draft of
royal instructions to colonial Governors; and those which are authorised by Act of
Parliament and are a form of delegated legislation. Members of the Privy Council
attending meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not thereby become
personally responsible for the policy upon which the orders are based; this rests
with the ministers in whose departments the draft orders were framed, whether
they are present at the meeting or not. Certain Orders in Council must be published
in the London Gazette, which is an official periodical published by the authority of
the Government.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as summoning
or dissolving Parliament) which are of the same validity as Acts of Parliament.
Committees of the Privy Council
There are a number of Privy Council committees (presided over by the Lord
President), whose meetings differ from those of the full Privy Council in that the
Sovereign cannot constitutionally be present. These committees have advisory
functions: they may be prerogative, such as the committee which deals with
legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and the
Isle of Man for ratification by Order in Council, and the committees for medical
research, scientific and industrial research, agricultural research, overseas research,
and nature conservation; or they may be provided for by statute as are those for
the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the Scottish universities, and that
which deals with applications for the grant of charters to municipal corporations.
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out in the
Privy Council Office under the control of the Lord President. Parts of the work
relating to research are undertaken by the Office of the Lord President, since he
is responsible to Parliament for the Department of Scientific and Industrial
1 Since 1660, the office of Lord President has been a political appointment held by a
member of the party in power, who is usually a leading member of the Cabinet. In
addition to his duties in the Privy Council, the Lord President is free to undertake duties
of a general kind.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
.42
Research, the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural Research Council, the
Overseas Research Council, and the Nature Conservancy, and has a general
oversight of scientific matters.
Judicial Committee
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal on
certain legal issues arising in Australia and New Zealand and their dependencies,
in Ceylon, Ghana, and the Federation of Malaya, and in the United Kingdom
dependent territories. Its appellate jurisdiction derives from the principle of
English common law which recognises ‘the right of all the King’s subjects to appeal
for redress to the Sovereign in Council’ if they believe that the courts of law have
failed to do them justice.
Appeals come to it in limited categories of cases where a right of appeal has been
specially created, e.g., by Statute, Order in Council or Letters Patent, or by
special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice of the Judicial Committee.
Appeals are heard by a board of three or five drawn from the committee, depending
on the significance of the case, the quorum being three. Invitations to sit on the
board are issued by the Lord Chancellor, who thus determines which members of
the committee shall hear particular appeals. The boards are generally selected from
the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
although Lords Justices of Appeal and other members of the Privy Council who
have held high judicial office are also asked to sit when business is heavy. Chief
Justices and certain judges from other Commonwealth countries have usually been
sworn of the Privy Council and may be invited to sit on the boards.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being
with the administration of national affairs.
Composition
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to time,
both in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The usual minis-
iterial offices may be classified under the following heads:
1. The Prime Minister, who is the recognised head of the Government but
has no department.
2. Departmental Ministers, some of whom are known as Secretaries of State.
There are at present seven Secretaries of State—for the Home Department,
Foreign Affairs, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations, Colonies, War, and
Air. The more recently created posts usually have the formal title of
‘Minister’; and there are Ministers of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food;
Defence; Education; Health; Housing and Local Government (also for
Welsh Affairs); Labour and National Service; Pensions and National
Insurance; Power; Supply; Transport and Civil Aviation; and Works. A
few of the older posts have special titles: the Chancellor of the Exchequer
(who is responsible for the Treasury and for a number of other financial
and central departments); the President of the Board of Trade; the First
Lord of the Admiralty; and the Postmaster General.
3. Non-Departmental Ministers, or ministers who are the holders of various
traditional offices, including the Lord President of the Council, the Lord
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
43
Privy Seal, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster,1 the Paymaster-
General and, at present, a Minister without Portfolio. These ministers have
few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any special
functions which the Prime Minister may wish to entrust to them.
4. The Lord Chancellor and the Law Officers. The Lord Chancellor has depart¬
mental functions; he is also in a somewhat special position as a Minister of
the Crown who is also head of the judiciary in England and Wales. The four
Law Officers of the Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney-
General and the Solicitor-General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and
the Solicitor-General for Scotland.
5. Ministers of State, who are deputy ministers in Government departments
where the work is particularly heavy and complex, or when it involves
frequent travelling overseas. There are now two Ministers of State in the
Foreign Office, one in the Colonial Office, and one at the Board of Trade. In
addition, the Secretary of State for Scotland is assisted at ministerial level
by a Minister of State, and there is a Minister of State for Welsh Affairs.
6. Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary
or, where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to
relieve their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in
parliamentary debates and answering parliamentary questions, and by
assisting in their departmental duties. The Parliamentary Secretary to the
Treasury and the Junior Lords of the Treasury are in a different category
as Government Whips.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all senior ministers are
appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, since the
approval of that House is necessary for the general policy (and frequently for the
specific proposals) of the Government. There must, however, always be some
ministers in the House of Lords, partly because the House of Commons Disqualifi¬
cation Act, 1957, limits the number of ministers who may sit and vote in the
Commons while receiving salaries from the Crown, and also because every
Government must be assured of spokesmen of standing to expound and justify
its intentions and its actions to the House of Lords.
The Prime Minister
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during the
eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the holder of this
office derives from his status as leader of the majority party in Parliament and from
his power to submit his own choice of ministers to the Sovereign and to obtain their
resignation or dismissal individually. In modern times, the Prime Minister always
holds the office of First Lord Commissioner of the Treasury, and may also hold
another portfolio. In April 1957, he became the minister responsible for atomic
energy.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general
business of the Government; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise a general
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed
by the reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is
separately administered by the Chancellor. In January 1957, the Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster became responsible for the co-ordination of the Government Information
Services.
44
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
supervision over departments, settling departmental differences and approving
important departmental decisions where reference to the Cabinet is not required.
The Prime Minister speaks for the Government in the House of Commons on the
most important topics and answers questions on its general administration in that
House. .
The Prime Minister’s responsibilities include making recommendations for
the appointment of Church of England archbishops, bishops and other senior
clergy and incumbents of Crown livings, as well as for appointments to high judicial
and civil offices such as that of the Lord Chief Justice and certain other judges,
Lord Lieutenants of counties,1 Regius Professors in certain universities and trustees
of certain national museums. He also makes recommendations for the award of
most civil honours and distinctions.
The Cabinet
The Cabinet is composed of a number of ministers who are selected by the
Prime Minister personally. Membership is not fixed, although the holders of certain
important ministerial offices are always included; the number of members is now
usually less than twenty.
The origins of the Cabinet can be traced back to informal conferences between
the Sovereign and his or her leading ministers held in the seventeenth century',
independently of the Privy Council. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an
active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development of organised
political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832
onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet, as defined in the Report of the Machinery of
Government Committee (Haldane Committee), Cd. 923°> are •
determination of the policy to be submitted to Parliament; the supreme control
of the national executive in accordance with the policy agreed by Parliament;
and the continuous co-ordination and delimitation of the authority of the several
departments of State. The Cabinet has no legal authority, however, since its
decisions are valid by convention and not by law.
In determining Government policy, whether in the form of proposed legislation
for the consideration of Parliament or otherwise, the Cabinet is able to take into
account the widest possible range of interests in the country as a whole, by means
of an elaborate machinery of consultation, both formal and informal. For the
investigation of matters considered to be of the greatest importance, and where
time is not of the essence, the procedure frequently adopted is the appointment (by
Royal Warrant) of a Royal Commission, whose members are selected on grounds
of their wide experience and diverse knowledge of the subject matter under
consideration. A Royal Commission examines written and oral evidence from many
interested organisations and individuals and, on this evidence, submits a report
containing recommendations which the Government may accept in whole or in
part, or upon which it may decide to take no further action or to delay action until
a later date.
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential. Its
members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose any informa¬
tion. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as well as of other
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant in the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
45
State papers, and a resigning minister desiring to make a statement involving dis¬
closure of Cabinet discussions must first obtain the permission of the Sovereign
through the Prime Minister. The theoretical reason for this secrecy is that a Cabinet
decision is advice to the Sovereign, whose consent is necessary before the decision is
made public. From a practical point of view, secrecy is essential in the interests of
unprejudiced debate, which can take place only if there is no risk of publicity for
every statement made and every point conceded.
In normal times, the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is not sitting.
Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any time, if a matter
urgently requiring discussion should arise. During Cabinet meetings, decisions are
reached on major issues of Government policy, and the Cabinet settles any matters
which cannot be disposed of at lower levels.
The Cabinet carries on much of its work by means of a committee system
which originated in the nineteenth century and has been developed to keep pace
with Government business during the past sixty years. The system involves
the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned, which considers
the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the full Cabinet
with recommendations for action. Ministers not in the Cabinet are called to
attend Cabinet meetings when matters affecting their departments are under
discussion; they may also be members of Cabinet committees.
Detailed accounts of Cabinet meetings are not prepared; only the substance
of documents submitted, together with a summary of the arguments and the con¬
clusions, are recorded; even these records have a strictly limited circulation.
Responsibility for the keeping of records lies with the Secretariat of the Cabinet,
known as the Cabinet Office.
Ministerial Responsibility
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which ministers
share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual responsibility
of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the middle
of the nineteenth century, imposes upon ministers the obligation to act not as
individuals but (in the interests of stability of government) as a united group.
It does not require every Cabinet minister to be present at every Cabinet meeting;
and the obligations of individual ministers may be passive rather than active when
the decision to be taken does not relate to their spheres of administrative responsi¬
bility. At the same time, every minister should be fully informed of the subject of
•discussion beforehand, so that if he has any objections he may voice them at the
meeting. He may not repudiate, either in Parliament or in his constituency, policies
which have received Cabinet approval, nor may he adopt policies that have not
been agreed with the other departments concerned (including the Treasury).
A minister must also be prepared to vote with the Government on all issues, and
where necessary to speak in support or defence of its policy; if he feels himself
unable to agree or to compromise with the view of the majority of his colleagues
in Parliament or elsewhere he must resign. A minister who does not resign in these
•circumstances cannot later reject criticism on the ground that he did not personally
agree with the policy adopted.
The doctrine of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet is bound to
offer unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold
identical views on a given subject.
BRITAIN l AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
46
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department means
that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its acts and
omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of administration, any
injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be criticised in Parlia¬
ment, whether he is personally responsible or not. Since the majority of ministers
are members of the House of Commons, they are available to answer questions and
to defend themselves against criticism in person. Ministers who are in the House of
Lords must be represented in the Commons by political subordinates qualified to
speak on their behalf, i.e. by their Parliamentary Secretaries and Under-Secretaries.
Responsibility, however, cannot be delegated; it remains with the senior minister
concerned.
Ministers are expected to take the final decision on all matters relating to their
spheres of administration, unless these are of such political importance that
Cabinet sanction is required. If any departmental decision brings a minister under
fire of criticism in Parliament he may be upheld by the Cabinet, which will then
treat the matter as one of confidence in itself; or he may be disowned, when he
alone will be liable to lose office.
Ministerial responsibility is an effective way of bringing government under public
control, for the knowledge that any departmental action may be reported to and
examined in Parliament discourages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered
decisions.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are organs of Government used to give effect to
Government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation. They
may and frequently do work with and through local authorities, statutory boards,
and Government-sponsored organisations which, while not forming part of Govern¬
ment departments, are under varying degrees of Government control.
As a rule, a change of Government does not immediately affect the number or
general functions of Government departments, although a radical change in policy
may be accompanied by some change. The widening scope of Government activity
in the past half-century has, however, gradually led to the formation of many new
departments. A few have existed for over 200 years.
The work of some departments, e.g., the Post Office and the Customs and Excise
department, covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments cover
Great Britain (England and Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland), e.g.,
the Ministry of Labour and National Service; others cover England and Wales
only, e.g., the Ministry of Health, and there are similar but separate departments
for Scotland and Northern Ireland. Some departments, e.g., the Ministry of
Education, make special arrangements for Welsh affairs.
Departments differ in size and in the number, type and complexity of their
functions, and some have regional and local offices. Most departments have a
minister of their own in control; a very few have no minister responsible to
Parliament, e.g., the Exchequer and Audit Department under the Comptroller
and Auditor General, who is an officer of Parliament and not of the Government;
and some are in charge of ministers who have other duties. For instance, Treasury
ministers are responsible for the administration of a number of departments,
including H.M. Stationery Office, the Central Office of Information, the Treasury
Solicitor’s Department, the Department of the Government Actuary, the Royal
Mint, the National Debt Office, the Public Works Loan Board, the National
Savings Committee and certain museums and art galleries.
ADDENDUM
GENERAL ELECTION 1959 AND CONSEQUENT
ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES
General Election
In the general election, held in the United Kingdom on 8th October, 1959, the
Conservative Party was returned to office with a majority of xoo over all other
parties. This is the first time, since the establishment of the modem party system
in Britain in the nineteenth century, that a party has increased its parliamentary
strength in four successive general elections (namely those of 1950, 1951, 1955
and i959)> and the first time that a party has retained office after being in power
for the duration of two full Parliaments (1951-55 and 1955-59).
During the election, all 630 constituencies of the United Kingdom were contested
and there were 1,536 candidates standing for election. A total of 27,862,708 voters
went to the polls, representing 78-7 per cent of the total electorate. The number
of votes cast for each party was:
Conservative and supporters . . . . 13,750,935
Labour and Co-operative .. .. 12,216,166
Liberal ..    1,640,761
Communist .. . . .. .. 30,897
Others1   223,949
Representation in the House of Commons is as follows:
Seats Gained
Conservative and supporters .. .. 365
Labour and Co-operative . . . . 258
Liberal . . .... . . . . 6
Independent .. .. . . . . 1
Comparative figures for the general elections of 1945-55 are given on page 34.
Administrative Changes
A number of important administrative changes were made by the Prime Minister
when he formed his new Government in October 1959. While these changes do
not alter the basic structure of the Cabinet, they have a far-reaching effect on the
duties of certain ministers and Government departments.
1. The Lord Privy Seal, as Minister for Science and Technology, has been
given the general duty of promoting scientific and technological develop¬
ment. He has thus assumed responsibility for the work of the Atomic
Energy Authority (previously held by the Prime Minister) and for that of
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Medical
Research Council, the Agricultural Research Council, the Overseas
1 Including Welsh and Scottish Nationalists, Independent Labour Party, other
Independents, Irish Labour, Irish Nationalist, Irish Anti-Partitionist and Sinn Fein.
ADDENDUM
Research Council and the Nature Conservancy (previously held by the
Lord President of the Council). The Lord Privy Seal is also responsible
for the supervision of Britain’s contribution to space research.
2. The former Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation has been divided
into two new ministries: the Ministry of Transport, to which has been
transferred responsibility for the shipbuilding and ship repairing industry
hitherto held by the Admiralty; and the Ministry of Aviation. The Minister
of Aviation has assumed responsibility not only for civil aviation, but also
for research, development and production of aircraft (both civil and
military), guided and atomic weapons, radar and electronics, previously
controlled by the Minister of Supply.
3. The Ministry of Supply has been abolished. Those of its responsibilities
which are not now exercised by the Ministry of Aviation are mainly con¬
cerned with the control of. munitions and Royal Ordnance factories, and
have been transferred to the War Office.
4. The Ministry of Labour and National Service is now the Ministry of
Labour.
Readers should note that the sections of the Handbook
principally affected by these changes are: chapter IIpp. H-S,
48, 55, 58-60; chapter III pp. 109, m, ii4~7l chapter VII
pp. 20J-20; chapter IXpp. 256, 258, 259, 3371 and chapter
x pp. 358-65, 370, 379-85.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
47
This section provides an outline of the principal functions of the main Govern¬
ment departments. Since much of their work is interconnected, they are not
grouped according to the subjects with which they deal, but are arranged in
alphabetical order, except for the Cabinet Office and the Treasury (which, in view
of their central position, are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern Ireland
departments, which are grouped at the end of the section. Further information on
the work undertaken by the various departments is given in later sections of this
handbook under the relevant subject headings.
The Cabinet Office
The Cabinet Office, or Secretariat of the Cabinet, was introduced as an emer¬
gency institution during the first world war and has grown into an organ of great
importance in the co-ordination of policy at the highest level. The secretariat is
responsible for the keeping of Cabinet records, for providing information and
advice to ministers, and for issuing directives or promulgating the decisions of the
Cabinet or the Prime Minister to the departments concerned. It has a military side
and a civil side. Attached to the Cabinet Office is the Central Statistical Office, which
is charged with the collection, analysis and presentation of statistics relating to
the national economy.
The Treasury
Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the First
Lord of the Treasury (now always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor of the
Exchequer and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners never
meet as a board and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer assisted by two junior ministers, the Financial Secretary and the
Economic Secretary. There is also a Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury, who
is the Chief Government Whip in the House of Commons.
The functions of the Treasury fall under four main headings: finance (sub¬
divided into home finance and overseas finance), control of expenditure, general
civil service establishment matters, and co-ordination of economic policy. Home
finance includes taxation policy (though executive responsibility for the collection
of revenue lies with the Board of Inland Revenue and the Department of Customs
and Excise), the provision of funds for the day-to-day needs of the public services,
currency and banking, and the management of the national debt. The Treasury
has been heavily occupied with overseas financial questions since the end of the
second world war because of the post-war emphasis on the problem of the balance
of payments.
Control of expenditure is a matter partly for Government departments and
partly for the Treasury, which scrutinises the detailed annual Estimates and
exercises a general supervision over departmental expenditure, subject always to
the overriding control and authority of Parliament. The Treasury’s responsibility
in general civil service questions has developed gradually out of the control of
expenditure.
The co-ordination of economic policy is a function which the Treasury has
acquired since the end of the second world war. It arose from the acceptance by
successive Governments of responsibility for maintaining full employment, safe¬
guarding the balance of payments and avoiding inflation.
Parliamentary Counsel to the Treasury. The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel
is responsible for the drafting of all Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions
of Bills extending exclusively to Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s
Department. The office drafts all financial and other parliamentary resolutions and
4g BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
amendments moved by the Government during the passage of Bills through
Parliament; it advises departments on questions of parliamentary procedure;
and it attends sittings of both Houses of Parliament, and their committees. In
addition, the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel drafts subordinate legislation
when instructed, and advises the Government on legal, parliamentary and
constitutional questions falling within its special experience.
Tlie Admiralty
The Admiralty Act of 1690 appointed Lords Commissioners to the Board of
Admiralty to execute the office of Lord High Admiral. The responsibilities of the
Board of Admiralty are, briefly, to build, direct, maintain and administer the Royal
Navy within the framework of the Government’s naval defence policy. The present
Board of Admiralty comprises ten members (three ministerial, six naval and one
civil servant); the First Lord is the ministerial head of the department and the
other members are responsible to him for specific duties. The Board of Admiralty
is served by three departmental groups: (1) the divisions of the naval staff,
responsible for advising on general and technical policy, strategy, tactics, operational
planning, the disposition of the Fleet, methods of naval warfare, and material require¬
ments • (2) the departments responsible for advising on personnel and material policy,
for providing the men (and their training), the ships (including their weapons
and equipment) and supplies, for the general organisation and administration of
associated naval establishments at home and abroad, and for stating (to the Ministry
of Supply) naval aircraft requirements; and (3) the secretariat branches, which
co-ordinate business, provide advice on precedent and on general Government
policy, ensure financial regularity and receive, pay and account for all money
administered by the department.
The Admiralty has responsibilities for the merchant shipbuilding and repair
industry, and advises on the Government’s economic policy in the industry.
Much of the research work undertaken to meet naval requirements has additional
civil applications. The Admiralty administers the Royal Greenwich Observatory
and the National Institute of Oceanography.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food was established by Order in
Council in April 1955 and assumed the responsibilities previously discharged by
the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Food.
The ministry is responsible generally for the efficiency of the agricultural,
horticultural and fishing industries in England and Wales. In this connection it
keeps in touch with local farming opinion through the county agricultural executive
committees, and is concerned with the provision of technical advisory services,
measures to promote improvements in the quality of livestock, agricultural an
fisheries produce, matters affecting agricultural labour, and marketing schemes.
It administers the production grants for the improvement of farm land, build¬
ings, equipment, and livestock, and the price guarantees to farmers under the
Agriculture Acts, 1947 and 1957- With other Government departments it is
concerned with improvements (in rural areas) to such services as the provision ot
farm buildings, water supplies and electricity; with the supply of machinery,
fertilisers and seeds; and with various aspects of land use..
Throughout Great Britain, the department is in operational control of epidemic
diseases of animals and of plant diseases and pests, and it has general responsibility
for food supplies, both home produced and imported, for food manufacture,
distribution and storage, for identifying problems for food research, for the
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
49
conduct of the National Food Survey, and for administering part of the food and
drugs legislation—in particular that part relating to the composition of food,
labelling and advertising, and the cleanliness and quality of milk.
The ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign
countries interested in the United Kingdom as a market for their food exports, and
is responsible for schemes such as the Commonwealth Sugar Agreement, which is
operated through the Sugar Board. It contributes to the work of such international
bodies as the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, the
Organisation for European Economic Co-operation, the Economic Commission for
Europe, and, for food defence planning purposes, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation.
The ministry is also responsible for the administration of the Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew.
Ordnance Survey Department. The control of the Ordnance Survey Department
was transferred from the War Office to the Office of Works as the importance of
its civil work outstripped that of the military purposes for which it had been
founded in 1791. It is now generally administered by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, although it is itself responsible for its day-to-day affairs. The
department carries out land registry surveys, and produces a wide range of maps
for the Admiralty, War Office, Air Ministry, and Geological Survey.
The Air Ministry
The Air Council was established by Order in Council in 1918 according to
provisions of the Air Force Constitution Act, 1917, which authorised the absorption
of the Royal Naval Air Service and Royal Flying Corps into the Royal Air Force
(RAF) under the administrative control of an Air Council presided over by a
Secretary of State.
The present Air Council comprises eight members—two ministerial, five air
force and one civil servant. Its president is the Secretary of State for Air and the
other members are responsible to him for specific duties. The Air Council is
served by four departments, which together form the Air Ministry. The departments
are: (1) the department of the Chief of Air Staff, responsible for policy, planning
and the fighting efficiency of the RAF; advice on the conduct of operations and the
issue of operational orders; operational requirements, flying training, ground combat,
navigational, command and staff training; defence, including the use of guided
weapons; operational and defence research; flight safety; (2) the department of
the Air Member for Personnel, responsible for all matters in connection with the
personnel of the RAF (except training and establishments); (3) the department of
the Air Member for Supply and Organisation, responsible for organisation of the
RAF in peace and war; establishment of personnel, aircraft, marine craft and
mechanical transport; transportation; works and technical services; technical
training; engineering; supply services; work study; and (4) the department of the
Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Air, responsible for general control and
co-ordination of Air Ministry procedure and the conduct of official business;
control of expenditure; establishment of Air Ministry headquarters and outstations
and all civilian staff matters; parliamentary and legal business; and the general
administration of the Meteorological Office.
The supply of airframes, aero engines, and certain other weapons and equipment
is arranged through the Ministry of Supply.
The Meteorological Office, for which the Air Ministry became responsible in 1920,
provides meteorological services for the general public, Government departments,
50 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the armed forces, shipping and civil aviation. It organises meteorological observations
in the United Kingdom and at certain stations overseas and undertakes the collec¬
tion, publication and distribution of meteorological information from all parts of
the world. It also undertakes meteorological and climatological research.
The Colonial Office
The Colonial Office deals with the affairs of the great majority of the non-self-
governing countries of the Commonwealth. At the head of the Colonial Office is
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, who is the minister responsible to Parlia¬
ment for the general administration of those territories. The main functions of the
Colonial Office are to convey to the governments of the dependent territories the
views and wishes of the United Kingdom Government on broad matters of policy
and to provide them with guidance on a wide range of matters through a staff of
professional advisers and with the help of advisory committees composed of men
and women eminent in many fields. The department is also responsible for ensuring
that the interests of governments and peoples of the dependent territories are
safeguarded and promoted, and for undertaking expert service of many kinds,
including the allocation of funds for development purposes under the Colonial
Development and Welfare Acts and the provision of administrative and professional
staff for the Overseas Civil Service. Other functions of the Colonial Office include
the care of students from the dependent territories in the United Kingdom, the
British Council acting as agent in providing for their general welfare.
The Colonial Office does not directly administer the territories with which it
deals. Each of these has its own administration and an increasing measure of
autonomy.
Her Majesty's Overseas Civil Service. Members of this service (recruitment for
which is in the hands of the Secretary of State for the Colonies) are employed in
the public services of colonial overseas territories and are paid by the government
of the territory in which they serve. The service merges the administrative and
professional branches of the former Colonial Service. Its members are ehgible to be
considered for employment in any post which the Secretary of State for the Colonies
is requested or authorised to fill, and may also be considered, as opportunity offers,
for any post in Commonwealth or foreign territories for which the United Kingdom
Government may be invited to recommend candidates. Recruitment into this
service is undertaken in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries
when suitably qualified local candidates are not available for appointment to the
territorial public service.
The Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, while not con¬
stituting a Government department, are appointed by the Secretary of State for
the Colonies to act as commercial and financial agents in the United Kingdom for
the governments of the territories for which he is responsible. They also act by
special arrangement for other governments and bodies.
The Commonwealth Relations Office
The Commonwealth Relations Office, known between 1925 (when it was first
established as a separate Government department) and 1947 as the Dominions
Office links the United Kingdom Government—by consultation and exchange of
information on all subjects of mutual interest, including foreign affairs, defence
co-operation and economic matters—with the Governments of the other member
nations of the Commonwealth (Canada, Australia, New Zealand the Union of
South Africa, India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Ghana, and the Federation of Malaya), with
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
51
the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, and with the self-governing colony of
Southern Rhodesia. Similar relations with the Irish Republic (which, although no
longer a member of the Commonwealth, is not treated as a foreign country) are
maintained through the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, who is
also responsible for the administration of the South African High Commission
Territories (Basutoland, the Bechuanaland Protectorate and Swaziland).
The Customs and Excise Department
Commissioners to collect the customs and the excise revenues were first
appointed by the Long Parliament in 1643 (although after the Restoration the
older method of collection through private contractors was revived for a time).
The two branches of the revenue remained distinct until 1909, when they were
amalgamated under Commissioners of Customs and Excise. The primary work of
the Customs and Excise Department is to collect and administer the duties of
customs and excise imposed from time to time in the annual Finance Acts or by
other legislation, and to advise the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any matters
connected with them. The department is also responsible for preventing and
detecting evasion of the revenue laws, including smuggling and illicit distillation.
In addition to its revenue work, the department undertakes a wide range of
non-revenue agency work for other departments, e.g., the enforcement of prohibi¬
tions and restrictions on the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods,
exchange currency control, and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade
statistics from customs import and export documents.
The Ministry of Defence
The Ministry of Defence was formally constituted in January 1947 following the
passing of the Ministry of Defence Act, 1946. The Act charges the minister with
responsibility for ‘the formulation and general application of a unified policy
relating to the armed forces of the Crown as a whole and their requirements’. He
carries out this responsibility in accordance with general defence policy laid down
by the Cabinet.
In addition to its main function of co-ordinating the policies and requirements
of the armed Services, the ministry is responsible for the administration of the
Joint Intelligence Bureau, the Imperial Defence College, the Joint Services Staff
College and Amphibious Warfare Headquarters.
The Ministry of Defence also has responsibilities arising from United Kingdom
participation in international defence organisations.
The Ministry of Education
The Ministry of Education was established in 1944 to take over the powers and
duties previously exercised by the Board of Education (1899-1944) in regard to
the promotion of the education of the people of England and Wales and of the
progressive development of institutions devoted to that purpose. The ministry
exercises this function in co-operation with the local education authorities—the
councils of the counties and of the county boroughs—whose duty it is to secure
adequate facilities for all forms of education in their areas. On professional matters,
contact with the local education authorities is maintained through Her Majesty’s
Inspectorate of Schools, which is organised in regional divisions throughout
England and Wales for its work of inspection, liaison and advice. A separate Welsh
Department of the Ministry of Education deals with education in Wales.
The ministry is concerned with the development of primary, secondary and
further education, including vocational education and education for leisure and
52 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the social and physical training of young people. It deals with the supply, training
and superannuation of teachers; the building of new schools and other institutions;
the school health service; the special educational treatment of handicapped children;
and the provision of school meals and milk. It is responsible for the award of State
scholarships and other awards for university students; for the administration of the
Victoria and Albert Museum and the Science Museum, London; and for the
maintenance of educational relations with other countries of the Commonwealth
with foreign countries, and with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation.
The Commonwealth Institute. The institute was founded (as the Imperial Institute)
in 1893. Its work is now directed by a board of governors, some of whom are
appointed by the Minister of Education and others by the Governments of the
member nations of the Commonwealth. The institute houses permanent exhibi¬
tions of the peoples and products of the Commonwealth, shows films on Common¬
wealth subjects, and does much educational work in co-operation with the schools.
It also arranges lectures and conferences and has study and recreational accommo¬
dation for Commonwealth students. The institute is financially dependent on an
endowment fund and on grants from the United Kingdom and other Common¬
wealth Governments. A new building to house the institute is due to be completed
in 1962.
The Foreign Office
The Foreign Office, which is the headquarters of the Foreign Service,1 first
became a separate department of State in 1782. The minister in charge of the
Foreign Office, and responsible to Parliament for the conduct of foreign affairs
and for the direction and operation of the Foreign Service, is the Secretary o
State for Foreign Affairs. , tt v ^
The Foreign Office acts as a channel of communication between the United
Kingdom Government and the Governments of foreign States, either through the
representatives of foreign States in the United Kingdom or through Her Majesty s
representatives abroad, for the discussion and negotiation of all matters falling
within the field of international relations, including the drawing up of international
treaties and agreements. It also provides the means by which the United Kingdom
Government is represented in the United Nations and on other international bodies
and is kept informed of developments in foreign countries; by which British sub¬
jects and interests abroad are protected and trade promoted; and by which British
policy is explained to foreign Governments and peoples. The questions dealt with
by the Foreign Office are primarily of a political nature, but they also include
many other matters such as questions of nationality, the issue and renewal of pass¬
ports, and the immunities and privileges of foreign diplomatic representatives.
The Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission, which was established as the national forest authority
with its own annual Vote in Estimates by the Forestry Act, 1919, is responsible
under the Forestry Acts, 1919-5 L f°r promoting the interests of forestry^ the
development of afforestation, and the production and supply of timber in Great
Britain, and for maintaining reserves of growing trees, through a system of licensed
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible for forest policy
in England and Wales, and the Secretary of State for Scotland in Scotland.
1 See p. 66
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
53
The General Register Office
The General Register Office is responsible under the Registrar General for the
regulation of civil marriages and for the administration of civil registration in
England and Wales, for the preparation of statistics and reports relating to popula¬
tion, fertility, births, marriages, adoptions, diseases and deaths, and for making
arrangements for the periodic census of the population. Responsibility to Parliament
rests with the Ministry of Health.
The Ministry of Health
The Ministry of Health was created in 1919. Its main functions are the
administration, in England and Wales, of the National Health Service under the
National Health Service Acts, and the supervision of the work of local authorities
under certain sections of the Public Health Acts and of their services in connection
with mental illness, and for the care of the aged, infirm, blind, deaf and other
handicapped persons under the National Assistance Act, 1948.
The Ministry of Health is also concerned with the medical and surgical treatment
of war pensioners in England and Wales, the Channel Islands and the Isle of
Man and those living in the Irish Republic. Its other responsibilities relate to
food hygiene and welfare foods.
The exercise of the department’s functions in Wales has been delegated to the
Welsh Board of Health, the members of which are appointed by the Minister of
Health.
The Ministry of Health is represented on the World Health Organisation of the
United Nations.
The Home Office
The Home Office was created in 1782. Its head is the Secretary of State for the
Home Department (the Home Secretary), who is entrusted with all the responsibi¬
lities of national administration which have not been especially assigned by law or
convention to another minister. The Home Secretary is the channel of communica¬
tion between the Sovereign and his or her subjects, and between the United
Kingdom Government and the Governments of Northern Ireland, the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are: the maintenance
of law and order; the efficiency of the police service; the treatment of offenders,
including juvenile offenders; the efficacy of the probation service; the organisation
of magistrates’ courts; the introduction of legislation on criminal justice; the
efficiency of the fire service; the care of children by local authorities and voluntary
organisations; the regulation of the employment of children and young persons;
the law relating to the conduct of parliamentary and local government elections;
public safety and preparations for civil defence; the control and naturalisation of
aliens; and general questions and individual cases relating to British nationality
and citizenship of the United Kingdom and Colonies.
Particular matters for which the Home Office is responsible, both in connection
with its general functions and otherwise, include: receiving and submitting
addresses and petitions to the Sovereign and preparing presentations to Parlia¬
ment; preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal proceedings for the
bestowal of honours; advising the Crown on the exercise of the prerogative of
mercy; making and receiving requests for the extradition of criminals; sanctioning
by-laws made by local authorities in so far as they relate to ‘law and order’ and
‘good governance’; granting licences to experiment with animals; ordering the
exhumation and removal of bodies; supervising the control of explosives, firearms
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
54
and dangerous drugs; and administering the State Management Scheme for
control of the liquor trade in the Carlisle district.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is generally responsible fcr
local government in England and Wales, and exercises powers in regard to housing,
town and country planning, water, sewerage, and other services administered by
local authorities. It is also responsible for sanctioning loans for most purposes
for which local authorities require to borrow money, and for acting as the main
link between local authorities and the central Government.
As the central housing authority under the Housing Act, 1936, the Minister of
Housing and Local Government supervises the administration of the housing
statutes and the national housing programme; and his officers keep in close touch
with the local authorities in England and Wales. Local authority proposals fcr
dealing with slum clearance are also submitted to the minister.
The town and country planning work of the ministry includes the framing and
execution of the national policy on the use and development of land for the purpose
of achieving the best use of land in the public interest. The responsibilities of the
minister include confirmation of the acquisition and disposal of land by local
authorities; and the payment of grants, for planning purposes, in certain cases of
acquisition, clearing and compensation. The minister also has responsibilities in
connection with the establishment and work of the Development Corporations of
the new towns, and with the National Parks Commission.
The Minister of Housing and Local Government is also the Minister for Welsh
Affairs.
The Central Office of Information
The Central Office of Information was established in 1946 as the successor to the
war-time Ministry of Information. It is a common service agency for producing
and advising on information and publicity material and for supplying general
publicity services required by Government departments. It produces and distributes
books, pamphlets, magazines, films (including films for television), exhibitions,
photographs and other visual material for the home and overseas ministerial
departments. In the United Kingdom, it conducts all Government press and
poster advertising except that of the National Savings Committee, carries out social
surveys, and distributes departmental press notices to the press, the BBC and the
television companies. For the overseas departments, it also supplies British
information posts abroad with a daily service of topical information, comment
and official news for local circulation and other material for the press and radio,
and with a comprehensive reference service, and arranges tours for official visitors
from overseas to enable them to see various aspects of life in Britain. Administra¬
tively, the Central Office of Information is responsible to the Treasury ministers,
while the ministers whose departments it serves are responsible for the policy
expressed in its work.
The Board of Inland Revenue
The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax and
surtax, profits tax, stamp duty, estate duty, and certain other direct taxes of lesser
importance; and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any matters connected
with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of real property for various
purposes such as compensation for compulsory purchase, local rates in England
and Wales, and estate duty.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
55
The Ministry of Labour and National Service
The Ministry of Labour was created in 1916. In 1939, when it became responsible
for manpower, both for the armed forces and for industry, its name was changed
to the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
In relation to manpower policy, the ministry co-operates with other Government
departments on matters of general employment policy, including the distribution of
industry and the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment. One of its
principal functions is the administration of the Employment and Training Act,
1948, under which it provides facilities and services for vocational guidance and
training, helps workers to obtain and retain employment suitable to their age and
capacity, and assists employers to obtain suitable employees. The ministry’s
services include the operation of (1) a national system of employment exchanges,
(2) the Technical and Scientific Register, (3) nursing appointments offices and
(4) Government schemes for vocational training. It is also concerned with the
central administration of the Youth Employment Service, and provides the
Disablement Resettlement Service to enable disabled persons to secure employment.
Other functions of the department include: the registration, medical examination
and call-up of men for National Service and the resettlement in civilian employment
of men released from National Service or from the regular armed forces; the
supervision, through the Inspectorate of Factories, of safety, health and welfare
measures for industrial workers; the collection and publication of labour statistics
of all kinds; the promotion of good industrial relations; and the provision of
services for conciliation, arbitration and investigation in industrial disputes.
Responsibility for the relations of the United Kingdom Government with the
International Labour Organisation rests with the ministry, which is also concerned
with labour policy in the international field, with overseas questions concerning
labour and employment and with the employment of foreign workers in Great
Britain.
Besides these principal functions, the ministry undertakes agency work for other
Government departments in connection with National Insurance, National
Assistance, repayment of income tax to unemployed persons, and the issue of
passports.
The Law Officers’ Department
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales (the Attorney-General
and the Solicitor-General) are appointed from among the more distinguished
members of the English Bar. They are always members of the House of Commons.
The Law Officers are the principal legal advisers to the Sovereign in his or her
private capacity, to the Government, and to Government departments; and they
appear in court as counsel on behalf of the Crown in important cases. In addition,
the Attorney-General is responsible for superintending the work of the Director
of Public Prosecutions; his consent is required to the institution of criminal
proceedings for certain offences; and he has unfettered power (exercised only in
exceptional cases) to stay criminal proceedings in the superior courts. The Solicitor-
General, as the Attorney-General’s deputy, acts for him in all cases where he is
authorised or required to do so. The Law Officers are assisted by a small
professional staff.
The Lord Chancellor’s Departments
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an
eminent ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar; it always carries Cabinet rank in
peace time.
E
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
56
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian of
the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different offices
and branches which are mainly concerned with legal practice and procedure. He
controls the machinery of the courts of law both through his patronage and through
administrative powers conferred by the Judicature Act, 1925, and other Acts; he
advises the Crown on many appointments to the judiciary in England and Wales;
and he is the minister responsible for the Judge Advocate General’s Department.
This department advises the War Office and the Air Ministry on all legal matters
arising out of the administration of military law, and, where necessary, reviews the
proceedings of army and air force courts martial.1 The Lord Chancellor is also a
member of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and exercises ecclesiastical
patronage. Under the Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1958, he appoints the chairmen
of certain administrative tribunals in England and Wales, and (with the Secretary
of State for Scotland) the members of the Council on Tribunals. The Land Registry
(which is responsible for maintaining a State register of title to land), the Public
Trustee Office (which may act as the executor or administrator of the estate of a
deceased person or as a trustee under a will or settlement) and the Public Record
Office (which preserves, and provides access to, the national archives) are
administered under the Lord Chancellor.
The National Assistance Board
The National Assistance Board is responsible to Parliament through the Minister
of Pensions and National Insurance. It administers the State service of financial
assistance to persons in need and unable to maintain themselves, and the non¬
contributory pension scheme under the Old Age Pensions Act, 1936, and is
responsible for assessing the means of persons applying for legal aid.
The Paymaster-General’s Office
The Paymaster-General’s Office acts generally as a banker for most Government
departments, money granted by Parliament to meet departmental expenditure
(other than the expenditure of the Board of Inland Revenue, the Customs and
Excise Department and the Post Office, for which separate arrangements exist)
being transferred (in such sums as may be required from day to day) from the
Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster-General at the Bank of England.
Most departmental payments are made by means of payable orders drawn on the
Paymaster-General’s Office; these are similar to cheques, and their recipients
obtain payment through the commercial banks, whose accounts at the Bank of
England are in turn reimbursed by the Paymaster-General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many public
service pensions, including those of civil servants, teachers, and members of the
National Health Service, as well as the retired pay and pensions of officers of the
armed forces, their widows and dependants.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
In 1953 the Ministry of Pensions (established in 1917) and the Ministry of
National Insurance (established in 1944) were amalgamated and became the
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. The ministry is responsible (1) for the
social security services established since the second world war by the Family Allow¬
ances Acts, the National Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (Industrial
Injuries) Acts, and for reciprocal social security arrangements with other countries,
1 The Judge Advocate of the Fleet is responsible for these matters in the Royal Navy.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
57
and (2) for the award and payment of war pensions and allowances for disablement
and death due to service in the armed forces of the Crown or in the Home Guard (now
disbanded), or due to war injuries sustained by naval auxiliaries, merchant seamen,
civil defence personnel and civilians in the second world war, and for the welfare of
pensioners and their dependants and war orphans. In addition to these responsi¬
bilities for war pensioners in the United Kingdom and in the Irish Republic, the
ministry is responsible for the administration of war pensions and for the medical
treatment of war disablement of United Kingdom pensioners living in Northern
Ireland and, through its various agencies, in other countries overseas. The ministry
maintains an office in Ottawa to serve pensioners in North America.
The Post Office
The Post Office was set up in the seventeenth century to take over the responsi¬
bility for carrying letters, which was previously attached to the Crown. The
minister at its head is the Postmaster General, and its work is now mainly concerned
with the operation of the inland postal, telegraph and telephone services and, in
co-operation with other countries and interests, of the overseas postal and telecom¬
munications services. A considerable volume of scientific research and technical
development relating to telephone, telegraph and radio systems and the mechanisa¬
tion of the postal services is carried out by the engineering staff of the Post
Office.
In addition to its other work, the Post Office undertakes certain banking functions,
including the operation of the Post Office Savings Bank, the sale of premium savings
bonds and the issue of money orders, and it acts as an agent for many other Govern¬
ment departments in the collection of revenue (e.g., by the sale of broadcast receiving
and other licences and by the sale of stamps for National Insurance contributions)
and the payment of grants and allowances, such as National Insurance payments,
retirement and certain other pensions and family allowances.
The Postmaster General is the minister responsible to Parliament for broad
questions of national policy concerning the sound and television broadcasting
services. The Post Office provides many line facilities for the British Broadcasting
Corporation and the Independent Television Authority.
The Ministry of Power
The Ministry of Power was established in 1942 (as the Ministry of Fuel and
Power) when it absorbed the former Mines and Petroleum Departments of the
Board of Trade and the Board’s functions in relation to gas and electricity. It was
made permanent by the Ministry of Fuel and Power Act, 1945, its title being
changed to Ministry of Power by Order in Council in 1957.
Since 1942, the ministry has had the general duty of ensuring the effective and
co-ordinated development of fuel and power supplies in Great Britain, and of
promoting economy and efficiency in their distribution and consumption. The
business of producing and distributing gas and electricity and of producing coal is
operated by the boards of the three nationalised industries, whose members are
responsible to the minister on policy issues. The ministry is also responsible for
Government relations with the petroleum industry; it has certain functions in
relation to the iron and steel industries; and it is specifically responsible for the
use of atomic energy as a source of industrial power.
The ministry is concerned with the general co-ordination of fuel research; it
administers the legislation governing the safety and health of workers in or about
coal mines, metalliferous mines and quarries, and it conducts or arranges for
research on these matters and on other specific projects.
5g BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department of the Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number of
Government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his department
include drafting and preparing litigation and prosecutions, representing depart¬
ments in court, and giving general advice on the interpretation and application of
the law. It also undertakes a considerable amount of conveyancing connected with
the transfer of real property and with the administration of the residuary estates
(undisposed of by will) of certain deceased persons, and it deals with the out¬
standing property and rights of dissolved companies.
Some Government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury Solicitor
for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a proportion of the work
and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice and, often, for conveyancing;
and others, whose administrative work is based on or deals with a code of specialised
law or involves a great deal of legal work, have their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also Procurator General (Queen’s Proctor) and in that
capacity has certain duties connected with the operation of the divorce laws.
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was set up as a department
of the Privy Council in 1916. It accounts for its own Vote in the Estimates and
is responsible to Parliament through the Lord President of the Council.
The work of the department covers research in the United Kingdom (except
defence research) in all branches of natural science except medicine and atomic
energy, and in all industries except agriculture, fisheries and forestry. Its primary
functions are to undertake research in the national interest for the benefit of the
community and to meet the requirements of other Government departments; to
encourage research and the application of scientific knowledge in industry; and
to encourage fundamental research at universities and elsewhere, and the
maintenance of an adequate supply of trained research workers for laboratories of
all kinds.
The Stationery Office
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office was established in 1786. It is the Government s
central organisation for the supply of desk stationery, office equipment, office
machinery, printed matter, published books and periodicals for British Govern¬
ment departments at home and abroad. It also undertakes printing, duplicating,
addressing and distributing services for other departments. The Stationery Office
is the Government publisher and is responsible for the sale of Government
publications, including Acts of Parliament. The ministerial head of the Stationery
Office is the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and questions pertaining to the depart¬
ment asked in the House of Commons are normally answered by the Financial
Secretary to the Treasury.
The Ministry of Supply
The Ministry of Supply was formed in 1946 by the amalgamation of the war-time
Ministries of Supply and of Aircraft Production.
The ministry is responsible for furnishing supplies, which include complete
atomic weapons, to the armed forces; it undertakes research on, and the
design and development of, equipment for these forces, principally for the Army
and Royal Air Force, but including aircraft, vehicles, some guns and ammunition
and other equipment for the Royal Navy. The ministry is also responsible for
certain aspects of the electronics and light metals industries, and for research on,
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 59
and development and production of, certain classes of equipment for civil use, e.g.,
civil aircraft and industrial gas turbines.
The ministry controls the Royal Ordnance factories and its own experimental,
storage and other establishments, and is responsible for the administration of such
matters as labour supply, labour management, welfare, housing and transport in
connection with these organisations.
The Board of Trade
The Board of Trade was formally constituted as a Committee of the Privy
Council by an Order in Council of 1786, which still provides its constitutional
basis. Since 1867, the President of the Board of Trade has been the only effective
member of this committee and his authority is, in practice, similar to that of a
Secretary of State or other minister of Cabinet rank.
The Board of Trade has a general responsibility in respect of the United
Kingdom’s commerce, industry and overseas trade, including commercial relations
with other countries, import and export trade, the protective tariff, industrial
development and consumer protection. It is also responsible for (1) the promotion of
exports, (2) statistics of trade and industry (both at home and abroad), including the
censuses of production and distribution, and (3) the administration of certain regu¬
lative legislation, for example, in relation to patents, registered designs, copyright,
trade marks, weights and measures, merchandise marks, companies, bankruptcy,
insurance, distribution of industry, films, and enemy property.
In addition, the Board of Trade is the department generally responsible for
Government relations with all industries which are not specifically the concern of
other departments. In this connection, it provides both a channel of communication
with and a point of contact for these industries, and a central place at which
knowledge about these industries and their problems is accumulated, analysed, and
used as a basis for advising ministers and other departments. The main industries
which fall outside the scope of the Board of Trade’s specific concern are food,
agriculture and fisheries, building and quarrying, iron and steel, shipbuilding, fuel
and power, and transport.
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation
The Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Civil Aviation were amalgamated
in 1953 as the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation.
The powers and duties of the ministry relate to inland transport, shipping and
civil aviation.
On the inland transport side, the ministry is concerned with railways, inland
waterways, roads, bridges and ferries, and the vehicles they carry. The Minister
of Transport and Civil Aviation is the highway authority for trunk roads in England
and Wales; he appoints the members of the British Transport Commission and
agrees the general lines on which its development programme is drawn up.
The marine side of the ministry’s work is concerned with national and
international shipping policy; ships, their masters, officers and men; safety of life
at sea; navigation (including pilotage, lighthouses and other aids to safety in
navigation); wreck and salvage; harbours, docks, piers and river conservancy; and
the Coastguard Service. The ministry is also responsible for providing and
operating troopships.
In civil aviation matters, the minister appoints the members of the airline
corporations and maintains close touch with them in all matters affecting the national
interest. He also approves associate arrangements between airline corporations and
independent air transport companies for the operation of scheduled services. The
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
6o
general civil aviation responsibilities of the ministry include: the regulation of
civil flying; air safety and efficiency; the provision, administration and equipment
of State-controlled aerodromes and other ground services; the negotiation of
international air transport agreements; the registration of aircraft; the licensing of
aircrew and aircraft maintenance personnel; and research on air navigation.
The War Office
The office of Secretary of State for War was established in 1854. In 1904, the
Army Council was constituted on the model of the Board of Admiralty, with the
Secretary of State for War as president and a membership of both military and civil
personnel.
The War Office is responsible for the administrative control of the Army, includ¬
ing appointments, promotions, postings and payment. Its functions include the
planning of operations and training; the collection and sifting of military informa¬
tion; the framing of policy on the composition, weapons and equipment of the
Army; the determination of financial and labour policy connected with the Army;
and the supervision of War Office civilian staff's both at home and abroad.
The Ministry of Works
The Ministry of Works, previously known as His Majesty’s Office of Works,
was established under its present title in 1943. Its main functions are: the provision
of office accommodation for Government departments (including public buildings
overseas), and of many other types of accommodation required by civil and Service
departments; the design, purchase, supply and maintenance of furniture and
equipment for Government departments and certain other bodies, and their
supplies of fuel, household articles and stores; the administration of the Ancient
Monuments Acts and the maintenance of those ancient monuments and historic
buildings which are in its charge; the making of grants, on the advice of the
Historic Buildings Councils, towards the maintenance of historic buildings of
outstanding interest; the maintenance of royal palaces and certain official residences;
the provision of building, engineering and supplies services for certain State
ceremonial occasions; the management and maintenance of the royal parks and
certain other open spaces.
The ministry also has responsibilities for the general efficiency of the building,
civil engineering and building materials industries and for co-ordinating information
about current and future building programmes. For this, regular consultation with
the industries at national and regional levels and a comprehensive statistical
service are maintained. Encouragement is also given to the industries to make
full use of the results of research and development.
SCOTLAND
The first Secretary for Scotland was appointed in 1885 in recognition of the fact
that Scotland required a system of administration separate from that of England
and Wales. Forty years later, his powers and duties were transferred to a Secretary
of State, appointed by the Secretaries of State Act, 1926.
The Secretary of State is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State and
three Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law
Officers. The Secretary of State’s functions are discharged by four main adminis¬
trative departments of equal status, each under a Secretary responsible to the
Secretary of State for the discharge of the duties of the department. The day-to-day
administration of the departments is conducted in Edinburgh, but each depart-
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
6l
ment has representatives in London for liaison and parliamentary duties. The
London office is generally known as the Scottish Office, a term also used to describe
all Scottish administration for which the Secretary of State is responsible.
The four main Scottish departments are the Scottish Home Department, the
Department of Health for Scotland, the Scottish Education Department, and the
Department of Agriculture for Scotland. The Scottish ministers are advised and
assisted (particularly in relation to questions with which more than one of the
departments is concerned or which fall outside the province of any of them) by the
Permanent Under-Secretary of State, Scottish Office, who is free from departmental
duties.
The Scottish Home Department
The Scottish Home Department was set up in 1939 to take over the work that
had been undertaken previously by the Secretary of State’s Office, and by the
Fishery Board for Scotland and the Prisons Department for Scotland.
In the field of law and order, the department is concerned with the police,
probation and remand home services, criminal justice, legal aid and the services
needed by the courts; and it is directly responsible for the administration of prisons
and borstal institutions.
The department is the central authority in Scotland for the fire service and
civil defence; for the children’s service; for highways administration, including
road safety matters (except in so far as they relate to the construction and use of
vehicles); and for legislation concerning shops, theatres, cinemas and licensed
premises. Licensed premises in districts in which State management of the liquor
trade is in operation are directly maintained by the Home Department.
The department has general duties in connection with the structure and finance
of local authorities, including valuation and rating and the administration of the
Exchequer equalisation grants; and it is responsible for the oversight and protec¬
tion of the Scottish inshore, deep-sea and freshwater fisheries. It is also closely
concerned, in co-operation with the Board of Trade and other United Kingdom
departments, with Scottish economic development, including the provision of
electric power and the rehabilitation of the Highlands generally.
The Department of Health for Scotland
The Department of Health for Scotland is responsible for the general supervision
of the National Health Service in Scotland; for the central administration of the
Housing (Scotland) Acts; for the supervision of the house-building programme and
for the distribution of grants to local authorities for housing purposes; for the
control, under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Acts, of the use of land;
and for the establishment of new towns under the New Towns Act.
The department is also responsible for supervising the administration of various
environmental services, including services connected with water supplies, sewerage,
-clean air, and clean rivers; for welfare services, e.g., the care of the aged and
handicapped persons; and for the medical and surgical treatment of war pensioners
in Scotland (including hospital services, and the supply and repair of artificial
limbs, surgical appliances and invalid chairs).
The Scottish Education Department
The Scottish Education Department is responsible for supervising the adminis¬
tration of the Education (Scotland) Acts, for guiding the development of public
education in Scotland in all its forms, for supervising the training of teachers,' for
issuing teachers’ certificates and administering the Teachers’ (Superannuation)
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
62
(Scotland) Regulations, for controlling the distribution of specific Exchequer grants
in aid of educational expenditure, for conducting the annual examination for the
Scottish Leaving Certificate, and for exercising general supervision over approved
schools, and over the administration of the Royal Scottish Museum.
The Department of Agriculture for Scotland
The Department of Agriculture for Scotland is the successor of the Board of
Agriculture, which was established in 1912. Its broad function is to assist, encourage
and improve home food production. It has a general responsibility for all Govern¬
ment measures for the promotion and development of farming in Scotland, and
in most cases the department itself administers them. The measures include:
guaranteed prices for the major farm products, fixed in association with the other
agricultural departments in the United Kingdom; the provision of grants and
subsidies and other services in connection with food production; the application of
measures for controlling injurious animals and birds and infestations in stored
food; the management of the extensive agricultural property owned by the
Secretary of State; the use and improvement of land and the improvement of
farm stock and crops; the economics of the industry; the instructional, advisory
and research services provided by the three agricultural colleges and eight research
institutes in Scotland; measures to promote animal health; the regulation of
agricultural wages; and the application to the agricultural industry of safety, health
and welfare measures.
Other Departments
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish
departments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the
Secretary of State. Such departments include the Department of the Registrar-
General for Scotland (the General Registry Office); the Scottish Record Office;
the Department of the Registers of Scotland; and the Scottish Information Office,
which undertakes information services on behalf of the Secretary of State for
Scotland, the Scottish departments and, in some degree, for Great Britain depart¬
ments in Scotland, and acts as the agent in Scotland of the Central Office of
Information. There are also Scottish branches of the Great Britain and United
Kingdom departments under the direction of controllers, who are responsible for
ensuring that the execution in Scotland of the policy and procedure of their
departments is in accordance with Scottish conditions and needs.
Legal Departments
The Law Officers for Scotland are the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor-General.
The Lord Advocate is in administrative control of two departments: The Lord
Advocate's Department, which is responsible for drafting Scottish legislation,
providing legal advice on Scottish questions for other departments, and assisting
the Scottish Law Officers in certain of their legal duties; and The Crown Office,
which is the central department responsible, under the Lord Advocate, for the
institution of criminal proceedings. The Lord Advocate is also responsible for the
work of the public prosecutors—the Procurators Fiscal who are appointed by
him in each sheriff court district.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Executive and administrative powers in connection with matters over which the
Northern Ireland Parliament has jurisdiction are vested in the Crown, and exercised
by the Governor through a number of departments. Each of the seven ministries-
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
63
(Finance, Home Affairs, Labour and National Insurance, Education, Agriculture,
Commerce, and Health and Local Government) is under the control of a minister
appointed by the Governor. In addition, there are a National Assistance Board and
an Exchequer and Audit Department which, together with the Ministries of Home
Affairs, Education, and Agriculture have functions indicated by their titles. The
other departments have duties of a varied nature, which are summarised below.
The Ministry of Finance
In addition to acting as Treasury to the Government of Northern Ireland, the
Ministry of Finance is responsible for administrative work in connection with the
erection and maintenance of public works and buildings and for the preservation
of ancient monuments; for Government valuation and survey; for land registry,
the registry of deeds, and certain duties in connection with land purchase; for the
work of the Registrar-General and of the Public Record Office; for the control of
Government publications; for the control and administration of charitable dona¬
tions and bequests; for the control of borrowings; for the collection of death duty,
entertainments duty (cinemas) and other transferred excise duties; and for the
administration of the Ulster savings movement and the Ulster Land Fund.
Attached to the department is the Office of the Parliamentary Draftsmen
(similar to the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel), in which Government Bills
are prepared for introduction into Parliament.
The Ministry of Commerce
The Ministry of Commerce undertakes commercial intelligence work, and is
concerned with industrial production and the development of, and financial help
for, new and existing industries. The department also has responsibilities in
relation to electricity and gas undertakings; roads and bridges and inland public
transport; the Northern Ireland Road Fund; railways; harbours and inland
waterways; fisheries; the tourist trade; the regulation and inspection of mines and
quarries; mineral development; scientific development; weights and measures; the
registration of companies and trade unions; and the administration of the Assurance
Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance Acts (Northern Ireland), 1924-48.
The Ministry of Health and Local Government
The ministry is responsible for the general supervision of the Health Services
in Northern Ireland, which are broadly similar to the National Health Service in
Great Britain. It also exercises functions under the Housing Acts (Northern
Ireland), supervising the house-building programmes of, and distributing grants
to, local housing authorities and the Northern Ireland Housing Trust. The
department also supervises various other functions of local authorities, including
planning, public health, water, sewerage and welfare services (many of which
attract specific grants-in-aid) and it controls the issue of central financial aid to
local authorities.
The Ministry of Labour and National Insurance
The ministry is responsible for the administration of the Factories Acts and
other legislation connected with industrial health and welfare; for the promotion
in industry of joint machinery for negotiation and for assistance in the prevention
and settlement of industrial disputes; for the administration of the Wages Councils
Act; for the administration of local employment offices and training centres
and the machinery for dealing with employment questions of all kinds under the
Employment and Training Act and Disabled Persons (Employment) Act; for the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
64
administration of the National Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (In¬
dustrial Injuries) Acts, and of the Family Allowances Acts; and for carrying out
certain statutory functions in connection with the National Assistance scheme in
conjunction with the National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of a
political or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose remunera¬
tion is found wholly and directly out of money voted by Parliament. The number
of civil servants under this definition amounts to nearly a million, for it includes
some 366,4001 Government industrial employees in such establishments as Royal
Ordnance factories and Admiralty dockyards. The term ‘Civil Service’ is, however,
generally used only to cover ‘non-industrial’ members of the staffs of the various
Government departments in the United Kingdom or working overseas either in
the Foreign Service or for other Government departments such as the Common¬
wealth Relations Office. At 1st April, 1959, the total number of non-industrial civil
servants employed in all departments, at home and overseas, was 632,9251; nearly
one-third of this total are women.
Although the civil servant is legally a servant of the Crown, in practice he serves
the minister in charge of the department in which he works, by advising on the
formulation of policy and by carrying out policy decisions once they have been
taken. From time to time the minister may change, but the civil servant remains
to serve his successor. In Britain, changes of government do not involve changes in
departmental personnel; this continuity makes for administrative stability.
Development of the Modern Civil Service
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years.
Before then, departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying standards
were unknown, there was no central supervision, and political jobbery was rife.
Measures of reform instigated during the nineteenth century included the sub¬
stitution of open competition for the practice of obtaining civil service appoint¬
ments by favour or purchase, and the establishment of an independent body,
the Civil Service Commission, to organise recruitment to the service. The great
expansion in State planning which has taken place during the last fifty years, and
the consequent expansion in the numbers of civil servants and the scope of their
duties, have led to further reorganisation. During the last few decades, recruitment
competitions have been adapted to a developing educational system; co-ordination
between the various departments has been improved; and the search for increased
efficiency in the conduct of public business has been the task of many Government-
appointed commissions and committees of inquiry. As a result, civil servants,
though they remain employees of their departments, are today members of an
integrated service with common conditions of employment and common traditions
and standards of conduct which belong not to individual departments but to the
Civil Service as a whole.
Departmental Organisation
The responsibility for the policy and activities of each department lies with the
minister, who is answerable to Parliament for what the civil servants in the
department say and do.
1 Part-time staffs are included in these, and subsequent, figures two part-time officers
being reckoned as equivalent to one whole-time officer.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
65
The internal organisation of departments is a matter for each department to
decide, and it varies according to the volume and nature of the work involved.
There are, however, features common to most departments: for example, the
minister of a major department is likely to have at the head of his officials a
Permanent Secretary (known as the Permanent Under-Secretary of State in those
departments where the minister is a Secretary of State) who is also Accounting
Officer and must appear periodically before the Public Accounts Committee; one
or more Deputy Secretaries; and a varying number of Under-Secretaries and
Assistant Secretaries. In addition, major departments usually have a Principal
Finance Officer and a Principal Establishments and Organisation Officer. A number
of Establishment Divisions have their own Organisation and Methods (or ‘O & M’)
branch, the members of which act in an advisory capacity as ‘efficiency experts’.
Many departments also have their own legal advisers or solicitors, and their own
Information Division. The use (wholly or in part) of the standard classes and grades
of civil servants, which are described below, is common to most departments.
Control of the Service
The measure of uniformity in the Civil Service has largely resulted from the
fact that the Treasury exercises general control. One of the two Joint Permanent
Secretaries to the Treasury is the official head of the Home Civil Service and the
principal adviser of the Prime Minister on matters affecting the Civil Service as
a whole, and in particular on appointments to senior posts in the service. The
Treasury is also responsible for the salaries and conditions of employment of
civil servants; it controls total numbers of staff and the creation of higher posts,
maintains a central Organisation and Methods Division which serves all depart¬
ments which do not maintain an Organisation and Methods branch of their own,
and deals with general questions relating to training after entry into the Civil
Service. It is also concerned with the number of departments and the distribution
of functions.
Classes and Grades
The engagement and position of all civil servants are covered by regulation,
agreement and traditional practice—every civil servant being assured of a definite
status depending upon the post which he is called upon to fill. There are four main
classes of civil servants, each class containing a series of grades. The classes are:
1. The Administrative Class, which is responsible for advising ministers on
policy, for dealing with any difficulties which may arise in carrying out
existing policy, and for forecasting the probable effects of new measures
and regulations. This relatively small class, which in April 1959 numbered
2,491, is recruited largely from university graduates.
2. The Executive Class (numbering some 68,000 in April 1959), which is
responsible for the day-to-day conduct of Government business, including
the higher work of supply and accounts, within the framework of estab¬
lished policy. Members of this class may, after entry, train for specialist
work such as that of auditor, actuary or statistician.
3. The Clerical Class (the largest of the main classes, comprising about 182,500
officers including clerical assistants), which undertakes all the usual clerical
work involved in running departmental business, e.g., the preparation of
accounts and the keeping of records, the handling of particular claims in
accordance with known rules, and the summarising and annotation of docu¬
ments for the assistance of senior officers.
66
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
4. The Typing Class (about 26,500 members), which consists of shorthand
typists, copy typists and learner typists.
Among other classes are: the Professional, Scientific and Technical Classes, which
consist of some 70,800 civil servants with the necessary qualifications (e.g., doctors,
lawyers, engineers and research workers) for carrying out the wide range of
specialised duties which are now discharged by the Government; the Inspectorate,
which numbers about 2,600; the Ancillary Technical Class, which includes machine
and duplicator operators, prison officers, forest workers and others, and numbers
some 42,100; the Messengerial Class which, in addition to messengers, includes
paper keepers, office cleaners and similar workers (in all some 35,000); and the
Minor and Manipulative Class (with some 202,000 members) which consists entirely
of post office workers, e.g., postmen, postal and telegraph officers, telephonists and
telegraphists, and their immediate supervisors.
The Foreign Service
Her Majesty’s Foreign Service is a separate self-contained service of the Crown,
formed in 1943 as a result of the amalgamation of the Foreign Office and the
Diplomatic Service with the Consular and Commercial-Diplomatic Services. It
provides an interchangeable staff for service both at home and at United Kingdom
diplomatic missions and consular posts in foreign countries1 and, in 1959, it
numbered some 2,520 established members.
The classes of the Foreign Service have their own nomenclature: Branch A
corresponds roughly to the administrative class of the Home Civil Service; Branch
B to the executive and clerical classes; and Branch C to the typing class. Branch D
carries out security and guard duties at Foreign Service posts abroad, and Branch
T technical duties in the Foreign Office and at Foreign Service posts abroad.
There are no equivalents of Branches D and T in the Home Civil Service. Members
of Branches A, B and C may be employed on any type of Foreign Service work
diplomatic, consular, commercial and ‘information’. In addition, various specialists
and advisers who are seconded from the fighting Services and from home Govern¬
ment departments (e.g., those concerned with financial, commercial or labour
matters) are often attached to overseas posts. At many posts abroad, some of the
staff are locally engaged on a ‘temporary’ basis, i.e. they do not normally qualify
for pensions.
Recruitment of Staff
The recruitment of all permanent civil servants is in the hands of the Civil
Service Commission which, in the selection of entrants, is independent of both
ministerial and parliamentary control; its members are appointed by the Crown
on the advice of the Government. The normal method of entry is by open com¬
petition, conducted in accordance with regulations approved by the Treasury and
consisting of written examinations or interviews, or both. The main points of entry
into the four main classes of the Home Civil Service are planned to correspond to
definite levels in the British educational system, and it is the commission’s duty
to study the requirements of the Civil Service in the light of the education provided
by the schools and universities.
In addition to holding examinations and conducting interviews, the commission
is responsible for issuing a certificate of qualification in respect of each successful
candidate, for placing new entrants in departments for which their qualifications
1 United Kingdom diplomatic posts in other independent Commonwealth countries are
normally staffed from the Commonwealth Relations Office and (in respect of the I rade
Commissioners’ Offices associated with them) from the Board of Trade.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 67
are appropriate, and for watching the careers of those it has selected in order to
ensure that current methods of recruitment are successful and up to date.
Temporary civil servants, who do not qualify for pensions, but are eligible for
gratuities, are normally recruited by the department concerned, either directly or
with the help of the Ministry of Labour and National Service. No qualifying
examinations are required for entrance on a temporary basis to general service.
Training after Entry
Each of the larger Government departments has a training officer and a number
of instructors, who organise both general and technical courses where necessary.
Types of courses vary from department to department, but nearly all have
systematic instruction of recruits in all classes. There are also ‘refresher’ courses
for more experienced staff covering technical subjects or broader subjects such as
management and supervision.
Methods of training include discussion groups, case studies, instructional
films and educational visits to enable civil servants to study the working of
appropriate outside bodies. In addition, officers in the early years of their service
may be transferred from branch to branch and, more rarely, from department to
department, in order that they may gain as wide an experience as possible of civil
service activities. Special leave schemes enable a few senior officers, each year, to
travel abroad or to undertake research at United Kingdom universities.
Training is co-ordinated by the Training and Education Division of the Treasury,
which runs central courses for members of the administrative, professional and
scientific classes at different stages of their careers. In addition, the division trains
departmental instructors and other special groups, such as superintendents of
typists, and secretaries.
Promotion
A period of probation (lasting from one to two years according to grade, with
extensions in certain instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent
Civil Service. Promotions from grade to grade are made by departments; those
from class to class partly through centrally conducted competitions (open only to
serving members of specified civil service classes), and partly by departments
themselves. All promotions to the administrative class from other classes require
Treasury approval. Promotions to most of the highest positions in the Civil Service,
i.e. permanent secretary, deputy secretary, principal establishments officer and
principal finance officer, must be approved by the Prime Minister; he is advised
in these matters by the Joint Permanent Secretary to the Treasury who is the
official head of the Home Civil Service.
Conditions of Service
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service as
a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council,1 which is composed jointly of
official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate sections of the
service is provided through the various staff associations which civil servants are
encouraged to join (e.g., the Civil Service Clerical Association, the Union of Post
Office Workers, the Society of Civil Servants, the Institution of Professional Civil
Servants, and the Association of First Division Civil Servants), and through depart¬
mental Whitley Councils1 (of which there are about 65).
1 Whitley Councils are representative bodies for negotiation and joint consultation
between managements and staffs; the councils are named after Mr. J. H. Whitley, former
Speaker of the House of Commons and chairman of a committee which investigated
industrial unrest from 1916 to 1919.
68
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is intended to compare
fairly with that paid for similar work outside the service, and he normally
receives annual increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to which
he belongs. In addition, although a civil servant holds office at the pleasure of the
Crown and may therefore be dismissed at any time, in practice he enjoys a con¬
siderable measure of security of tenure. Thus every permanent civil servant may
reasonably expect a full career in the public service, and a pension on retirement—
though this, again, is not a legal right.
Civil servants are generally ‘conditioned’ to a given number of hours of attend¬
ance a week. Overtime is paid to members of most of the lower salary groups if
they work longer than their ‘conditioned’ hours. The standard working week for
office staffs is 42 hours in London and 44 hours in the provinces. Annual leave
varies according to the grade up to a maximum of six weeks, i.e. 30 working days,
a year. Sick leave on full pay, less any National Insurance benefit received,
may be granted to established civil servants for up to six months in any twelve
months, and on reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s sick leave in any
four years.
Political and Private Activities
Officially, the position and functions of a civil servant remain the same which¬
ever political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government of the
day irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which a civil servant,
as a private individual, is free to participate in political activities varies according
to grade. For this purpose civil servants are divided into three groups: (1) the
unrestricted, which includes all industrial staff, post office counter clerks, postmen,
cleaners, messengers, and similar workers, who are free to engage in all kinds of
national and local political activities, although, if intending to stand for Parliament,
they should resign before nomination day, since a serving civil servant cannot sit
in the House of Commons; (2) the intermediate, which includes typists, clerical
assistants, clerical officers, and analogous grades, who are free to engage in all
political activities, except parliamentary candidature, subject to certain conditions
and with the permission of their departments; and (3) the restricted, which
includes all civil servants not in the other two groups. This last group is barred
from taking part in national political activities, but may seek permission to engage
in local political activities, subject to certain conditions.
Civil servants of every grade may, of course, exercise the right of all citizens to
register their private political opinions on appropriate occasions, e.g., at a general
election or at local authority elections.
The Government is not concerned with the private political views of its servants,
except where there are duties in which secrecy is so vitally important to State
security that it does not feel itself justified in employing any one to carry them out
whose reliability is in doubt; therefore no one who is known to be a member of, or
actively associated with, the Communist Party or with Fascist organisations is
employed in connection with such work. Otherwise, every civil servant may
engage in such private activities as he wishes, provided that these do not in any
way conflict with his official duties, nor with the provisions of the Official Secrets
Acts of 1911 and 1920 and the Prevention of Corruption Act of 1906. A civil
servant must not, however, use his official position to further his private interests,
and he is therefore subject to restrictions in matters of commerce and business from
which the ordinary citizen is free, e.g., he may not hold private interests in public
contracts; and he may not use official information in writing, broadcasting or
lecturing without the express approval of his department. Above all, a civil servant
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 69
is expected to conform to the high standards of integrity which characterise the
service to which he belongs.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Local government has been defined as government by popularly elected bodies
charged with administrative and executive duties in matters concerning the
inhabitants of a particular district or place and vested with powers to make by-laws1
for their guidance.
Government on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of the
United Kingdom for many centuries. In its present shape, however, it dates back
only to the late nineteenth century, when the conception of a comprehensive system
of locally elected councils to manage various services provided for the benefit of the
community was first incorporated in statute law.
Since local authorities were established their responsibilities have progressively
increased. They were charged with the management of most of the social services
that were created or expanded during the first forty years of the present century;
after the second world war, although certain of their functions (e.g., those connected
with hospitals and gas and electricity supplies) were transferred to other authorities,
they were given additional duties and powers in connection with, among other
things, the general health and welfare services, the care of deprived children, town
and country planning, civil defence, and clean air.
The Local Government Act, 1958, and the Local Government and Miscellaneous
Financial Provisions (Scotland) Act, 1958—have made changes in the local govern¬
ment financial system of Great Britain to give greater independence to local
authorities in the spending of money in their own areas; the English Act has also
provided for some devolution of responsibility for county services to the councils
of some of the larger county districts, and established machinery for the review
and alteration of local government areas and authorities in England (outside
Greater London) and Wales.
Relationship between Central and Local Government
As the supreme authority in the United Kingdom, Parliament controls local
authorities through Acts of Parliament, which require or permit elected local
councils to implement policies prescribed and defined in those Acts. The scope of
local government is limited by the same means; no council may go beyond the
bounds fixed for its activities by an Act of Parliament.
Legislation is supported by departmental supervision: Parliament makes certain
ministers responsible for securing the efficient functioning of local government
services. Departmental supervision is exercised by means of inspections, inquiries,
examinations of statistics, authorisation of loans, the issue of advisory circulars and
statutory instruments, the approval of by-laws, and the administration of Exchequer
grants. The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is the main link
between local authorities and the central Government in England and Wales; in
Scotland the Scottish Home Department is generally responsible for local govern¬
ment; and in Northern Ireland the Ministry of Health and Local Government.
Principal Types of Local Authority
For purposes of local government, England and Wales and Northern Ireland are
divided into county boroughs and administrative counties. Administrative counties
1 Laws of local application which must be approved by the appropriate minister.
1
70 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(outside London) are further divided into three types of county district: non-county
boroughs; urban districts; and rural districts, which are themselves sub-dmded
into parishes (except in Northern Ireland). Each of these divisions is administered
by a different kind of local authority, as follows:
England and Wales1 2
county councils (61) rural district councils (474)
county borough councils (83) parish councils (some 7>500) or
non-county borough councils (318) parish meetings (some 3>300)-
urban district councils (564)
Northern Ireland
county councils (6) urban district councils (25)
county borough councils (2) town commissioners (1)
borough councils (9) rural district councils (31)*
Scotland
The local authorities in Scotland are:
county councils (33, of which two pairs are combined for certain purposes)
town councils (198, consisting of: the authorities for counties of cities, 4; other
large burghs, 20; and small burghs, 174)
district councils (199; two counties are not divided into districts).
There are, in addition, the local authorities for London, which are unlike those
in the rest of the United Kingdom. They are:
the London County Council
the Corporation of the City of London
metropolitan borough councils (28).
Constitution of Councils
Local councils comprise a number of elected councillors (and, in some cases,
aldermen elected by the councillors), presided over by a chairman who has varied
ceremonial and civic duties to perform in addition to his work on the council.
In most boroughs of England and Wales and Northern Ireland the chairman is
the Mayor; in the City of London and certain important boroughs, the Lord
Mayor; in the Scottish counties, the Convenor; and in the burghs, the Provost or
Lord Provost.
Local Government Commissions
Local authority areas, even when administered by the same type of local council,
show great variations in density of population and territorial size. This diversity
has tended to increase during recent decades, and, as a result, two Local Govern¬
ment Commissions have been established to review the general county and county
borough pattern in England (outside the Greater London area) and in Wales
respectively, and, in special review areas (Tyneside, west Yorkshire, south-east
Lancashire, Merseyside and the west Midlands) the district pattern and the distribu¬
tion of functions as well. The commissioners are required to make recommendations
1 Excluding the county of London.
2 Including the Isles of Scilly.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
71
for such changes in the pattern as may appear to them desirable after investigating
the circumstances of local government in each area under review, and after
consulting the relevant local authorities and other interested bodies and persons.
The final proposals of the commissioners may be given effect by ministerial
order, with or without modification. Their recommendations (and any ministerial
order) are to be submitted to Parliament.
The system and the working of local government in the Greater London area
are being examined by a Royal Commission set up by Royal Warrant in 1957 to
recommend whether any, and if so what, changes in the local government structure
and the distribution of local government functions in the area, or any part of it,
would secure more effective and convenient local government.
Functions and Services
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such
environmental and social services as it may be required to provide and administer
by an Act of Parliament. It may provide additional services under the permissive
powers of a general Act or under powers granted to it by Adoptive Acts or by
local or Private Bill legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon their type, as follows: in
England (outside the County of London) and Wales and Northern Ireland, county
borough councils are all-purpose authorities, while both county councils and county
district councils have particular functions allotted to them, which they exercise
independently to a considerable extent, although there is a certain degree of
delegation from county councils to county district councils especially in the field
of planning and in the education, health and welfare services. Parish councils or
parish meetings have a few functions which they may exercise of right.
The broad principle underlying the distribution of powers and duties between
the London County Council (LCC) and the metropolitan borough councils is that
all those powers and duties which require uniformity of action throughout the
whole of London are administered by the LCC, while those that can be locally
managed are vested in the borough councils. The City Corporation exercises, in
the City of London, the general powers administered and duties performed by the
metropolitan borough councils, and also a number of functions which, in the rest of
London, devolve on the LCC. The City Corporation is not, however, an all-purpose
authority, since certain services in the City, e.g., education, are administered by the
LCC.
In Scotland, the town councils of the counties of cities are all-purpose authori¬
ties ; elsewhere the county councils exercise very many local government functions.
In large burghs, they administer education, valuation for rating, and, in some cases,
the police service, all other functions being exercised by the town councils. In
small burghs, county councils undertake a number of important functions, but
housing and some other services are administered by the town councils. The
functions of the district councils—the smallest authorities—are similar to those of
parish councils or parish meetings in England and Wales.
The services provided by the councils are generally classified under three heads—
environmental, protective and personal.
Environmental Services are designed to secure and improve the citizens’
surroundings. The majority are public health and sanitary services administered
in England and Wales either by the county, county district, or parish councils
(in London by the metropolitan borough councils), in Northern Ireland by the
county, county borough, borough and district councils, and in Scotland by the
county and town councils, e.g., the inspection and abatement of nuisances,
F
72
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
drainage, sewerage, street cleansing, refuse collection and disposal, the super¬
vision of water supplies, measures for ensuring food hygiene and for preventing
air pollution, for litter control, and rodent control, and the provision of baths
and washhouses. There are also the services for bridge and highway construc¬
tion and maintenance, for street lighting, public safety on the highways, and the
provision of amenities such as parks and recreation grounds, which are
generally administered by the same authorities and also, in part, by district
councils in Scotland. Town and country planning is carried out in England
and Wales by the county councils, which may delegate certain of their powers
to county district councils, and in Scotland by county councils and the town
councils of large burghs. County borough councils, as all-purpose authorities,
normally provide and administer all their own environmental services.
Protective Services include the fire service, the civil defence service and the
police. The fire service is administered throughout England and Wales by the
county borough councils and the county councils, or by joint authorities (or
joint committees) set up by those councils if they amalgamate. In Scotland,
the fire service is administered by eleven fire authorities: the town council of
Glasgow and ten joint committees of the councils of counties and large burghs.
Responsibility for organising the local divisions of the Civil Defence Corps is
vested, in England and Wales, in the county and county borough councils,
together with a few county district councils; in London, in the metropolitan
borough councils and the City Corporation; and in Scotland in the cities and
county councils. The police service is administered by standing joint com¬
mittees in the counties of England and Wales, by warch committees in the
county boroughs, or by committees consisting of representatives of the
constituent authorities in the case of combined police districts. In London,
the City Corporation has jurisdiction over the police force in its area, while
the Home Secretary, through the Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis,
has responsibility for the metropolitan police force. The police authorities in
Scotland are the county councils, the town councils of certain large burghs,
or joint boards for combined forces.
Personal Services are intended to promote the well-being of individuals.
The type of authority concerned depends on the nature of the services,
which range from health services, education, and housing to the pro¬
vision of entertainments. The services concerned primarily with health and
welfare include the provision of ante-natal, post-natal and child welfare clinics,
and some residential and day nurseries; the supervision of the midwifery ser¬
vice ; the provision of health visitors and home nursing services; measures for
the prevention of illness and the after-care of physically or mentally sick
persons; the provision of domestic help where necessary; the ambulance service;
the provision of facilities for vaccination and immunisation against certain
infectious deseases; and the services for the permanently disabled or handi¬
capped, for the aged and infirm and for children deprived of a normal home life.
Education and culture are promoted by the establishment and maintenance of
various types of schools; by the provision of adult education centres, and
art and technical colleges; by the award of grants and scholarships to students
of all kinds; and by the provision of libraries, art galleries and museums.
New houses are provided by local authorities on land acquired by them;
accommodation is also provided by the acquisition or conversion of suitable
houses. Most houses owned by local authorities are for letting, but they may,
in certain cases, be offered for sale. Councils may also make loans to persons
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
73
wishing to buy privately owned houses. Local authorities are responsible
for ensuring that houses unfit for human habitation are demolished or closed.
Some local authorities also engage in trading services, e.g., passenger transport,
water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services; but these are less numerous
than in the past.
Local Authority Elections
The normal term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local government
is three years; aldermen hold office for six years. In some local authority areas the
whole council retires every third year and another is elected immediately; in other
areas elections are held annually, when one-third of the councillors retire. Procedure
at local government elections is governed by rules laid down in the Representation
of the People Act, 1949.
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to vote at a
local government election provided that he or she is 21 years of age or over and a
British subject, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, and is registered as a local govern¬
ment elector for the area for which the election is held. In Great Britain, a person
qualifies for registration as a local government elector if, on the qualifying date for
the register (which is compiled annually), he or she is resident in the area or occupies
as owner or tenant any rateable land or premises in the area of a yearly value of not
less than £10. In Northern Ireland, in order to qualify for registration as a local
government elector, a person must have been born in Northern Ireland, or
alternatively, have resided continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years
immediately prior to the qualifying date and must have either a resident occupier’s
qualification, or a general occupier’s qualification.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the council concerned, under
the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the purpose. The procedure
for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that for parliamentary
elections, although facilities for postal voting are more restricted.
Every candidate for election as a councillor stands either as a representative of one
of the national political parties, or as a member of an association representing some
local interest, or as an independent. Each must be nominated by two electors,
as proposer and seconder; and in England and Wales (except in elections for
metropolitan borough councils, rural district councils and parish councils) eight
other electors for the area must assent to the nomination. In Scotland, county and
district council candidates require proposers but no assenters, town council
candidates proposers and five assenters. Candidates must be of British nationality
over 21 years of age and must either (1) be registered as local government electors
in the register of electors for the area for which they seek election, or (2) have
resided within that area during the whole of the twelve months preceding the
election (or within 3 miles in the case of parish councils), or (3) in England and
Wales, own freehold or leasehold land in the area. Candidates are also subject to a
number of statutory disqualifications designed to ensure that unsuitable persons
do not offer themselves for election.
Procedure at local government elections in Northern Ireland is governed by
electoral regulations made by the Ministry of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland.
These regulations are similar to those which apply in Great Britain, though differ¬
ing in certain particulars; for example, the town clerk or the clerk to the council is
the returning officer for all elections to the authority; there is no postal voting and
the only persons who may vote by proxy are Service voters.
Just as Great Britain as a whole is divided into constituencies for the purpose of
parliamentary elections, so, for local council elections, most local authority areas
74
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are divided into electoral districts. Administrative counties are split up, in accor¬
dance with orders made by the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the
Secretary of State for Scotland, into ‘electoral divisions’. Boroughs, urban districts
and rural districts in England and Wales, and the larger burghs in Scotland, are
divided into ‘wards’, unless they are small enough to be left as single units. In
rural districts, the wards are based on parishes which, if large enough, may
themselves be split into parish wards.
Outside London, county divisions each return one member. The LCC electoral
divisions (which cover the same areas as the London parliamentary constituencies)
return three members each; in all other types of local authority area, each ward
returns three, or a multiple of three, members.
Internal Organisation of Local Authorities
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own internal
arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they will discharge
their responsibilities. Questions of policy and principle are usually decided by the
whole council, which appoints committees to carry out the detailed administration
of its various services. The more important of the committees of the larger authori¬
ties divide their work among sub-committees, which stand to the parent committee
in a relation similar to that of the main committees to the whole council. The
execution of the policy decided upon by the council and the committees rests with
salaried officers and employees, whose number may vary from about half a dozen
in a small rural district to several thousand in the large counties and in the larger
county boroughs and burghs.
Apart from one or two minor provisions regarding the representation of specialists
on committees and the length of time certain members may hold office, com¬
mittees of councils are free from legal restrictions; even those known as statutory
committees are constituted according to individual requirements and not accord¬
ing to any set pattern laid down. For purposes of classification, however,
they may be divided into two kinds: ordinary committees and joint committees.
Ordinary committees may be further divided into statutory committees, the
appointment of which is compulsory under an Act of Parliament; standing com¬
mittees, which are appointed in accordance with the standing orders of the council
on a permanent basis according to the extent of the council’s business; and special
committees, which a council may set up for a limited period to deal with a particular
problem that once solved is unlikely to recur.
Joint committees or joint boards consist of representatives of more than one
authority. They are usually established for services that can be more effectively
administered over a wider area than that controlled by a single council, e.g., town
and country planning, water supplies and the police service.
Committees of a local authority may be advisory or executive; their powers and
duties are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing orders or, in the
case of a county or large burgh in Scotland, in the council s administrative scheme.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees except its powers in con¬
nection with raising loans, levying rates or issuing precepts, which are legally
reserved to the council as a whole.
Officers and Employees
Over one million people (including teachers, transport staff and building
workers) are employed in local government service in Great Britain. Certain posts,
e.g., the clerk, the treasurer, and the medical officer of health, are compulsory in
almost all councils, but, apart from these, councils are free to fill such other posts
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
75
as they deem necessary for carrying out their work. Choice of personnel is also left
to a great extent to the individual council; in theory, the appointment of certain
chief officers is subject to some central control but, in practice, the nominee of the
council is nearly always accepted.
Officers are normally of three kinds: heads of departments or chief officers,
whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial kind; subordinate
officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical capacity; and manual
workers who are employed to do the actual physical work for which the council is
responsible. As a rule, senior staff appointments are made at the instance of the
committee or committees particularly concerned; while most junior appointments
are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for engaging the manual
labour required. Appointments and engagements are always made in conformity
with a set establishment, and committees are informed of any appointments which
they have not made themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within the
jurisdiction of the employing council (except where the proposed salary of an
officer requires the approval of a Government department, as in the case of the
clerk of a county council in England and Wales). They are based on recommenda¬
tions made by the Whitley Councils,1 of which there are several, including the
National Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Administrative, Professional, Techni¬
cal and Clerical Services, the National Joint Industrial Council for Local Authori¬
ties’ Non-Trading Services (Manual Workers), the National Joint Council for
County Council Roadmen, and, in Scotland, the Joint Negotiating Committee for
Chief Officials of Local Authorities (Scotland) and the Joint Industrial Councils
for Local Authority Services. In England and Wales, conditions of service and
salary scales for senior local government officers are determined by special
negotiating machinery.
All local government officers are expected to maintain a high standard of conduct:
as public servants they ‘must not only be honest in fact, but must be beyond the
reach of the suspicion of dishonesty’.
Local Government Finance
Total local authority expenditure on current and capital account amounts annually
to over £2,000 million. Income derives from Exchequer grants (paid in Northern
Ireland by the Government of Northern Ireland), from local rates, from loans, from
trading receipts, rents, fees and other miscellaneous sources.
Government grants, which finance more than half the net expenditure by local
authorities, are paid to the county and county borough councils in England and
Wales by the Minister of Housing and Local Government and to the county and
town councils in Scotland by the Secretary of State for Scotland. The largest
single grant is now the general grant (established by the Local Government Acts
of 1958) which replaces the specific grants previously paid in respect of education,
health and welfare services, town planning, fire services, child care, road safety,
police traffic patrol, physical training and recreation, and a few other services. The
total sum of the general grant is fixed in advance for a period of two or more years
and allocated among the authorities according to a formula based mainly on
objective factors, such as size and distribution of population, and numbers of
school children. In fixing the total amount, the Government takes into consideration
the current rate of expenditure on the services concerned, any probable fluctuation
in the demand for those services, the need for developing services, and the extent
1 See footnote p. 67.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
76
to which, having regard to the general economic condition of the country, it is
reasonable to develop them. If, during any grant period, an unforeseen rise in the
general level of prices, costs or remuneration occurs and its effect on the cost of
providing the services covered is of such magnitude that it is felt that it ought not
to fall entirely on local authorities, the ministers are empowered to adjust the
amount of the grant. They also have power to reduce the allocation of any authority
(subject to parliamentary confirmation) if they are satisfied that that authority has
failed to achieve or maintain reasonable standards in the provision of the relevant
services in comparison with the standards achieved in other areas.
Other Government grants are: percentage grants, of which the two principal
remaining examples are those for the police service and highways; unit grants,
e.g., housing subsidies; rate deficiency grants (Exchequer equalisation grants in
Scotland), which are contributions to the general revenues of the poorer local
authorities to enable them to bring their services up to a higher level of efficiency;
and assigned revenues, which are the proceeds of certain national taxes handed
over to local authorities, e.g., game and gun licences and licences for hawkers,
pawnbrokers, money-lenders and refreshment houses and, except in Scotland, dog
licences.
Rates, which are a form of local taxation paid by the occupiers of land and
buildings in a local authority area as contributions to the cost of local services,
provide about one-third of the total income of local authorities. They are levied by
a poundage on the rateable value of property, which in England and Wales is
equivalent to the rent which the property might reasonably be expected to com¬
mand if let from year to year, with the tenant bearing the rates and the cost of
insurance and repairs. There are certain statutory reliefs from rate liability, notably
for agricultural land and buildings, which are entirely exempt; for industrial
and freight transport premises, which are rated at 5° Per cent of the net annual
value; and for such buildings as shops and offices, the rateable values of which are
generally 80 per cent of their net annual value.
Valuation for rating is undertaken by the valuation officers of the Board of Inland
Revenue; appeals may be made to local valuation courts, each consisting of three
members of an independent local valuation panel, and thereafter to the Lands
Tribunal. In Scotland, valuation has hitherto been based primarily on the annual
rent actually payable; valuation on a basis similar to that in England and Wales will
come into force in 1961. Valuation is carried out by assessors appointed by the
councils of counties and counties of cities. Appeals lie to the valuation appeal
committee of each valuation area and thereafter to the Lands Valuation Appeal
Court of the Court of Session. A Scottish Valuation Advisory Council has been
established by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The responsibility for levying and collecting the rates in England and Wales lies
with the councils of county boroughs and county districts; in London, with the
City Corporation and the metropolitan borough councils. County councils finance
themselves by issuing a precept on the county districts (in London the metropolitan
borough councils and the City Corporation) for the sums of money required ,
while parishes are financed by rates levied by the appropriate rural district council
on property within the parish as an addition to the general rates. Rates in Scotland
are levied by the town councils in burghs and by county councils elsewhere, to
cover their expenditure, district councils issue a requisition each year to the county
council; a town council has to meet an annual requisition from the county council
in respect of the burgh’s share of the expenditure on functions exercised by the
county council throughout the county, including the burgh. In Northern Ireland,
county councils are responsible for making, levying and collecting the rates, except
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
77
in such parts of the county as fall within the jurisdiction of the county borough,
borough, or urban district councils.
Loans may be raised by all types of local authority for financing capital expendi¬
ture, subject to the consent of the Minister of Housing and Local Government
or the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are guided by the recommendations of
the Government department responsible for the service for which the capital is
required. Borrowing powers for specific purposes are sometimes included among
the provisions of local Acts; the London County Council seeks parliamentary
sanction every year to raise the money it needs for capital expenditure.
Loans may be raised by issuing stock upon the Stock Exchange, by internal
borrowing, by private mortgage, or from the Public Works Loan Board, which is
financed by the Exchequer.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned by a
finance committee, whose function is to keep the financial policy of the council
under constant review. In England and Wales, an external audit is carried out
(except for certain general accounts in about two-thirds of the borough councils
outside London) by district auditors appointed by the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government. Borough councils must use the services of the district auditor
for accounts which relate to education, national assistance, children, local health
services, coast protection, motor tax, rate collection, fire, civil defence and town and
country planning, but they may employ a professional firm of auditors to do other
work. In Scotland, all accounts are audited by a professional auditor appointed
by the Secretary of State for Scotland and paid by the council concerned.
THE LAW
The maintenance of public order in the United Kingdom is effected, generally
speaking, by two agencies—the judiciary and the police. Both are concerned in
different ways with the obedience of the citizen to the law.
Law is said to be based on the concepts of order and compulsion. In the legal
sense, it has been defined as any rule which will be enforced by the courts; as it
applies to a country, it is usually understood as the set of rules by which the
citizens of that country will expect to regulate their conduct in relation to their
fellow citizens and to the State.
There is no written code of law in the United Kingdom. The question whether
a particular rule is recognised as law is determined, where possible, by consideration
of the authorities: statutes, common law, and the opinions of legal writers of
established reputation (although these are not law until accepted as such by the
courts). If none of these authorities exists, the judge uses a process of analogy:
that is to say, he bases his decision in a case on its similarity to a previous case in
which judgment has already been given.
Common law originated in the customs of the realm, and has been built up by the
decisions of the courts. A supplementary system of law, known as ‘equity’, came
into being during the Middle Ages to temper justice with mercy where conscience
was opposed to the rigours of the law, and to provide and enforce more effective
protection for existing legal rights; later, it hardened into a separate body of legal
rules. In 1873, the courts of equity were fused with the courts of common law, so
that all courts now apply both systems, but where they conflict, equity prevails.
Statute law includes Acts of Parliament and delegated or subordinate legislation
made under powers conferred by Parliament.
The Treaty of Union between England and Scotland in 1707 included the
provision that Scotland should retain its own system of law, and differences in law
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
78
tin cl Icgsl procedure between. Scotland unci the rest o£ the United Kingdom remmn ^
The Scottish common law, unlike its English counterpart, has, in general, preferred
broad principles to strict adherence to judicial precedent, and has often adopted and
adapted ideas from other legal codes; and there are separate Scottish statutes in
many fields of legislation. Nevertheless, the very close links that have been forged
between England and Scotland since 1707, and the steady increase in the number of
Acts of Parliament that apply uniformly throughout the United Kingdom, have
narrowed the gap between the legal systems of the two countries until the points of
similarity have become as numerous as the differences, and there is now a consider¬
able volume of law common to both countries.
The leading branches of the law in the United Kingdom, as in most other
countries, are civil law and criminal law. The purpose of civil law is to uphold
private rights, and to redress private wrongs which do not involve moral guilt.
Criminal law deals with wrongs considered injurious to the community, and
consequently punishable by the State.
JUDICIAL PROCEDURE
English law provides that if anyone is arrested or detained otherwise than upon
lawful grounds1 he may sue out a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him, this person then being required to appear before the court on the
day named to show cause for detention. If no cause can be shown, the prisoner
must be released forthwith, and thereafter he has the right to sue the person who
detained him for assault or false imprisonment. In England and Wales, the writ
of habeas corpus may be granted by the Queen’s Bench Divisional Court or by any
judge of the High Court; in Scotland, the High Court of Justiciary has a similar
power to release persons unlawfully detained.
Arrest to enforce a court order in civil proceedings can be effected only on a
warrant of the court. In criminal cases, arrest may be effected on a warrant issued
by a judicial authority on information laid before it. In certain cases, it may also
be effected without warrant; but in these circumstances, the arrest is not lawful
if the person making it had no reasonable grounds for his action, and civil or criminal
proceedings may then be taken by the person aggrieved.
Anyone arrested on a criminal charge must be informed at once of the reason
for his arrest (except when he is caught in the act) and brought speedily for trial
before a magistrates’ court, sitting in public. When the arrest is without warrant, a
police officer may release the defendant on bail: that is to say he may discharge
him temporarily subject to his entering into a recognisance, with or without
sureties, for a reasonable sum of money, to appear in court at the time appointed
for the trial. Unless the offence is serious, bail must be granted if the defendant
cannot be brought before the court within a day. Magistrates also have discretion
to grant bail, and this discretion is liberally exercised according to well-established
principles. If bail is refused by the magistrates, the defendant is always entitled
(unless charged with treason or murder) to apply to the High Court for bail, and
he must be informed of this right.
In England and Wales, there is, in general, no restriction on the right to institute
proceedings; most criminal prosecutions are initiated and conducted by the police
representing the public, but a private citizen may institute proceedings if he wishes
1 q^ese are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for civil debt (this is now permitted only
where a person of proved capacity to pay refuses to do so); for contempt of a superior court
or of either House of Parliament; detention of persons found to be insane or mentally
defective; detention of children by their parents or guardians.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
79
to do so. In some cases, the consent of the Attorney-General or the Director of
Public Prosecutions or, less frequently, a Government department is required before
prosecution can be initiated. The Director of Public Prosecutions has power to
take over any proceedings once they have been instituted and is under a statutory
duty to take over certain cases, e.g., where the alleged offence is punishable by
death.
In Scotland, private prosecutions or prosecutions by the police are virtually
excluded. All prosecutions are instituted in the public interest by the Lord Advocate
or his officers or by prosecutors appointed by the burgh or justice of the peace
courts.
Criminal law presumes the innocence of the accused until his guilt has been
conclusively proved by the prosecution. Therefore, it has long been the custom
to deny to the prosecution any advantage, apparent or real, over the defence. The
Judges’ Rules, formulated for England and Wales in 1912, forbid anything in the
nature of cross-examination by the police of any arrested person, and require that
if such a person wishes to make a voluntary statement, he must first be cautioned
that anything he says may be used in evidence; while in Scotland, although there
is no exact replica of the Judges’ Rules, the courts will reject as evidence statements
made by the accused, unless they are satisfied that these statements have been
fairly obtained. Private interrogation before an examining magistrate prior to
public trial forms no part of criminal proceedings.
Every accused person has the right to employ a legal adviser for the conduct of
his defence, and if he cannot afford to pay for legal representation, he may apply
for legal aid at the public expense (see p. 89). This is granted at the discretion of
the court, except in the case of a person charged with murder, who must be granted
legal aid if his means are insufficient. Anyone remanded in custody may be
visited in prison by his legal adviser, so that his case may be properly prepared.
During the preparation of the case, counsel for the defence has the right to compel
the prosecution to disclose all the documents in its possession which have a bearing
on the case, and he may require that these documents be produced at the trial, if
such a procedure would seem advantageous to the defence. During the trial, the
accused has the right to hear and subsequently to cross-examine (normally through
his counsel) all the witnesses for the prosecution; to call witnesses on his own
account, who, if they will not attend the trial of their own free will, may be
‘subpoenaed’ or legally compelled to attend; and to address the court either in
person, or through his counsel. But he cannot himself be questioned, unless he
consents to be sworn as a witness in his own defence. The right to cross-examine
a prisoner, even when he is so sworn, is limited by law, with the object of excluding
inquiry into his character or into past offences not relevant to the particular charge
on which he is being, tried.
The Jury System
Generally speaking, all the more serious crimes, i.e. crimes known as indictable
offences because a formal written accusation or ‘indictment’ is required for their
prosecution, must be tried in a superior court before a jury. In English law,
however, certain specified indictable offences may be dealt with instead at a
magistrates’ court if the defendant consents. Conversely a criminal case which
would ordinarily be dealt with in a magistrates’ court must usually be heard before
a jury if the offence is punishable by more than three months’ imprisonment and
the defendant elects to be so tried.
A jury consists of twelve persons duly summoned in pursuance of a precept
from the court. Most property owners and ratepayers (men and women alike) are
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
8o
liable to be summoned for jury service if they are British subjects and are between
the ages of 21 and 60, unless they are disqualified as, for example, having been
convicted of an infamous crime. Members of certain professions are, however,
exempt from service, and no person can be summoned to serve on any jury more
than once in any one year unless all the jurors on the list have already been sum¬
moned to serve during that same year.
In trials by jury it is, broadly speaking, the duty of the judge to determine
questions of law (including questions as to the admissibility of the evidence), and
to acquit the accused or pass sentence, according to the verdict of the jury; but it
is the duty of the jury alone to decide the issue of guilt or innocence. The judge
sums up the evidence for the benefit of the jury, but he never accompanies it when
its members retire to consider their verdict. The verdict of a jury must be unani¬
mous ; if its members are unable to reach agreement, the case must be retried before
a new jury. Members of the jury are completely independent of both the judiciary
and the executive. Moreover, although both the prosecution and the defence have
the right, before the trial opens, to object to any member of the jury on the ground
of his lack of impartiality, once all the members have been sworn in they are free
from interference of any kind, even if, as sometimes happens, they bring in a verdict
in apparent contradiction to the summing up of the judge. It is an offence to assault,
threaten or attempt to corrupt a juryman either before or during a trial.
Scottish legal procedure differs from the foregoing in a number of respects;
notably, the verdict may be by a bare majority of the jury (which in Scotland con¬
sists of fifteen persons in criminal cases and twelve in civil cases) and, in addition
to ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’, may also be given as ‘not proven’; this last verdict (which
does not exist in English law) involves acquittal in the same way as ‘not guilty’.
In England and Wales, either party may insist on trial by jury in civil courts in
cases involving claims for defamation, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment,
seduction, breach of promise to marry, or fraud; other civil cases are tried by jury
only if the court, in its discretion, so orders on the application of one or both
parties to the dispute. Where there is no jury, the trial is by judge alone. In the trial
of a civil action, the jury is responsible for deciding questions of fact (as in the trial
of criminal cases) and also the amount of damages to be awarded to the injured party.
Jury trial in civil cases is a more commonly used procedure in Scotland than in
England and the procedure in civil courts in Scotland differs in some respects from
that in English courts. . ^ , 1 -1*7 1
At certain inquests at coroners’ courts (see p. 85) in England and Wales, a jury is
required to be present to return a verdict on how, when and where a deceased person
died. The jury in this instance consists of not fewer than seven and not more than
eleven jurors. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner to decide
whether objects of gold or silver found in the ground are ‘treasure trove’.
Law of Evidence
Evidence in the legal sense is all the legal means, exclusive of mere argument,
which tend to prove or disprove any matter of fact, the truth of which is submitted
to judicial investigation. The law relating to it is, in general, the same in criminal
and in civil trials; but, because of the peculiar nature of a criminal trial the
gravity of the issue, the extent to which the public interest is involved and the
penalty to which the prisoner may be subjected—some of the rules, as they relate
to the proof of the case against the prisoner, are applied with greater rigour and
severity in the course of criminal than in the course of civil proceedings. Thus,
hearsay evidence (oral or written statements made by persons not called as wit¬
nesses) is not as a rule admitted; and although the uncorroborated evidence of one
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
8l
witness is, as a matter of English law, sufficient, a conviction solely on the evidence
of an accomplice (or accomplices) is, in practice, never allowed, unless the judge
has warned the jury of the dangers of convicting without corroboration. In Scotland,
apart from a few statutory exceptions, no person may be convicted unless there is
evidence of at least two witnesses, or corroboration of one witness by facts and
circumstances which clearly implicate the accused person in the crime.
Admissions by an accused person before trial are accepted as evidence in a
criminal trial only if they were made voluntarily without fear of prejudice or
hope of advantage. The previous history of the accused may only be used
against him if he has either expressly set up his own virtuous character as
an argument for his innocence, or attacked a witness or the prosecutor, or given
evidence against a co-defendant, in which case, should he choose to give evidence
himself, he may be asked questions about his own previous convictions, provided
that they are relevant and not too remote in time.
THE COURTS
The courts that apply the law in the United Kingdom are broadly speaking
divided into civil and criminal courts, although no hard and fast line can be drawn
since the distinction is a comparatively modern one. Quite a number of civil cases
are, in fact, heard in criminal courts; while occasionally a criminal case may be
heard in what is primarily a civil court.
Civil Courts in England and Wales
The more important of the civil courts in England and Wales are:
County Courts
County courts are so arranged that there is no part of the country more than a
reasonable distance from one of them. They deal with the great bulk of civil
litigation; over a million cases are entered in them every year, although com¬
paratively few ever reach the stage of trial, many being settled out of court. County
courts are presided over by a paid judge, who almost always sits alone, although he
may sit with a jury. There are sixty-nine county court judges now in office.
Most of the county courts (of which there are nearly 400) do not sit continuously,
so that one judge can preside over several courts. However, if pressure of business is
so great as to cause delays in the administration of justice in any district, the Lord
Chancellor may, on representations made to him by the judge of the district,
appoint a person (who must previously have held office as a judge or have been a
barrister of at least seven years’ standing) to act for the judge at any sitting of the
court.
The general jurisdiction of the county court covers all common law actions,
provided that the amount claimed does not exceed £400, although some claims
where the personal reputation of the plaintiff is involved, e.g., for libel, can only
be tried there in exceptional circumstances. Actions involving awards in excess
of this sum may be transferred to the High Court by order of the presiding judge
on application by the plaintiff. Cases which fall under the specific jurisdiction of
the county courts, e.g., those connected with rent restrictions, hire purchase
agreements and other matters governed by statute or ministerial order, are tried
irrespective of the amount involved.
In addition to the ordinary county courts, there are still a few local courts with
somewhat similar jurisdiction. Most of these are survivals from the medieval
borough courts, and have little or no work to do at the present time, but the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
82
Liverpool Court of Passage, the Salford Hundred Court and the Mayor’s and City
of London Court are still comparatively well used.
The High Court of Justice
The High Court of Justice forms part of the Supreme Court of Judicature, which
largely took its present form in 1873. It is composed of the High Court and the
Court of Appeal. . .
The High Court sits in three divisions: the Queen’s Bench Division, the
Chancery Division, and the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division. These
divisions derive from the old courts of the same names which existed before i873»
and cases are distributed between them as tradition and convenience dictate.
The Queen’s Bench Division is staffed by the Lord Chief Justice and 25 puisne
judges, i.e. judges without special office of their own. These judges are concerned
with ordinary civil actions, e.g., debt cases, actions for damages, revenue cases,
insurance cases and commercial cases, and they also hear criminal cases at assizes.
The Chancery Division is officially headed by the Lord Chancellor; but most of
the work is done by seven puisne judges who remain in London all the time. The
jurisdiction of the Chancery Division derives from the equity system, and its work
covers actions for the administration of the estates of deceased persons, partnership
actions, actions connected with trusts and mortgages, some tax cases, the care of
infants’ estates, and company and bankruptcy matters. • • • u
The Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division deals, as its name implies, with
the proof of wills; with Admiralty and shipping cases; and with divorce cases,
heard either before High Court judges or before specially appointed divorce
commissioners—often county court judges.
Appellate Courts
There are two appellate courts in civil law actions—the Court of Appeal, which
is part of the Supreme Court of Judicature, and the House of Lords.
There are several ex officio members of the Court of Appeal, but its effective
head is a judge called the Master of the Rolls, who is assisted by eight Lords
Justices of Appeal. Appeals lie to the Court of Appeal from the county courts, the
Mayor’s and City of London Court and the civil side of the High Court. The
Court of Appeal generally sits in two or three divisions, with three judges to a
division. , TT r t j
From the Court of Appeal, a further appeal is possible to the House of Lords,
with the leave of the House of Lords or of the Court of Appeal. Such appeals are
usually heard by five of the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, who are paid pro¬
fessional judges with peerages for life. In addition, the Lord Chancellor and any
peers who have held high judicial office are entitled to sit. The House of Lords
is the supreme court of appeal in civil cases in the whole of the United Kingdom.
Civil Courts in Scotland
Sheriff Courts
Sheriff courts in their civil capacity correspond roughly to county courts in
England and Wales, but they have a wider jurisdiction unlimited by the value of
the case. Scotland is divided into 12 sheriffdoms, each provided with a sheriff and
a number of sheriffs-substitute. The work of the sheriff court is normally done by
a sheriff-substitute, against whose judgment an appeal may be made to the sheriff
or directly to the Court of Session.
Minor civil matters (actions not exceeding £5 in value) may be tried by justices
of the peace.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
83
The Court of Session
The Court of Session is the supreme civil court in Scotland. It was established
in 1532 and consists of 15 judges. The court is divided into two parts—the
Inner House, which is mainly an appeal court, and the Outer House, a court of
first instance, where, inter alia, all actions for divorce are taken. The Inner House
is divided into two divisions of equal status, each consisting of four judges; the
first division being presided over by the Lord President, and the second division
by the Lord Justice Clerk. From the Inner House, an appeal may lie to the House
of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court
This is a special court in Scotland for dealing with certain agricultural matters.
The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank and dignity of a
judge of the Court of Session.
Criminal Courts in England and Wales
The criminal courts in England and Wales include:
Petty Sessional or Magistrates' Courts
Magistrates’ courts are courts of summary jurisdiction where persons accused
of all kinds of minor offences and a large number of the less serious indictable
offences may be tried without a jury. Over 97 per cent of all persons convicted are
convicted at magistrates’ courts. These courts are also used for committal
proceedings, i.e. the public conduct, by magistrates, of preliminary inquiries into
indictable offences to determine whether or not an accused person should be
committed for trial in a higher court.
The majority of magistrates’ courts consist of not fewer than two and not more
than seven unpaid ‘lay’ magistrates or justices of the peace, who are appointed, in
each county and for each borough which has its own commission of the peace, by
the Lord Chancellor, who is advised as to a county by the Lord Lieutenant1 with
the assistance of an advisory committee, and as to boroughs by separate advisory
committees. There are also a few persons who are authorised by statute to act as
justices, by virtue of holding some other public office, e.g., mayors of county and
non-county boroughs and chairmen of county councils.
In central London, most of the courts consist of stipendiary (paid) magistrates
sitting alone; under the Metropolitan Magistrates’ Courts Act, 1959, their maximum
number is being increased from 27 (a figure fixed in 1829) to 35. The Act also
empowers the Lord Chancellor to appoint qualified persons to be acting metro¬
politan magistrates for temporary periods, when the number of cases to be tried
is exceptionally high. Some of the larger towns also have stipendiary magistrates.
Juvenile Courts in England and Wales are specially constituted magistrates’
courts which deal with young people under 17 years of age who are charged with
any offence except homicide, or are brought before the courts as being in need of
care or protection or beyond control, or as persistent truants. Juvenile courts also
deal with most applications for the adoption of children.
Outside the London magistrates’ courts area, the justices for each petty sessional
division elect from their number a panel of justices specially qualified to deal with
juvenile cases. The panel for the London area is appointed by the Home Secretary.
A juvenile court consists of not more than three justices drawn from the panel
and must, except in special circumstances, include a man and a woman. A juvenile
1 See footnote p. 44.
84 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
court must sit either in a different room or building from that in which other courts
are sitting, or on a different day. Only persons within certain specified categories are
admitted and only limited publicity is allowed.
Domestic Proceedings are also tried by not more than three justices, of whom one
should be a man and one a woman. The hearing of domestic proceedings is
separated from other business and, as in juvenile courts, the public is excluded.
Courts of Quarter Sessions
There are two different kinds of quarter sessions—county sessions and borough
sessions; both are normally held four times a year, although, when necessary,
additional sittings may be held.
Each of the 65 courts of county quarter sessions is presided over by a legally
qualified chairman or deputy chairman, who may or may not draw a salary, sitting
with a number of the magistrates of the county. In London, Lancashire and
Middlesex, where the courts have continuous sittings, the chairman and deputy
chairman usually preside alone. In the 96 boroughs which hold separate quarter
sessions, most of the courts, which do not sit continuously, are presided over by a
Recorder (usually a part-time judicial officer), who is a salaried barrister, as sole
judge. Trial by jury applies at both borough and county sessions.
The jurisdiction of quarter sessions covers all but the most serious indictable
offences, but the courts are debarred from trying any crime that carries the death
sentence or (subject to certain exceptions) imprisonment for life.
Courts of assize are branches of the High Court of Justice. They are held in the
county towns and in certain big cities three times a year, a Queen’s Bench judge
or a Commissioner of Assize (who may be a barrister commissioned to act as a
judge) presiding. The assize judges work on circuits covering England and Wales,
and travel from one county town to another in the course of their duties. They can
try any indictable offence committed in the county.
At the winter and summer assizes, civil business as well as criminal rnay be
taken, but except in a few large towns the autumn assize is confined to criminal
cases.
Crown Courts
Crown courts are courts which were established at Liverpool and Manchester by
the Criminal Justice Administration Act, 1956, to act as courts of assize in and for the
West Derby Division of Lancashire and the Salford Division of Lancashire. They
also act as courts of quarter sessions for the cities of Liverpool and Manchester.
The Crown courts are presided over by the Recorders of Liverpool and Man¬
chester, who are whole-time judicial officers.
The Central Criminal Court
The Central Criminal Court at the Old Bailey acts as the court of assize for the
criminal business of London, Middlesex and parts of the home counties. The
judges include: a judge chosen, in rotation, from the Queen s Bench Division for
each monthly session of the court; the Recorder of London; the Common Serjeant;
and two additional judges of the Mayor’s and City of London Court.
Criminal Appeals
Appeals may be made direct from the magistrates’ court to the High Court on a
point of law; but the more usual kind of appeal is that of a convicted person
against his conviction or his sentence. Appeals of this kind from a magistrates
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
BS
court are heard in the counties by the Appeal Committee of Quarter Sessions,
consisting of between three and twelve magistrates, and in the boroughs by the
Recorder; in neither case is a jury required.
Appeals against convictions or sentences by quarter sessions, assizes or Crown
courts go to the Court of Criminal Appeal. Appeals on questions of law may be
brought as of right, but on other grounds, only by leave.
The Court of Criminal Appeal consists of the Lord Chief Justice and a number
of Queen’s Bench judges; three in session is the usual number.
A further appeal from the Court of Criminal Appeal to the House of Lords on a
point of law can be brought if the Attorney-General grants a certificate that ‘the
decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal involves a point of law of exceptional
public importance and that it is desirable in the public interest that a further appeal
should be brought’. Appeals of this kind are very rare.
Criminal Courts in Scotland
Criminal prosecutions in Scotland are mainly dealt with in the sheriff court
sitting under summary procedure, i.e. the sheriff without a jury. Minor offences
are tried under summary procedure in police courts in burghs and in justice of the
peace courts in counties. Any summary court may sit as a juvenile court when
hearing charges involving only persons under 17 years of age and, in some areas,
there are specially constituted juvenile courts. The sheriff court also sits under
solemn procedure, i.e. the sheriff with a jury, to hear the more serious cases
prosecuted on indictment.
The most serious cases are taken under solemn procedure in the High Court of
Justiciary, which is the supreme criminal court of first instance. It consists of the
Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of Session),
the Lord Justice Clerk and thirteen Lords Commissioner of Justiciary who are also
judges of the Court of Session. The seat of the court is in Edinburgh, but the
judges go on circuit to preside at trials in other towns. The High Court of Justiciary
is also the appeal court from the summary courts and, sitting as a court of criminal
appeal, hears appeals in indictment cases. Appeals are heard by three or more
judges; there is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
Courts in Northern Ireland
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England
and Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller community. The main
difference is that all petty sessional cases are dealt with by resident magistrates, who
correspond to the stipendiary magistrates of England and Wales. The inferior
courts, that is to say the courts where the less serious cases are tried, are adminis¬
tered by the Parliament of Northern Ireland; the administration of the superior
courts has been reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament.
Coroners’ Courts
Where a person appears to have died a violent or unnatural death, or a sudden
death of which the cause is unknown, or in certain other circumstances, the death
must be reported to the coroner (who may be a barrister, a solicitor, or a medical
practitioner of not less than five years’ standing, appointed by a county or a county
borough council) within whose jurisdiction the body is lying. When a death is
reported to the coroner, he inquires how, when, and where the deceased died;
he may hold an inquest in court for this purpose, and he must hold an inquest
if he has reasonable cause to believe that the deceased has died a violent or unnatural
death or has died in prison or in circumstances for which an Act of Parliament
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
86
provides that an inquest must be held. A jury must be summoned in certain cases,
including those in which there is reason to suspect that the death was due to
murder, manslaughter, or infanticide, or was caused by an accident arising out
of the use of a vehicle on the public highway. If the jury returns a verdict of
murder, manslaughter or infanticide by a particular person, the coroner commits
that person for trial at assizes. If the death is merely a sudden death of which the
cause is unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest, but may order a post¬
mortem examination to ascertain the cause of death.
The discovery of gold or silver objects hidden in the soil or in buildings must be
reported to a coroner, if the original owner cannot be traced. The coroner then
holds an inquest with a jury to inquire whether the objects are ‘treasure trove’ and
who was the finder thereof. If it is decided that the objects are treasure trove, then,
though the law is that treasure trove vests in the Crown, the declared finder will
either receive them back or be paid their full market value.
In Scotland, the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal inquires
privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and may report the
results of his inquiries to the Crown Agent in order that Crown Counsel may
consider what proceedings, if any, are required.
Ecclesiastical Courts
The established Church of England has its own ecclesiastical courts, which
constitute a graduated hierarchy. They include the Court of the Archdeacon, the
consistory court of the bishop of each diocese and the provincial courts of the
archbishops of Canterbury and of York.
The ecclesiastical courts, which are still courts in the full sense of the word, have
jurisdiction only in matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.1
Administrative Tribunals
A number of administrative tribunals exist in various parts of the United King¬
dom for the exercise of special judicial functions; broadly speaking they fall into
three groups:
(1) those which deal with a class of dispute in which a Government department
or public authority is interested, e.g., local valuation courts (rating),
general and special commissioners of inland revenue (income tax), and
pensions appeal tribunals;
(2) those which deal with a class of dispute where specialised knowledge or
experience on the part of the tribunal is required, e.g., the Lands Tribunal
(assessment of values of interest in land), rent tribunals (assessment of
fair rents for furnished premises), and the Restrictive Practices Court
(investigation of restrictive trading practices); and
(3) those which enforce professional discipline, e.g., the General Medical
Council (doctors), and the Disciplinary Committee of the Law Society
(solicitors).
Appeals from certain of these tribunals lie to the appropriate minister (if there is
one) or, on a point of law, to the superior courts of England and Wales, Scotland
or Northern Ireland, as the case may be.
An advisory Council on Tribunals (established under the Tribunals and
Inquiries Act, 1958) exercises general supervision2 over the tribunals and reports on
1 See also p. 195.
2 Excluding supervision of the professional disciplinary tribunals, with which the
ordinary public are not concerned.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
87
particular matters. The members of the council are appointed jointly by the Lord
Chancellor and the Secretary of State for Scotland; matters peculiar to Scotland
are dealt with by the Scottish committee of the council. Responsibility for the
appointment of most chairmen of administrative tribunals (hitherto appointed by
ministers) was transferred by the 1958 Act to the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord
President of the Court of Session in Scotland, and their consent is also required
to the dismissal of members of the tribunals.
Military Courts
The jurisdiction of military courts, which are known as courts-martial, is
exclusively over persons subject to military law. Appeals lie to the Courts-Martial
Appeal Court, which was set up by the Courts-Martial (Appeals) Act, 1951, and
from that court to the House of Lords1 if the Attorney-General certifies that its
decision involves a point of law of exceptional public importance and that it is in
the public interest that a further appeal should be brought. The powers of courts-
martial are limited to those conferred on them by statute, and if these powers are
exceeded, the person injured has his remedy in the High Court.
THE JUDICIARY
The judiciary of the United Kingdom is independent. That is to say, it is free
to administer the lawr under the protection of the law without fear or favour. All
judges, from those of the House of Lords and the superior courts to the ‘lay’
magistrates or justices of the peace, must not only be, but must appear to be, com¬
pletely impartial, for it is of fundamental importance that ‘justice should not only
be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done’.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s courts in that ‘all jurisdiction
of the courts is either indirectly or immediately derived from the Crown’, but
since the end of the seventeenth century it has been established that the executive
cannot disturb or delay the course of common justice, attempt to force the judges
to act otherwise than impartially, or use the prerogative powers of the Crown to
create courts to administer any system of law other than common law. Judges
always have been and still are selected from the ranks of practising barristers; and
neither their training nor their career is in any way influenced by the State.
The independence of the judiciary vis-a-vis the legislature is likewise strictly
observed. Originally laid down by the Act of Settlement, 1701, the law governing
the matter was re-enacted in the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act,
1925, which provides that all judges of the High Court and the Court of Appeal,
with the exception of the Lord Chancellor (who is a member of the Cabinet), shall
hold their offices during good behaviour, subject to a power of removal by the
Sovereign on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament. During the
centuries that have passed since 1701, only one such address has been moved
(against a judge convicted of misappropriation of funds, in 1830); and it can be
stated with confidence that Parliament would never use this means to attempt to
interfere with judicial independence. Similarly, although no court in the United
Kingdom would ever question the validity of an Act of Parliament which had been
duly passed, legally promulgated, and published by the proper authority, it might,
through its interpretation of the statute, come to a decision contrary to the policy
of the Government which introduced the Act. In such a case, it would be open
to the Government to persuade Parliament to clarify or amend the statute, or to
1 There have been no appeals as yet to the House of Lords under this provision.
G
88
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pass a new Act. It would not be open to it to penalise the judge or to try to influence
the court in any other way.
Administration of the Judicial System
There is no Minister of Justice in the United Kingdom. The central responsi¬
bility for the administration of the judicial system in England and Wales lies partly
with the Lord Chancellor and partly with the Home Secretary. The Prime Minister
is also concerned in that he is responsible for recommending to the Crown the
appointment of the Lords Justices of Appeal and that of the Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary.
Apart from the appointment of the Lords Justices of Appeal, Crown appoint¬
ments to the High Court bench are made on the recommendation of the Lord
Chancellor, who appoints justices of the peace and is also responsible for recom¬
mending to the Crown the appointment of county court judges (except in Lanca¬
shire where they are nominated by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster),
Recorders of boroughs and metropolitan and stipendiary magistrates. The admini¬
strative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature and the appointment of court
officials is partly in the hands of the Lord Chancellor and partly in the hands of
the appropriate judges. The Lord Chancellor is concerned with legal procedure in
that he is a member of the Rule Committee which makes the rules of the Supreme
Court, and that he appoints the County Court Committee and has power to alter or
disallow the rules made by it. He is also concerned with law reform in that he refers
questions on this subject (save in the field of criminal law, where the Home
Secretary is primarily responsible) to the Law Reform Committee and the Private
International Law Committee (both established in 1952), and that the reports of
these committees, which often become the basis of legislation, are presented to him.
The Home Secretary is responsible for the general administration of magistrates’
courts in England and Wales, except in relation to their judicial functions in which
they can be controlled only by the Queen’s Bench Division of the High Court. He
is also responsible for approving appointments of clerks to justices made by
magistrates’ courts committees, of which there is one for each county and county
borough and for certain non-county boroughs. Magistrates’ courts committees
exercise local responsibility for the administration of magistrates’ courts.
In Scotland, the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appointment of
the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord Justice Clerk.
Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies with the Secretary
of State for Scotland on the nomination of the Lord Advocate. The High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session are administered by the Clerk of the Justiciary
and his staff and the principal Clerk of Session and his staff respectively. Powers
of appointment and removal of justices of the peace, formerly held by the Lord
Chancellor, were transferred in 1955 to the Secretary of State for Scotland, who
is also responsible for the staffing and general organisation of the sheriff courts.
THE LEGAL PROFESSION
The legal profession of England and Wales is divided into two classes of
lawyers—barristers and solicitors. The distinction, which is due mainly to historical
causes, is found also in Northern Ireland, in Scotland (where members of the Bar
are known as advocates), and in certain other parts of the Commonwealth.
No hard and fast line can be drawn between the work of the solicitor and the
work of the barrister, since there are many barristers who do little advocacy, and
there are solicitors who do little else, and who have made considerable reputations
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
89
for themselves in the courts in which they are permitted to appear. In general,
however, it may be said that solicitors undertake legal business for lay clients,
while barristers advise on legal problems submitted through solicitors and conduct
legal proceedings in the higher courts.
A barrister is required to have reached an accepted educational standard, to have
passed the legal examinations conducted by the Council of Legal Education and to
have become a member of one of the four Inns of Court—Gray’s Inn, Lincoln’s
Inn, the Middle Temple and the Inner Temple. A barrister with a substantial
junior practice may apply to the Lord Chancellor for a patent appointing him
Queen’s Counsel—a proceeding that is known as ‘taking silk’. The highest appoint¬
ments in the legal profession, including those of Attorney-General and Solicitor-
General, are made from among barristers who have become Queen’s Counsel. The
professional conduct of a barrister is subject to the scrutiny of the General Council
of the Bar; but disciplinary powers are vested exclusively in the Benchers of the
Inns of Court.
A prospective solicitor must be considered suitable by the appropriate com¬
mittee of the Law Society (the professional organisation of solicitors) and he must
enter into ‘articles of clerkship’ with a practising solicitor of not less than five
years’ standing before he can begin his professional career. The term of articles
lasts for three or five years, depending upon the educational qualifications of the
student. An articled clerk must pass the necessary examinations held by the Law
Society and, unless he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university,
he is generally required to attend a course of studies at a recognised law school.
Once a solicitor is qualified, he may become a member of the Law Society.
In Scotland, the conditions for admission as, and the standing of, advocates and
solicitors are much the same as those applying in the case of barristers and solicitors
in England and Wales. The analogous professional organisations are the Faculty
of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland.
LEGAL AID
Schemes for free legal assistance to persons of slender means and resources have
existed for centuries in some courts, to a limited extent in England and Wales and to
a somewhat greater extent in Scotland. The existing schemes were revised in 1949
when the Legal Aid and Advice Act and the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act
were passed. These Acts, which are not yet fully in operation, were introduced to
improve and extend the existing arrangements in civil proceedings so that no one
would be financially unable to prosecute a just and reasonable claim or to defend a
legal right, and to make the facilities already available in criminal proceedings
more easily accessible to those who needed them. The Acts also provided that
solicitors and barristers acting for persons receiving legal aid should no longer be
required to act gratuitously in civil cases, but should be remunerated for their
services from public funds.
Legal Aid in Civil Cases
Legal aid in civil cases is now available to persons whose income, computed in
accordance with rules applied by the National Assistance Board, does not exceed
£420 a year, and whose capital, as so computed, does not, save in exceptional
circumstances, exceed £500. Where an assisted person can afford to make a con¬
tribution to the costs of his case, he is required, as a condition of receiving legal
aid, to pay an amount which is settled with due regard to his financial resources.
In England and Wales, legal aid in civil cases is already available in connection
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
90
with proceedings in the High Court, in the Court of Appeal, in county courts and
in certain local courts of similar standing. Eventually the scheme will cover repre¬
sentation in courts of all types, from magistrates’ courts to the House of Lords.
The scheme is operated through the Law Society under the general guidance of
the Lord Chancellor. The cost is met from the Legal Aid Fund, drawn from three
sources: contributions from assisted persons; costs recovered from opposite parties
in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer.
For the purposes of the scheme, England and Wales are divided into twelve areas.
In each area a committee of solicitors and barristers, known as an area committee,
is responsible for the administration of the scheme. These committees are re¬
sponsible for setting up legal aid centres to which anyone seeking legal aid may
apply. The committees hear the facts, and if they consider that there is aprimafacie
case they give it their support. The person who wishes to bring the action is then
allowed to select from a panel a solicitor and, if necessary, a barrister, to conduct
his case. Certain types of action, including breach of promise to marry, and libel
and slander, are excluded from the scheme.
In Scotland, the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of Scotland
through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court Committee and
twenty-one local committees. Legal aid is at present available for civil proceedings
in the Court of Session and the sheriff courts. An applicant for legal aid in Scotland
is required to show a ‘probable cause’ and produce in support of his application a
statement corroborated according to the requirements of Scottish law.
Legal Aid in Criminal Courts
Free legal aid is available in the criminal courts in England and Wales under
the Poor Prisoners’ Defence Act, i93°> and, in case of appeal, under the
Criminal Appeal Act, 1907, and the Summary Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act, 1933.
The Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949, makes certain procedural changes in the
system and, when fully implemented, will transfer financial responsibility for pay¬
ing for free legal aid from local to central funds. It also provides that solicitors
and barristers should receive fair payment for work actually and reasonably done.
The Costs in Criminal Cases Act, 1952, empowers the courts, in the case of an
indictable offence, to order the reasonable costs of the defence to be paid out of
local funds when the accused has been discharged by the magistrates court or
acquitted. Under the Act, a magistrates’ court has power, if it dismisses an
information on summary trial, to order such costs as it considers just and reasonable
to be paid to the accused by the prosecutor.
Pending the full implementation of the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act,
legal aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons in Scotland under the Poor s
Roll system, which is administered on a voluntary basis by the legal profession
with the help of a grant from Government funds.
In Northern Ireland, free legal aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons
under the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Act, 1945- The cost of providing
free legal aid is met from public funds.
Legal Advice
Oral advice on legal matters is available to persons who cannot afford to obtain
it in the ordinary way. Advice is given by practising solicitors (paid out of the Legal
Aid Fund at the rate of £1 for every half-hour) without charge to those having less
than £75 capital (excluding the value of their dwelling house, furniture, clothes
and the tools of their trade), and for 2s. 6d. to those having an income in the seven
days preceding the application of less than £4 10s., after deducting 30s. if married
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
91
and maintaining a spouse, 25s. for each dependent child, and 30s. for any adult
dependant, as well as income tax and national insurance, industrial injury or
national health contributions.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The chief aims of the penal system of the United Kingdom are deterrence and
reformation; its effectiveness depends on its total impact—fear of detection, public
trial and conviction and the possibility of punishment—and not solely upon the
treatment of the offender, which today is based increasingly on the recognition
that the community has a responsibility not simply to punish or reject the law¬
breaker but to prevent him from returning to crime.1 Research into the causes and
prevention of delinquency which, according to statistics, has shown a marked
increase since the end of the second world war, is at present being undertaken by
a research unit in the Home Office, by a number of universities and by other bodies
concerned with these problems. An Institute of Criminology has recently been
established at Cambridge University.
Penalties
Except in relation to murder and certain rare offences for which there is a fixed
penalty, the court has discretion to select the penalty (within maxima prescribed
by law) that it considers most suitable in the light of the circumstances of the
offence and the offender. In general, the courts have power to impose either
imprisonment or a fine for serious offences (both—in certain cases); while most
minor offences are punishable by a fine only, with the alternative of imprisonment
if the fine is not paid. Moreover, the court has discretion, instead of sentencing
an offender, to discharge him absolutely, to place him on probation, or, in
England and Wales only, to discharge him conditionally (i.e. subject to the
condition that he commits no offence during a specified period not exceeding
twelve months). There are special provisions governing the treatment of young
offenders; and the Criminal Justice Act, 1948, and the Criminal Justice (Scotland)
Act, 1949, provide that courts shall not sentence a person under 21 years of age
to imprisonment unless they consider that no other method of dealing with him
is appropriate.
Two special types of treatment—corrective training and preventive detention—
have been devised to deal with the persistent offender. A sentence of corrective
training of not less than two nor more than four years (seven years in Northern
Ireland) may be imposed on offenders of 21 years of age or over if they are con¬
victed of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of two years or more
and have been convicted of such an offence on at least two previous occasions since
attaining the age of 17. Sentences of preventive detention (primarily for the pro¬
tection of the public) may be imposed on persons of not less than 30 years of age,
who are found guilty of offences punishable with imprisonment for a term of two
years or more and have been convicted of such offences on at least three previous
occasions since attaining the age of 17, and have been sentenced to borstal training,
imprisonment or corrective training on at least two of these occasions. A sentence
of preventive detention runs for not less than five years (three in Northern Ireland)
or more than 14 years, as the court decides.
1 Some aspects of policy relating to the treatment of offenders, including young offenders,
have been examined in a White Paper, Penal Practice in a Changing Society, Cmnd. 645,
published in 1959.
92
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Under the Homicide Act, 1957, the death penalty for murder is confined to
those forms of murder (known as ‘capital murder’) which strike most directly at
the maintenance of law and order and the public peace, i.e. murder done in
the course of furtherance of theft, murder by shooting or by causing an
explosion, murder committed to escape lawful arrest or to effect or assist
escape or rescue from legal custody, murder of a police officer (or person
assisting him) acting in the execution of his duty, or murder by a prisoner of
a prison officer (or person assisting him) acting in the execution of his duty. The
penalty for murder not in capital categories is imprisonment for life, except that
the death penalty continues to apply where a person who is convicted of murder
has previously been convicted of another murder committed in Great Britain on
a different occasion. Persons under the age of 18 years at the time that the crime
was committed are not sentenced to death or to life imprisonment, but ‘to be
detained during Her Majesty’s pleasure’. If the defence is able to prove that a
person accused of murder was suffering from such abnormality of mind as sub¬
stantially impaired his mental responsibility for the killing, he is liable to be
convicted only of manslaughter.
It is the long-established practice for the Home Secretary or the Secretary of
State for Scotland to review every capital case before the law is allowed to take
its course and to consider whether there are grounds for advising the Crown to
exercise the prerogative of mercy. Where a reprieve is recommended, the sentence
of death is commuted to one of imprisonment for life. A person subject to a
sentence of life imprisonment is liable to be detained for the rest of his life, but
the Home Secretary may, if he thinks fit, release him on licence at any time. In
recent years, the average period served by persons whose death sentences have
been commuted has been about nine years, but the period varies according to the
circumstances of the particular case and the question of whether the prisoner s
discharge would be likely to involve risk to the public.
The Homicide Act does not apply to Northern Ireland, but the exercise of the
prerogative of mercy in all capital cases is considered by the Northern Ireland
Cabinet, which tenders advice to the Governor in his capacity as representative of
the Crown.
Administrative Authorities
In England and Wales, general responsibility for all institutions for the treatment
of offenders is vested in the Home Secretary. His statutory powers and duties in this
connection include the making of rules for the governance of such institutions, the
recommendations of persons for appointment by the Crown as prison commis¬
sioners, and the appointment of boards of visitors.
In the discharge of these duties, the Home Secretary is advised by the Advisory
Council on the Treatment of Offenders, which also acts as the National Working
Group for the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, and as the
National Committee of the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission.
Responsibility to the Home Secretary for the administration of prisons, borstal
institutions and detention centres in England and Wales lies with the Prison
Commission, assisted by inspectors and by a professional and technical staff. The
Prison Commission consists of not more than five commissioners (who are appointed
by the Crown), including the chairman who is appointed to that office by the Home
Secretary. There are also a number of assistant commissioners who are inspectors
under the Prison Acts. # ...
The general supervision of penal institutions is the responsibility of visiting
committees appointed by the justices for those prisons to which convicted persons
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
93
are committed direct from their courts, or of boards of visitors appointed by the
Home Secretary for the other prisons and institutions. The main functions of
the committees and boards are: to act as the superior disciplinary authority of the
prison or institution; to constitute an independent judicial body to which any
prisoner or inmate may make a complaint or request; and to report direct to the
Home Secretary, both by formal annual report and as occasion may require, on
every aspect of the administration of the prison. In borstal institutions and preven¬
tive detention prisons, the boards also advise the Prison Commissioners on the
release of the inmates on licence.
The prison system in Scotland is based on principles similar to those applied in
England and Wales, and the Secretary of State for Scotland is advised in the
discharge of his duties by the Scottish Advisory Council on the Treatment of
Offenders. In Northern Ireland, the system is the responsibility of the Minister
for Home Affairs.
Prisons
The increase in crime during recent years has led to severe overcrowding in
prisons and has strained the resources of other agencies, such as borstals, approved
schools and the probation service. Measures to deal with the problems include
plans for a substantial increase in the number of prisons and the other institutions
mentioned above, and the reconstruction or replacement of a number of old prisons.
Prisons in England and Wales are of the following types: local prisons of the
ordinary type, which receive all classes of prisoners direct from the courts; local
prisons of a special type, which may be open or walled, for short-sentence prisoners,
chiefly first offenders; four young prisoners’ centres for the reception of youths
under 21 years of age with sentences of three months or over, as far as accommoda¬
tion permits; regional training prisons (some of which are open) for first
offenders and trainable prisoners of other categories, including those sentenced to
corrective training; and central prisons for habitual law-breakers, preventive deten¬
tion prisoners and long-term prisoners of the ‘Star’ class1—one for the latter class is
an open prison.
In Northern Ireland, with its smaller population, the necessity for several kinds
of prison for the separation of various classes of prisoners does not arise to the
same extent as in England and Wales. The Scottish system of classification of
prisoners is broadly the same as that of England and Wales; but each prison in
Scotland accommodates more than one classification group. There are 48 prison
establishments in England and Wales, 9 in Scotland, and 2 in Northern Ireland.
Full-time prison officers of all ranks, except chaplains, are permanent civil
servants. In 1959, prison staff of all grades in England and Wales numbered about
8,000. Some 8 per cent of this number were women. In Scotland, in 1959, the
prison staff numbered 803, including 66 women, and in Northern Ireland the
prison staff of 199 included 20 women.
Classification of Prisoners
Every person committed to prison is first received in the local prison serving the
court from which he is committed. Subsequently, he may either serve his whole
sentence at the local prison or he may be sent to another institution, depending on
his age, the length and nature of his sentence, and his personal history and character.
The object of classification is first to ensure the separation of the sexes, of young
persons from adults, of untried prisoners from convicted prisoners and of civil
1 ‘Star’ class prisoners are those who have not previously been convicted of serious
crime and are not of habitually criminal or depraved habits.
94
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
prisoners from criminal prisoners; secondly to prevent contamination, among
convicted prisoners, of the better by the worse; and thirdly to provide training
appropriate to their needs for those among convicted prisoners who seem likely to
benefit therefrom.
Training
The main elements of prison training (including corrective training) have been
defined as (i) work of a kind likely to help to fit prisoners to earn their living after
release, with technical training in skilled trades for certain persons, (2) suitable
educational facilities, and (3) opportunities for the development of a sense of
personal responsibility, including (for suitable persons) training in open conditions.
A system of vocational training courses in skilled trades, designed to enable the
trainees to take the examinations of recognised examining bodies, is being developed
in central and training prisons. In 1959, there were 75 such courses, covering 23
different trades in the various prisons, and the standard of training was such
that just under 70 per cent of entrants passed the external examinations.
Employment
Prison industries in England and Wales are controlled by the Director of
Industries and Stores, who is a member of the Prison Commission. The director,
who is advised by an experienced industrialist appointed on a voluntary basis by
the commission, has a head office staff of technical officers and supervisors
(including a supervisor of farms and gardens), and industrial managers at the prisons.
In Scotland, responsibility for the general direction of prison industries rests with
the Supervisor of Industries, who is a member of the Scottish Home Department.
Except in local prisons, where the hours are shorter, most prisoners spend
about 40 hours a week in the prison workshops or in other employment such as
building, farm work, domestic work and gardening in the prison precincts. A few
prisoners are employed outside the prisons on various projects of public value,
such as agriculture, land drainage, road works, and forestry.
All prisoners are entitled to earn a limited amount from the first day of their
sentence; in England, Wales, and Scotland, these amounts may be increased for
satisfactory output after a specified lapse of time. In Northern Ireland, there is a
progressive system of earnings, which are not related to output or to work done.
Education
Educational schemes are provided in prisons in England, Wales, and Scotland
by the local education authorities with the advice of the Government departments
responsible for education in their respective countries, and in Northern Ireland by
the Ministry of Home Affairs. The local authorities are reimbursed for the full cost
of their services, and the work in England and Wales is under the organisational
control of the Assistant Commissioner for Education in the Prison Commission.
Evening institutes have been established; and a wide range of correspondence
courses is made available for those who have a serious desire to improve their
education and qualifications.
Educational schemes are supplemented by periodical lectures, film displays,
concerts, and dramatic performances. Prisoners may also use the prison library,
which in most cases is now stocked by the county, city or borough library committee.
Psychiatric and Psychological Services
Three prisons and one borstal in England and Wales and one prison in Scotland
have their owTn psychiatric clinics (with qualified medical staff, visiting psycho¬
therapists and psychiatric social workers) to which inmates may be transferred if,
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
95
in the opinion of the relevant medical officer, they would benefit by psychiatric
treatment. Elsewhere, prisoners may, if necessary, be sent for treatment to
psychiatric hospitals outside the prisons. Arrangements may also be made (for
prisoners serving short-term sentences) for appropriate treatment after release.
The building of a central psychiatric prison hospital, with accommodation for
300 patients, was begun in 1959.
There is also a psychological service for prisons, whose officers are employed to
assist governors and medical officers in their work of examining and classifying
prisoners, and to advise on methods of treatment.
Religion and Welfare
A chaplain of the Church of England (in Scotland of the Church of Scotland and
in Northern Ireland, of the Church of Ireland, and Presbyterian Church) and a
Roman Catholic priest are appointed to every prison. Ministers of the Methodist
Church and of other denominations are either appointed or specially called in as
required. Regular services are held, and chaplains and other ministers may visit
prisoners in their cells. Welfare is generally the responsibility of the chaplain and
welfare officers of local aid societies; at some local prisons, full-time welfare officers
have been appointed.
Prisoners may be visited by their relatives and friends at specified intervals and,
in England and Wales, by recognised prison visitors asked to serve in this field by
the Prison Commissioners. The voluntary work of these visitors is co-ordinated
and guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
Privileges and Discipline
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to imprison¬
ment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence (one-fourth in
Northern Ireland in respect of sentences of less than two years), provided that this
does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in Scotland, 30 days). The Home
Secretary may at any time, if he thinks fit, release on licence anyone sentenced to life
imprisonment. A prisoner sentenced to corrective training becomes eligible for
release on licence after serving two-thirds of his sentence. A prisoner sentenced to
preventive detention becomes eligible for release on licence after serving two-thirds
or five-sixths of his sentence (in Northern Ireland, two years, or one-half of his
sentence, whichever is greater) according to an assessment of his character, conduct
and prospects, which is made after he has served a substantial part of his sentence.
In addition, at successive stages of a prisoner’s sentence, he becomes entitled to
additional privileges; for example, he is allowed to have meals and recreation with
his fellow prisoners and to have some of his personal belongings in his cell.
For breaches of discipline in prison, the prison governor or the visiting committee
or the board of visitors have power to order forfeiture of remission (or postponement
of the date of release) and forfeiture of privileges.
Discharge and After-Care
Pre-release courses (at which experts from outside hold an open forum with the
prisoners nearing their release, on the domestic, social and industrial problems
with which they are likely to be faced) are conducted at all prisons. Specially
selected men amongst those sentenced to preventive detention and long-term
imprisonment are allowed to work in ordinary civilian jobs outside prison, as
free men, during the last six months of their sentence; hostels for this purpose have
been or are being established at ten prisons in areas where there are reasonable
prospects of employment. Home leave (allowing five clear days at home) is
96 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
extensively granted to many categories of prisoners with sentences of two years or
over towards the end of their sentences to enable them to make family adjustments
and to make contacts with potential employers.
On discharge, prisoners from local prisons are assisted by discharged prisoners
aid societies, which are local and voluntary bodies supported partly by private and
partly by public funds. These societies are assisted by prison welfare officers
employed by the National Association of Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies in
England and Wales which is a central, co-ordinating body, depending on a grant
from public funds for its administrative expenses, and, in Scotland, by the Scottish
Home Department. For persons discharged from other prisons and from borstals
(who are, in general, subject to statutory supervision), after-care in England
and Wales is in the hands of the Central After-Care Association, a voluntary body
financed from public funds and governed by a council appointed by the Home
Secretary, which includes in its membership representatives of the Ministry of
Labour and National Service, of the National Assistance Board and of the probation
service. The After-Care Council (appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland)
carries out similar duties in Scotland.
In England and Wales, the association works through local associates, usually
probation officers, and, in Scotland, the council works through voluntary guardians.
The officers of the local organisations make all arrangements for the reception of the
prisoner after his discharge, and will advise, assist and befriend him for as long as is
necessary or required by statute.
In Northern Ireland, the after-care of all prisoners is carried out by the discharged
prisoners’ aid societies with the help of probation officers.
Treatment of Young Offenders
Under the English and Scottish legal systems, a child under the age of eight
cannot be charged with an offence. A child between eight and 14 years old, who
is charged with an offence other than homicide, must be dealt with in a juvenile
court, unless charged jointly with an adult.
In England and Wales, a young person between 14 and 17 years of age charged
with an indictable offence may be dealt with summarily (as is usually the case) or
committed for trial by jury. In certain cases young persons may claim to be tried
by jury, though this right is rarely exercised. In Scotland and Northern Ireland,
all young persons up to the age of 17 years who are charged with offences must be
dealt with in juvenile courts, unless they have been charged in conjunction with
adult offenders.
The following methods of treatment are available in law for dealing with children
and young persons who have been found guilty of committing an offence: absolute
discharge; conditional discharge (in England and Wales only); fines (imposed upon
the offender or, in certain circumstances, upon his parents); probation; committal
to the care of a fit person (normally the appropriate local authority) until the age
of 18; or a period of detention in one of the different types of institution which
are available when institutional treatment is considered necessary.
Remand Homes
In England, Wales, and Scotland, remand homes are provided by local authorities
for the custody of boys and girls under the age of 17 before their appearance in
1 A committee was appointed by the Home Secretary in 1956 to inquire into, and make
recommendations, inter alia, on the working of the law in England and Wales in respect
of young offenders; the constitution, jurisdiction and procedure of juvenile courts; and the
remand home, approved school, and approved probation home systems.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
97
court, or between court appearances (while inquiries are made as to the best method
of treatment for them), while they are awaiting vacancies in approved schools, or
for a short period (up to a month) of punitive detention. Facilities for observation
are provided in remand homes, and valuable reports can thus be made to guide
those responsible for the future of young offenders.
In Northern Ireland, the responsibility for providing or arranging for the pro¬
vision of remand homes rests with the Minister of Home Affairs.
Approved Schools
Approved schools are residential schools for the education and training of young
offenders, and children committed to them by the courts as in need of care or
protection. These schools may be provided by local authorities, by voluntary
organisations concerned with the welfare of children on a national scale, or by local
committees formed by people interested in such work. In England and Wales, the
schools must be approved by the Home Secretary; in Scotland, by the Secretary of
State for Scotland; and in Northern Ireland, by the Minister of Home Affairs.
The number of approved schools in England and Wales in 1959 was 119. There are
20 approved schools in Scotland, and five (known as training schools) in Northern
Ireland.
The schools are for boys only or for girls only. They are classified according to
the ages of the children on admission, and include separate schools for Roman
Catholic children. The assignment of a child to a school in the appropriate age
group is determined by such considerations as the location of the school in relation
to the child’s home, the type of training provided, and the probable reaction of a
child to the individual personalities of the staff.
In general, the education given in approved schools follows the lines of that given
in ordinary schools, with vocational training for older boys and girls: the emphasis
is on character building, and close attention is given to after-care.
The period during which a child or young person may be detained in an approved
school is determined by law. In Great Britain it is three years, except for children
under the age of 12 years and 4 months at the time of committal, who may be kept
until the age of 15 years and 4 months, and those over the age of 16 on committal,
who can be detained only up to the age of 19, or 19! if they have been found guilty
of absconding or of serious misconduct in an approved school. Managers of all
approved schools are under an obligation to review the progress of each child in
their school towards the end of the first year of detention and thereafter at least
quarterly, with a view to granting a release on licence as soon as the situation
warrants it.
Statutory responsibility for after-care rests on the school managers. A boy or girl
on release remains under the care of the managers during the periods of licence and
supervision. The period of licence lasts until the expiry of the time for which the
boy or girl might have been legally detained in the school. The period of super¬
vision lasts for three years more, or until the boy or girl reaches the age of 21,
whichever is the shorter period. Managers are assisted in their after-care work by
welfare officers and social service organisations.
Remand Centres
Work on the building of the first of several remand centres (centres to which a
court may send young persons between the ages of 17 and 21 who would otherwise
be remanded to prison, and those under 17 years old who are unsuitable for remand
homes) was due to begin during 1959.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
98
Attendance Centres
Thirty-seven attendance centres have been established in England and Wales to
deal with boys between the ages of 12 and 17 found guilty of offences for which an
adult can be sentenced to imprisonment. This form of treatment is designed to
teach young offenders a respect for the law and to give them some instruction in
the proper use of leisure. Boys ordered to attend must do so during their spare
time on Saturday mornings or afternoons; they may be required to attend for up
to three hours on any one occasion and for not more than twelve hours in all. The
activities include a period of instruction in handicrafts, or a lecture (e.g., on first
aid) and a period of physical training or disciplinary tasks under supervision.
Efforts are made at the centres to induce the boys to join a youth club or other
suitable organisation.
An experimental centre for youths aged 17 to 21 has recently been established
in Manchester. This operates on similar lines to those adopted at the juvenile
centres, but the activities have been adapted to meet the needs of the older age group.
Detention Centres
Detention centres are designed to provide a short, sharp shock for those who
have not yet developed a definitely anti-social attitude, but who need to be taught
that the law cannot be defied with impunity. The offender is normally sent to the
centre for three months, though in certain circumstances the courts have power to
commit for a shorter or longer term up to a maximum of six months. 1 he regime
is designed to deprive the boy of his liberty and of all the elements of what he
thinks of as a ‘good time’, and to oblige him to live a brisk, disciplined life, main¬
taining the highest possible standards at the highest possible tempo. Each boy in
a detention centre must be alert, punctual and tidy, and emphasis is placed on the
inculcation of obedience, cleanliness and good manners. The routine provides a
normal working week of 44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to physical
training. Boys of compulsory school age receive full-time education, and classes of
further education are provided for others in the evenings. In i959> there were four
detention centres in England and Wales—two junior centres for boys over 14 and
under 17 years of age, accommodating about 70 and 60 boys respectively, and two
senior centres for youths over 17 and under 21 years of age, accommodating about
75 and 65 respectively.
Borstal Institutions
There are various types of borstal institution, which aim to provide suitable
conditions and training courses for different types of young offenders between the
ages of 16 and 21 years. For youths in England and Wales, there are two borstal
allocation centres, 19 training borstals, one correction centre and one recall
centre; and there are three training borstals and one recall centre for girls. In
Scotland, there are four borstals for youths and one for girls; and in Northern
Ireland, one for youths and one for girls. The period of the sentence ranges between
a minimum of nine months detention to a maximum of three years, with the total
period of control extending to four years (three years in Scotland and Northern
Ireland), divided between training in a borstal institution and controlled freedom
under statutory supervision. In Scotland, the supervision period is for one year
from the date of release from the institution or until the expiration of three years
from the date of sentence, whichever is the shorter. The system is essentially
remedial and educational, based on personal training by a carefully selected staff.
Emphasis is placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is much freedom
of movement, and many borstals are conducted in open conditions. An initial
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 99
period of classification ensures that each young offender is sent to the institution
best suited to his or her requirements.
Probation
The probation service1 is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender
while he remains at work or at school under the supervision of a probation officer,
whose duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature of the sendee
is that it relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before making a probation
order, the court must explain its effects and make sure that the probationer under¬
stands that if he fails to comply with the requirements of the order he will be liable to
be dealt with for the original offence. A probation order cannot be made without
the consent of the person concerned unless (in England, Wales, and Northern
Ireland only) he is under 14 years of age. The order usually requires the probationer
to keep in regular touch with the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to
lead an industrious life. It may also require him to live in a specified place, or to
submit to treatment for his mental condition. A probation order is made for not
less than one year and not more than three years.
Every magistrates’ court and superior criminal court must have available the
services of probation officers of both sexes. In 1959, the total numbers were:
1,407 whole-time and 54 part-time probation officers in England and Wales,
16 whole-time and one part-time in Northern Ireland, and 130 whole-time and
35 part-time in Scotland. In London, the appointment of probation officers is the
responsibility of the Home Secretary, and in Northern Ireland of the Ministry of
Home Affairs; elsewhere it is the responsibility of probation committees appointed
by magistrates in England and Wales, and by local authorities in Scotland (except
for certain ex officio members), but all appointments are subject to confirmation
by the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland respectively.
Training facilities in England and Wales are provided by the Home Office on the
advice of the Probation Advisory and Training Board and are made available,
by arrangement, to Northern Ireland officers. In Scotland, training is provided
during the first year of appointment and before the officer is allowed to make
probation work his permanent career.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised and controlled on a local basis
under the guidance of those Ministers of the Crown who are responsible for the
maintenance of law and order in their respective countries. In England and Wales,
the responsible minister is the Home Secretary; in Scotland, the Secretary of State
for Scotland. In Northern Ireland, the police force is controlled by an Inspector-
General, who is responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs.
POLICE IN GREAT BRITAIN
Police Forces
There are 125 separate, independent police forces in England and Wales, defined
according to area of responsibility as county forces; borough forces; combined
forces, which are forces whose area of responsibility extends over neighbouring
counties or boroughs; the metropolitan police force, which is responsible for an
1 A departmental committee to inquire into and make recommendations on all aspects
of the probation service was appointed in May 1959.
IOO
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
area of approximately fifteen miles radius from Charing Cross, but excluding the
City of London; and the City of London force. In Scotland, there are 33 forces,
including county forces, burgh forces and combined forces.
In England and Wales and Scotland, police forces vary considerably in size
according to the area and population which they serve. Thus, in 1959, the metro¬
politan police force had a strength of approximately 17,000, while that of the
smallest force in Scotland was 16.
The strength of the regular police force in Great Britain in 1959 was approxi¬
mately 80,000, including women.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are part-time special constables;
the police of certain public services, e.g., the British Transport Commission
police, the civil aviation constabulary, the Port of London Authority police and
other dock and harbour forces (who have duties and powers analogous to those of
ordinary constables but limited to the premises and immediate neighbourhoods of
their employers); and the police of the Service departments—the Admiralty
constabulary, the War Department constabulary which guards War Office lands
and military property, the Royal Marine police who are employed chiefly in
dockyards, and the Air Ministry constabulary.
Police Authorities
In the counties of England and Wales, the police authority is the standing joint
committee, half of whose members are members of the county council while the
other half are justices of the peace. In the boroughs, the police authority is known
as the ‘watch committee’ and is elected by the council from among its members.
The police authority of a combined force is made up of representatives of the
constituent areas as prescribed in the scheme under which they combine.
The police authority for the metropolitan police force is the Home Secretary. In
the City of London, the Common Council is the police authority, although it
usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland, the police authority for the counties is the county or joint county
council; in the large burghs it is the town council; where there are combined forces
there is a joint police committee.
It is the statutory duty of the police authorities to establish and maintain efficient
police forces for their areas. They are responsible for the appointment of the chief
officer of police in their areas, subject to the approval of the Home Secretary in
the provinces of England and Wales, of the Crown in the City of London, and, in
Scotland, of the Secretary of State. In the metropolitan police district, the chief
officer of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the Crown on the
recommendation of the Home Secretary.
The police authorities are also responsible (with the approval of the Home
Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland) for the size and disposition of
their forces; for paying the members of the forces their prescribed emoluments;
for providing and maintaining police premises; and for exercising disciplinary
functions in relation to the most senior officers.
Central Authority
Co-ordination in the administration of the police service is exercised through
detailed police regulations which are issued by the Home Secretary and the Secre¬
tary of State for Scotland under the Police Act, 1919, and the Police (Scotland) Act,
1956. The police regulations cover such matters as organisation, discipline, pay,
allowances, pensions, clothing, and conditions of service of the members of all
police forces to which the Acts apply.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION XOI
The Police Council for Great Britain, a negotiating body established in 1953
(which is representative on the one side of all ranks of the police service and on the
other of the local police authorities, the Home Office and the Scottish Home
Department), has power to reach agreement on conditions of service in the police
forces and on certain procedural matters. It also advises the ministers on police
pensions and any other matter which may be referred to it by the ministers or
any other body concerned. In their supervisory responsibilities, the ministers are
assisted by Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Constabulary, of whom there were five
(in addition to a woman assistant inspector for the women police) in England and
Wales, and one in Scotland in 1959. Each inspector is responsible for a certain
number of forces, and satisfies himself of their continuing efficiency by annual
inspections, ad hoc visits and consultations when particular problems arise. The
inspectors report to the ministers on the condition of all the forces, with the
exception of the metropolitan police force, for which the Home Secretary has a
direct responsibility and which is not inspected.
All police authorities receive a Government grant equal to half their net
expenditure reckoned in accordance with the provisions of orders made under the
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions Act, 1950 (as regards England and Wales)
and the Police (Scotland) Act, 1946 (as regards Scotland). These orders empower
the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland to withhold the grant,
in whole or in part, permanently or for such time as they may determine, if they
are not satisfied that a police area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly
maintained and administered, or that the rates of pay or allowances are as
prescribed or approved by them.
Police Officers
There are several different kinds of police officer in Great Britain: regular police
officers who usually serve for 25 years or more and thereafter retire on pension;
members of the first police reserve, which is composed almost entirely of police
pensioners or men with previous police experience who are prepared to give whole¬
time paid service to a particular force in an emergency, whether national or local;
and special constables, who are volunteers who perform short periods of duty
without pay in their spare time from their normal occupations.1
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the ages
of 19 and 30, although an exception may be made, in special circumstances approved
by the ministers and on the recommendation of the appointing authority, in the
case of men of over 30 years of age. Women entrants in England and Wales must
e between the ages of 20 and 35, and in Scotland between 20 and 30 years old.
The standard police ranks in Great Britain, except in the metropolitan police
distnct, are: chief constable, superintendent, inspector, sergeant and constable.
I he tollowing ranks may also be adopted in areas where varying degrees of
responsibility make intermediate ranks necessary: assistant chief constable, chief
superintendent, chief inspector and, in England and Wales only, station inspector,
station.sergeant and acting sergeant. In the metropolitan police district the chief
officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis. He is assisted by a deputy
commissioner and four assistant commissioners. Next in rank are commanders,
then deputy commanders; thereafter (i.e. from chief superintendent downwards)
the ranks are the same as in the rest of the country. In the City of London the
ranks are the same as in the provinces, except that the chief officer is the
Commissioner of Police and the second in command is an assistant commissioner.
ject to stricUmitation?151071116111 °f Special constables> other than in emergencies, is sub-
o
At
102
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union, since it is a basic
principle of the service that its members must not only be free from political bias,
but must also be seen to be free of it. The Police Act, 1919, however, laid it down
that the police should have statutory representative organisations of their own.
There are now several organisations representing the various police ranks, including
the Police Federation in England and Wales and the Scottish Police Federation,
to which all inspectors, sergeants and constables belong. Any branch or committee
of the federations may make representations to the chief officer or police authority
concerned, or to the appropriate minister. Delegates from the joint central I
committees of the two federations sit on the police councils.
Police Cadets
Police cadets are recruited by most forces from among youths between 15 and 18
years of age, so that prospective constables shall have had some training and have l
gained sufficient insight into police duties to make reasonably certain that they wish !
to stay in the police service before they undergo constable’s training. A few forces
also recruit girl cadets.
Civil Staff
A number of police authorities employ civilians to perform certain duties
ancillary to police functions, e.g., as shorthand-typists, switchboard operators,
mechanics, canteen staff and cleaners, in order to release uniformed personnel for
police duties. In 1959, the civil staff employed by the police authorities in England
and Wales (outside the metropolitan district) was 10-7 per cent of the actual
strength of the uniformed force.
Police Duties
Every police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office. ;
His powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by common law, are
exercised by him by virtue of his office and cannot be exercised on the responsibility
of any person but himself. Thus, unless acting in pursuance of a magistrate’s
warrant, a police officer is liable for any wrongful or mistaken action on his part,
for he is not the servant of the police authority, and in discharging his duties must
rely on his own discretion and his own knowledge of the law.
The many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from the
protection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic control to
criminal investigation, arresting persons committing offences or, in certain cases,
under suspicion of acting in an unlawful way, and, in England and Wales, preparing
and presenting straightforward cases in magistrates’ courts.
All police forces have their own criminal investigation departments, and many
have other specialised departments, including motor patrols, river police (in
districts which include long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted branch
(for maintaining order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
Centrally Run Services
During recent years a number of common services have been established to
supplement those provided by the police authorities for their own use. In England
and Wales, such services include a training service, which provides eight residential j
district training centres and a central police college; an installation and maintenance
service of wireless equipment for the police; a forensic service, which provides
laboratories for the use of regional groups of forces; and arrangements for
conducting centralised police promotion examinations. In Scotland, there is a
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
103
central police college, which provides training courses for recruits and courses of
higher training; but the installation and maintenance of wireless equipment is a
direct charge upon the police authorities concerned and there is no centrally run
forensic science service. The resources of the Glasgow police force’s criminal
investigation department (which includes a finger-print bureau and an extensive
laboratory service) are, however, made available to other forces, and the univer¬
sities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews render assistance when
required.
A number of national services are provided by the metropolitan police force,
whose functions in this respect include: (1) the maintenance of criminal records and
finger-prints, which are available to all police forces of the United Kingdom and
to certain foreign forces; (2) the publication of the Police Gazette,1 which contains
particulars of people wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is
supplied without charge to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain
other Commonwealth and foreign forces; (3) the organisation and control of the
special branch of the criminal investigation department at New Scotland Yard,
whose duties include the physical protection of royalty, some ministers, and
distinguished foreign visitors; and (4) the carrying out of extradition orders made
by the courts. The metropolitan police force is also the agent in the United
Kingdom of the International Police Commission (Interpol). For certain of these
services, the metropolitan police force receives an additional Exchequer grant.
POLICE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The Royal Ulster Constabulary comes under the direction of the Inspector
General, who is responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. It undertakes the
policing of the whole of Northern Ireland, its cost being borne by the Northern
Ireland Exchequer with a nominal contribution from the county borough of Belfast.
The strength of the Royal Ulster Constabulary in 1959 was approximately
2,890, including women. The Inspector General has, under his immediate command,
a deputy inspector general, a commissioner for the City of Belfast, and a county
inspector for each of the six counties. The area is further sub-divided into districts,
each district coming under a district inspector and each sub-district under a
head constable or a sergeant. Conditions of service and pay follow closely on the
lines of the police service in Great Britain, and the general duties pertaining to
the various ranks are much the same. Although the more senior ranks bear different
titles, the ranks of head constable, sergeant and constable are broadly equivalent
to the three junior ranks in the Great Britain police service.
The Ulster Special Constabulary also comes under the direction of the Inspector
General. In the main, this force is a part-time body, and, apart from training, its
duties consist in affording assistance to the Royal Ulster Constabulary on special
occasions; if necessary, however, its part-time personnel may be mobilised for
full-time duty. In 1959, the Ulster Special Constabulary included 13,800 part-time
members, of whom 1,570 were mobilised, and 100 full-time personnel.
THE FIRE SERVICE
The fire services in Great Britain are organised on a local basis, subject to a
measure of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England and Wales)
and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire services in Northern Ireland are
1 A Scottish Police Gazette is published by the City of Glasgow Police Force.
H
104 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
controlled by two authorities, the Belfast Corporation and the Northern Ireland
Fire Authority, which are responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. Every part
of the United Kingdom is covered by a public fire brigade.
FIRE SERVICES IN GREAT BRITAIN
In 1959, there were 135 local authority fire brigades in England and Wales and
11 in Scotland.
Fire Authorities
The responsibility for fire-fighting functions, which was vested in the two
ministers on a national basis as an emergency measure during the second world
war, was restored in 1948 to local government control under the Fire Services
Act, 1947. The effect of the Act was to transform the National Fire Service (estab¬
lished in 1941) into separate fire brigades administered, in England and Wales, by
the county or county borough councils, which were created the fire authorities for
their areas and were given powers and duties which they exercise either separately
or as combined authorities where neighbouring councils care to make such arrange¬
ments to increase the efficiency of the service. The London County Council
is in direct control of the London Fire Brigade, which serves all London, including
the City of London. In Scotland, the local authorities are grouped in eleven areas
each with a single brigade; with the exception of Glasgow, where the town council
of the city is the responsible authority, each area is administered by a joint
committee representative of the councils of the counties and large burghs in the
area.
Central Control
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland are empowered to
make regulations prescribing such matters as the maintenance of discipline,
qualifications for appointment, promotion, and pensions in the local fire brigades.
In matters affecting the fire brigades as a whole (excluding discipline and similar
matters), each minister is advised by the appropriate Central Fire Brigades Advisory
Council, consisting of representatives of the local authority associations, represen¬
tatives of the chief officers (firemasters in Scotland) and other members of the
brigades, and other persons having special qualifications for the purpose. The
advisory councils are not concerned with the conditions of service of members of
the brigades. On these subjects the ministers are advised by the National Joint
Council for Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades in Great Britain and the National
Joint Council for Chief Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades in Great
Britain.
Central control is also exercised through the inspectors of fire services, whose
duties include advising the ministers on technical matters. In 1959, there were
12 inspectors and assistant inspectors and one woman staff officer in England and
Wales, and one inspector and one assistant inspector in Scotland.
Establishment Schemes
Each fire authority is required to draw up a scheme showing the establishment
of officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and loca¬
tion of fire stations and the number and type of vehicles and appliances considered
necessary for the provision of an all-over cover of its area. While details of
establishment schemes (which must have ministerial approval) vary considerably
according to the fire risks in the area concerned, there are, in the whole of England
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
105
and Wales, approximately 19,500 whole-time and 14,250 part-time firemen,
operating almost 4,000 fire-fighting appliances (including pumps, turntable ladders,
water tenders, and emergency and salvage tenders) housed in some 1,600 fire
stations. In Scotland, there are approximately 2,000 whole-time and 2,600 part-
time firemen, 600 fire-fighting appliances, and 320 fire stations.
It is the duty of each fire authority to purchase such vehicles and equipment as
are required under the establishment scheme. Equipment is standardised, and
appliances are bought by fire authorities to requirement specifications, which ensure
that essential standards are maintained and yet allow sufficient freedom of design
to meet local requirements.
Operational Methods
Each fire authority is required to appoint a chief officer (firemaster in Scotland)
to be the chief administrative and executive officer for the fire services in its area.
The appointment must be ratified by the Home Secretary or by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The chief officer or firemaster is responsible to the fire authority
for seeing that both the fire brigade and the fire department (which is the admini¬
strative centre and staff headquarters for the fire brigade) are organised and managed
in accordance with policy laid down.
There is a central headquarters for operational control, which is exercised on a
ocal basis by divisional officers in charge of geographical divisions into which
most areas are divided for the purpose. Each divisional officer has at his disposal
a small staff of whole-time, and a varying number of part-time, officers and men;
and he is responsible for mobilising this force in the strength necessary for dealing
with any outbreaks of fire in his division. Constant communication is maintained
between divisional and brigade headquarters; and if at any time an outbreak of
fire should grow beyond the capabilities of a divisional force, help is sent from one
or more neighbouring divisions in its area, or even from the area of another fire
authority. Under arrangements for mutual help made by all fire authorities, the
nearest available force is sent to the scene of a fire, regardless of area boundaries.
In England and Wales, the average number of fire calls a year totals about 158,000,
including those for chimney fires. In addition, there is an annual average of 22,000
special service calls for such purposes as rescuing persons and animals trapped in
dangerous situations, dealing with crashed aircraft, and pumping and salvage
operations. During the past ten years, some 2,500 lives have been saved through
fire service operations. In Scotland, the average number of fire calls a year, including
those for chimney fires, is 21,118; the average number of special services is 918, and
the number of persons rescued through fire service operations during the past ten
years was 1,056.
Firemen
Firemen in Great Britain include: whole-time firemen; part-time firemen—
either ‘retained’ firemen, who undertake, in return for a small retaining fee, to
attend fires if they are called upon to do so, or ‘volunteer’ firemen, who receive
no remuneration; auxiliary firemen, who are enrolled as part of the local authority
civil defence organisation as members of individual brigades under the command
of chief officers or firemasters, and whose activities are restricted (except in a
war emergency) to such duties as are desirable for training; and members of fire¬
fighting organisations with specialised functions, which are outside the scope of
the 1947 Act, e.g., those maintained by the War Office, the Air Ministry, the
Ministry of T ransport and Civil Aviation and by some of the more important
industrial and commercial concerns.
io6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ranks in the fire services (for men) are chief officer, assistant chief officer (fire-
master and assistant firemaster in Scotland), divisional officer, assistant divisional
officer, station officer, sub-officer, leading fireman and fireman. Ranks in the
women’s branch, which is mainly concerned with controls, administrative duties
and duties of a clerical nature, are (for Great Britain as a whole) group officer,
assistant group officer, senior leading firewoman, leading firewoman, and fire-
woman. Promotion in the lower ranks of the fire-fighting forces is by examination
and by merit, and in the higher ranks by merit only.
Recruits and junior ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive
practical training and theoretical instruction in a number of subjects, including
physics, chemistry, hydraulics, building construction, industrial processes, and the
law, at training schools run by fire authorities and refresher courses arranged by
fire departments. In Scotland, similar training is carried out at a central training
school which is the responsibility of the Scottish Home Department. Courses for
officers and potential officers of fire authority brigades are held at the Fire Service
College, at Wotton House, near Dorking, Surrey, which is maintained by the
Home Office and the Scottish Home Department as the central training institution
for the fire services. The college also provides intensive courses for fire prevention
officers.
Finance
Every fire authority is required to submit to the Home Secretary or to the
Secretary of State for Scotland an annual statement showing its expenditure and
income in connection with the provision of fire services during the preceding year;
the local authorities bear the cost of maintaining the services, the Exchequer
contribution being included in the general grant.
Research
Research into all aspects of fire prevention and fire-fighting is directed mainly
by the Joint Fire Research Organisation; the cost of its work is shared equally
between the Government and the Fire Offices’ Committee (a committee of the
insurance companies dealing in fire risks). The organisation controls a fire research
station at which practical tests are carried out.
FIRE SERVICES IN NORTHERN IRELAND
In Northern Ireland, the Belfast Corporation controls the Belfast Fire Brigade
and is responsible for the area inside the city boundary, and the Northern Ireland
Fire Authority covers the rest of the country outside Belfast.
The Belfast Fire Brigade maintains five whole-time stations and has an establish¬
ment of 190 officers and men manning 13 appliances, while the Northern Ireland
Fire Authority has one whole-time station in Londonderry and 44 other stations
throughout the remainder of the area, and an establishment of 90 whole-time
officers and men and 650 part-time firemen, manning 69 appliances.
Ranks of Firemen
The ranks of firemen in Northern Ireland are: for the Northern Ireland Fire
Authority—fire force commander, divisional officer, assistant divisional officer,
senior company officer, company officer, section leader (retained brigades only),
leading fireman and fireman; and for the Belfast Fire Brigade—chief officer, deputy
chief officer, divisional officer, assistant divisional officer, station officer, sub-officer,
leading fireman and fireman.
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
107
Finance
The Fire Services Acts (Northern Ireland), 1947-56, under which the fire
authorities were established, provided that the amount of fire service grant payable
to the Northern Ireland Fire Authority should be 50 per cent of the loan charges
in respect of capital expenditure which did not exceed £60,000, and 25 per cent
of the amount (if any) by which the loan charges exceeded £60,000, together with
50 per cent of the first £150,000 of other net expenditure and 25 per cent of the
excess over that amount. Expenditure in excess of the fire service grant is appor¬
tioned among the local authorities liable to contribute to the funds of the authority.
Under the Fire Services Acts, the Belfast Fire Brigade cannot qualify for the
payment of fire service grant.
III. DEFENCE
THE DEFENCE SYSTEM
An adequate general survey of the principles which govern United Kingdom
defence policy is possible only in the wider context of the United Kingdom’s
international relationships, its place in the Commonwealth and in world affairs,
and its responsibilities towards British dependent and protected territories—
subjects which, as explained in the Introduction, fall outside the scope of this
handbook. This chapter, therefore, can attempt little more than an outline of the
present pattern of the development of Britain’s armed forces.
DEFENCE POLICY
The national defence policy has been increasingly based on the realisation that
no country can protect itself in isolation and the defence of Britain is possible only
as part of a system of collective defence. Policy is therefore determined largely by
Britain’s obligations to contribute to the collective defence organisations of which
it is a member—the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and Western
European Union, the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO, formerly the Baghdad
Pact), and the SEATO defence system in South-East Asia—as well as to discharge
its own special responsibilities in many parts of the world; and defence planning is
carried out in close co-operation with Britain’s partners in these organisations.
Close liaison is maintained with other Commonwealth countries, between whose
forces there is considerable standardisation of equipment, weapons and training
techniques and interchange of personnel.
At the same time the United Kingdom continues to work for the attainment of
international agreement on the control of all forms of armaments.
Machinery of Higher Defence Planning
The Queen is titular head of all the armed forces. Supreme responsibility for
national defence rests, under the ultimate control of Parliament (which makes
annual financial provision for defence needs), with the Prime Minister and the
Cabinet. Subject to this supreme responsibility, defence problems which engage
the collective responsibility of the Cabinet are normally handled on the Cabinet’s
behalf by the Defence Committee, meeting under the chairmanship of the Prime
Minister. The Prime Minister determines which members of the Defence Com¬
mittee should attend particular meetings of the committee, according to the
subjects to be discussed and the ministerial responsibilities involved. The Minister
of Defence, who is a member of the Cabinet and of the Defence Committee,
answers to Parliament for all matters of policy common to the three fighting
Services—the Royal Navy, the Army and the Royal Air Force. The minister has
authority to decide (subject to the responsibilities of the Cabinet and the Defence
Committee) all major matters of defence policy affecting the size, shape, organisa¬
tion and disposition of the armed forces, and their weapons and war-like equipment
and supply (including defence research and development). He is also ministerially
responsible to the Prime Minister for the execution of military operations approved
108
DEFENCE
IO9
by the Cabinet or the Defence Committee. Recommendations for the more
important Service appointments are submitted by the Service ministers (the
First Lord of the Admiralty, the Secretary of State for War, who deals with the
Army, and the Secretary of State for Air) and the Minister of Supply for the
approval of the Minister of Defence, who, in appropriate cases, seeks the covering
approval of the Prime Minister.
The Service ministers, working through the Board of Admiralty and the Army
and Air Councils, are responsible for the efficiency and administration of the
three Services. The Minister of Supply, similarly, is responsible for the efficient
execution of approved programmes of defence research development and production.
All these ministers are members of the Defence Committee, while consultation on
defence policy between them and the Minister of Defence and discussion of
inter-Service problems take place at meetings of the Defence Board, of which the
Minister of Defence is chairman.
The Chiefs of Staff Committee, which comprises the Chief of the Defence Staff
(who is principal military adviser to the Minister of Defence) as chairman and the
professional heads of the three Services, is collectively responsible to the Govern¬
ment for professional advice on strategy and military operations and on the military
implications of defence policy generally. Its collective advice is given to the
Minister of Defence by the Chief of the Defence Staff, who tenders his own advice,
together with the views of the other members of the committee, if the committee
cannot reach agreement. The Chief of the Defence Staff is responsible for issuing
operational orders, and he is entitled to call on the respective Chiefs of Staff to
make available, to assist him in his functions, the services of the Naval, General and
Air Staffs. The Chiefs of Staff are members of the Defence Board, are in attendance
at meetings of the Defence Committee and may be invited to attend meetings of
the full Cabinet as necessary; they have at all times a right of access to the Minister
of Defence and, when necessary, to the Prime Minister.
Britain’s defence policy is reviewed each year in a White Paper presented to
Parliament by the Minister of Defence immediately before the detailed Estimates
of the Service departments.
The White Paper for 1957—Defence: Outline of Future Policy, Cmnd. 124—set
out a five-year plan for the reshaping of the defence forces in the light of changes
in the international situation, the rapid progress in military technology, and the
need to relieve the burden which defence requirements had been imposing on the
country’s financial and economic strength. This programme, described as involving
‘the biggest change in military policy ever made in normal times’ is now being put
into effect, and progress during the first two years was reviewed in the White
Papers of 1958 {Cmnd. 363) and 1959 {Cmnd. 662).
The Long-term Plan
Britain’s armed forces, the 1957 White Paper stated, must be able to perform
two main tasks:
(1) ‘to play their part with the forces of allied countries in deterring and
resisting aggression; and
(2) ‘to defend British colonies and protected territories against local attack,
and undertake limited operations in overseas emergencies.
‘The aim must be to provide well-equipped forces sufficient to carry out these
duties, while making no greater demands than are absolutely necessary upon man¬
power, money, and other national resources.’
no
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The new plan provides for smaller, highly trained, all-regular forces with
increased mobility, equipped with the most modern weapons and organised on
up-to-date lines. A central strategic reserve will be maintained together with the
means of transport, including airlift, to take it rapidly to the scene of any trouble.
Since ‘the over-riding principle must be to prevent war rather than prepare for it’,
priority is given to the production of the deterrent—nuclear weapons and the
means to deliver them—though it is emphasised that conventional forces armed
with conventional weapons will still be essential.
The intention is that there should be no further call-up of men for National
Service after the end of i960 and that by the end of 1962 the armed forces should
be composed wholly of regulars. The plan involved a reduction of about 300,000
in the combined strength of the three Services, which stood at nearly 700,000
(adult United Kingdom males) in 1957. By 1st April, 1959, half this planned
reduction had been completed. The rate of run-down in later years will depend
on the international situation and the requirements of the regional defence
organisations of which Britain is a member.
DEFENCE AND THE ECONOMY
After the end of the second world war the strength of the armed forces had been
drastically reduced. It was not until growing world tension made it inevitable that
this trend was first halted and then reversed. Following the outbreak of war in
Korea in 1950, the United Kingdom embarked on a programme for building up
its defence forces, at a cost estimated originally at £4,7°° million over a three-year
period.
Between 1950 and 1953 annual defence expenditure was nearly doubled, rising
to some £1,400 million in 1952-53, and over the same period the total strength of
the active forces increased from just under 700,000 to a peak of about 875,000 at
the beginning of 1953. With the end of hostilities in Korea, the programme was
revised to meet the changed conditions and to keep it within the limits of the
country’s economic resources in the face of rising costs. In place of a short
rearmament spurt there was substituted the policy of the ‘long haul’; the pro¬
gramme was slowed down and spread over a longer period.
Nevertheless, the burden on the economy continued heavy. In 1953, defence
absorbed about 11 per cent of Britain’s gross national product, compared with 7 per
cent in 1950. In 1956, some 7 per cent of the working population was either in the
Services or supporting them, and one-eighth of the output of the metal-using
industries—vital to the economy as a main source of exports—was devoted to
defence. The very heavy cost of maintaining large British forces abroad (which in
1956 involved expenditure of some £179 million in foreign currency) placed a
severe strain on the balance of payments. The total net defence budget of nearly
£1,500 million in 1956-57 (after allowing for receipts from United States aid under
the Mutual Security Programme and German contributions to the cost of British
forces stationed in Germany as part of the NATO forces) equalled more than
one-third of total central Government current ordinary expenditure.
The effects on the economy of the new defence policy announced in 1957
are now making themselves felt. The proportion of the working population in
the Services or supporting them is falling (it is now estimated at just over five per
cent), the claims on the metal-using industries are being appreciably reduced
(about one-ninth of the output of these industries is at present being devoted to
defence), and the call on scientific and engineering skills is easing. Because of
the increasing complexity of modem weapons and equipment and the higher cost
DEFENCE
III
per man of regular forces, defence expenditure cannot show a reduction pro¬
portionate to that in manpower. In the face of rising costs and improvements in
Service pay, allowances and conditions, defence expenditure has been held at the
1956-57 level (and in 1958-59 represented about 8 per cent of the gross national
product). It still, however, accounts for about a quarter of total central Government
ordinary expenditure.
Current Defence Budget
The gross defence Estimates for 1959-60 totalled £1,514 million. After deducting
the contribution from the Federal German Government in respect of local costs
of British forces in Germany,1 the Estimate presented to Parliament for 1959—60
was £i,5°2 million.
The allocation of finance between the various Services is shown in Table 5.
Admiralty
War Office
Air Ministry
Ministry of Supply
Ministry of Defence
TABLE 5
Defence Estimates, 1959-60
£ million
After deducting
Gross receipts from
Total Germany
370-70 370-70
441-35 431-35
492-80 490-80
191-80 191-80
17-48 17-48
1,514-13 1,502-13
The Ministry of Defence Estimate consists mainly of contributions to inter¬
national defence organisations, largely to the NATO common infrastructure
programmes.2
Defence expenditure by civil Departments in 1959-60 (including loan expendi¬
ture by the Post Office) was estimated at £18-48 million.
MANPOWER
Each of the three fighting Services is at present made up of a combination of
voluntary recruited regulars and men called up for National Service, and each
includes a corps of women volunteers who form part of the regular forces. An
analysis of the strength of the forces in April 1959, with estimates for i960, is given
in Table 6.
1 Under an agreement announced in May 1958, the Federal German Republic is to pay
£12 million annually for three years towards these costs.
2 NATO common infrastructure’ has been defined as capital investment in basic
facilities, such as airfields, signals systems and headquarters, designed for common use.
By March i959> shared expenditure under the infrastructure programmes amounted to
about £490 million and further programmes had been agreed for implementation by 1961
which, it was estimated, would bring the total to £928 million. The United Kingdom is
contributing about £112 million towards the cost of the programmes.
112
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 6
Active Strength of the Armed Forces, 1959-60
Thousands
Regular (male) . .
National Service
Women (including
nurses)
Totals
1st April, 1959
Navy
95-8
2-2
3-6
101-6
Army
172-9
125-0
6-0
303-9
RAF
142-2
26-0
5-0
173-2
Total
411-0
153-3
14-5
578-8
1st April, 1960 (estimate)
Navy
93
3-9\
0-9 J
3-6
98-4
Army
260-4
5-9
266-3
RAF
160-2
5-1
165-3
Total
515-4
14-6
530-0
Note: (i) Figures are rounded to the nearest ioo and therefore do not add up exactly.
(2) Figures for the Navy include the Royal Marines.
(3) The estimated strength figures of the Army and RAF at xst April, i960, cannot
as yet be divided between regulars and National Service men.
In addition, reserve and auxiliary forces with training liability (volunteers and
part-time National Service men) totalled 589,300 at 1st April, 1959-
The planned figures (United Kingdom adult males) for the all-regular armed
forces for 1962 are: Royal Navy, 88,000; Army, 165,000; Royal Air Force, i35>000*
Arrangements for recruitment and training of regulars are summarised for each
Service separately later in this chapter. Pay, pensions and allowances have recently
been substantially increased and other steps are being taken to improve the
conditions of Service life, including a five-year Service building programme,
estimated to cost £90 million.
A Regular Forces Resettlement Service, set up by the Minister of Labour and
National Service in 1957, assists regular officers and other ranks who are being
retired or discharged prematurely owing to the manpower cuts to find civilian
employment on leaving the forces (see also p. 399)-
National Service
Compulsory military service in peace time was first introduced in Britain in
1939, shortly before the outbreak of the second world war. Under the National
Service Acts, 1948-50, fit male British subjects between the ages of 18 and 26
ordinarily resident in Great Britain are (with certain limited exceptions) liable to
serve for two years in one of the armed forces.1 After this period of whole-time
service they must serve for a period of 31I' years with one of the reserve forces, giving
in all 5i years of whole-time and part-time service. During the latter period they
may be called upon to undergo up to 60 days’ training in all, if required, but not
more than 21 days in any year; with a few exceptions, this liability for part-time
service is no longer enforced.
In October 1955, the Government announced its decision to reduce the size of
the active forces (then nearly 800,000) by slowing down the rate of call-up for
1 The upper age limit may be extended, under the National Service Act, 1955, in the
case of men absent from Great Britain in the last year of their liability. The National
Service Acts do not apply to men born after i94°-
DEFENCE
113
National Service and allowing the general age of call-up to rise from 18 to 19
years. It was also stated that, in general, it would not be necessary to require
National Service men (who have a maximum liability for 60 days’ training during
their 3^ years’ part-time service) to do more than 20 days’ training in all. In the
spring of i957> the decision was taken to plan on the basis that the reduced man¬
power required under the new defence plan would be obtained by voluntary
recruitment and, subject to the fulfilment of this expectation, that there would be
no further call-up for National Service after the end of i960. The last National
Service men will therefore be due to complete their whole-time service by the end
of 1962.
During the run-down period not all men liable for National Service will be
required, and the intake will be diminished by further slowing down the rate of
call-up. It is intended to rely as far as possible on men in the age groups already
called up who had been granted deferment to enable them to complete training
or studies; they will be called up after completing their courses and will be
supplemented by younger men, mainly those not eligible for deferment. It is now
thought that sufficient men will become available from those born before October
I939 and the Government has announced that those born in or after that month
need not expect to be called up.
Those men who may be granted deferment under the National Service Acts
include, in addition to students and others undergoing training, men who are
employed in certain occupations in the national interest, for as long as they are
engaged in those occupations. This provision applies to men in certain coalmining
occupations, merchant seamen, sea-going fishermen who are members of the
Royal Naval Reserve (Patrol Service), some men employed in agriculture,
crofters, some graduate teachers, some highly skilled scientists and engineers,
a very small number of shale oil underground workers, and a limited number of
police cadets.
Postponement of call-up may also be granted on the grounds of exceptional
domestic, business or other hardship. Applications for postponement which are not
granted by authorised officers of the Ministry of Labour and National Service are
referred to independent local committees from whose decisions appeal may be
granted to an umpire appointed by the Crown.
Men registering as conscientious objectors are subject to the decisions of local
tribunals of impartial persons appointed by the Minister of Labour and National
Service, with the right of appeal to an appellate tribunal.
Men called up under the National Service Acts have statutory rights to
reinstatement in their former civil employment.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service calls up the men from civil life
for registration and medical examination and posts them to the Services. The Armv
has been by far the biggest user of National Service men. In 1959, over forty per
cent of the Army’s active male strength was provided by National Service men as
against about sixteen per cent of the Royal Air Force and just over two per cent
of the Royal Navy.
Deployment Overseas
The deployment of United Kingdom forces is world-wide, in fulfilment of
responsibilities under the regional defence organisations of which the United
Kingdom is a member, and for the defence of United Kingdom dependencies A
considerable part of these forces is committed to NATO on the continent of
Europe. Forces are also maintained in the Middle East, the Far East, East and
North Africa, and the Caribbean.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
114
Where appropriate, inter-Service commands are being established overseas.
In April 1958, a single command was established for all United Kingdom land
and air forces in the Arabian Peninsula, Persian Gulf and British Somaliland,
together with the naval forces allotted to the Persian Gulf. A similar inter-Service
command for the United Kingdom naval, army and air forces in the Mediterranean
area is being set up as soon as practicable, and the possibility of setting up a unified
command in the Far East is being examined.
Commissioned Ranks
The following are the main commissioned ranks in the three fighting Services;
each rank is shown parallel to its equivalent in the other Services.
Royal Navy
Admiral of the Fleet
Admiral
Vice-Admiral
Rear-Admiral
Commodore
Captain
Commander
Lieutenant-Commander
Lieutenant
Sub-Lieutenant
Army
Field-Marshal
General
Lieutenant- General
Major-General
Brigadier
Colonel
Lieutenant- Colonel
Major
Captain
Lieutenant
Second Lieutenant
Royal Air Force
Marshal of the RAF
Air Chief Marshal
Air Marshal
Air Vice-Marshal
Air Commodore
Group Captain
Wing Commander
Squadron Leader
Flight Lieutenant
Flying Officer
Pilot Officer
Staff Colleges
Selected officers of all three Services who have had previous staff training or
have been to the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich (London), the Army Staff
College at Camberley (Surrey), or the Royal Air Force Staff Colleges at Bracknell
(Berkshire) and Andover (Hampshire), go to the Joint Services Staff College at
Chesham (Buckinghamshire), where they live and work together and where
particular attention is paid to the inter-Service aspects of staff work. This college
caters for about 150 students a year from the Navy, Army and Air Force, the Civil
Service, and other Commonwealth countries. Finally, there is the Imperial Defence
College in London, to which are sent a few specially selected and more senior
officers from the Services, the Civil Service, and from other Commonwealth
countries.
SUPPLY OF WEAPONS AND EQUIPMENT
The Ministry of Supply is responsible for the procurement of all weapons and
equipment used by the Army and the Royal Air Force. It is also responsible for the
procurement for the Royal Navy of aircraft, some guns and ammunition, guided
weapons and a certain amount of miscellaneous equipment. The Admiralty is
responsible for the procurement of ships and associated equipment.
Production and Research
Production for the Services is carried out to a great extent by private industry
on a contract basis, but also by the Royal Ordnance Factories, the Royal Dockyards
and other establishments operated by the Ministry of Supply and the Admiralty.
The Ministry of Supply’s research establishments carry out research and develop¬
ment on behalf of the War Office and the Air Ministry, and also for certain aspects of
Admiralty requirements, in particular naval aviation. Among the most important
DEFENCE
US
of these establishments are: the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough; the
Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern; the National Gas Turbine Establishment,
Farnborough, the Guided Weapons Establishment at Aberporth, Cardiganshire;
the Rocket Propulsion Establishment, Westcott, Buckinghamshire; the Aircraft
and Armament Experimental Establishment, Boscombe Down, Wiltshire; the
Armament Research and Development Establishment, Sevenoaks, Kent; and the
Fighting Vehicles Research and Development Establishment, Chobham, Surrey.
The Admiralty has its own research establishments, which carry out research on
ships, maritime equipment and weapons (see p. 118) and also on certain kinds of
electronic equipment on behalf of all three Services. Current production and
development programmes are summarised later in this chapter in the sections
dealing with the three Services individually.
Development and production of nuclear warheads to meet Service requirements
are carried out by the Atomic Energy Authority (see pp. 212-3) under contract
from the Ministry of Supply, which is responsible for the completed weapons. The
Atomic Energy Authority is also co-operating with the Admiralty in research on
the development of nuclear propulsion.
Service officers attend courses at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment,
Harwell, and have also been attached to industrial firms manufacturing guided
weapons during the development stage.
Guided missiles are tested at the Ministry of Supply’s research establishments,
and guided and ballistic missiles at the Woomera range set up in Australia under
the Joint United Kingdom/Australia Guided Weapon Project. Service firing trials
of air-to-air and surface-to-air missiles are carried out at Aberporth and at the Army
gunnery range in Anglesey; a range for testing surface-to-surface missiles has been
set up on South Uist in the Hebrides. There is close collaboration with the United
States in the exchange of information and visits by technical personnel.
Some military equipment, including guided weapons, aircraft and radar equip¬
ment, is being supplied to Britain by the United States under the Mutual Security
Programme. Part of this equipment is manufactured in the United Kingdom and
financed by the United States under the ‘off-shore procurement’ programme. Under
this programme the United Kingdom is also making equipment for other NATO
countries in Europe. Wherever possible, weapons and other military equipment are
standardised with NATO allies. The United Kingdom and the Federal Republic
of Germany, for example, are co-operating in the development of tanks, light
tracked vehicles and anti-tank weapons.
In addition to any orders for warships that may be placed from abroad with
British yards, ships of the Royal Navy which have become surplus to United
Kingdom requirements are made available to the Governments of other Common¬
wealth countries and to those of other friendly nations.
Nuclear Weapons
During the second world war, British research workers played an essential part
in the allied project that led to the production of the first atomic bombs in the
United States. After the war, the exchange of information on atomic weapons was
for a time prohibited by an Act1 of the United States Congress (later amended), and
the United Kingdom therefore developed its own independently. The first test
The Atomic Energy Act, 1946 (known as the McMahon Act), subsequently replaced
by the Atomic Energy Act, 1954. Substantial relaxations were made by amending legisla¬
tion passed in 1958, which permits, inter alia, the exchange, with friendly nations, of both
nuclear and non-nuclear parts for weapons and military reactors and of information on
nuclear weapon development.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Il6
explosion of a British atomic weapon was carried out in 1952 in the Monte Bello
Islands off the north-west coast of Australia; further tests took place a year later
near the Woomera rocket range in Central Australia, and early in 1954 it was
announced that delivery of atomic weapons to the armed forces had begun. Further
series of tests were held in 1956 and 1957, in the Monte Bello Islands and at the
weapons proving ground at Maralinga in the South Australian desert. Britain now
has a substantial and growing stockpile of kiloton1 weapons.
In February 1955, the Government announced its intention to proceed with the
development and production of thermonuclear weapons. The first test explosions
were successfully carried out in May and June 1957 near Christmas Island in the
central Pacific, and further tests were carried out in the same area later in 1957
and in 1958. The production of British megaton2 weapons is now proceeding
steadily. The 1958 tests and the exchange of information with the United States3
have enabled important technical advances to be made in the design of nuclear
warheads which will permit a significant increase in the rate of production.
The chief means of delivering these weapons are at present the RAF’s medium
bombers of the V-class. The development is proceeding of propelled stand-off
bombs which will greatly reduce the vulnerability of a bomber aircraft by enabling
it to release its bombs a long distance from the target, outside the range of the
missile defence system. In February 1958, the United Kingdom and United
States Governments signed an agreement for the provision of launching sites in
the United Kingdom for United States Thor intermediate-range ballistic missiles;
these weapons would be used with nuclear warheads in time of war only with the
agreement of both Governments. A British ballistic missile of a more advanced
type, Blue Streak, designed for launching from underground, is being developed
in close co-operation with the United States. Research is in progress into defensive
measures against ballistic missiles and, in August 1958, it was announced that
Britain had developed a device which could detect the launching of a ballistic
missile over a distance of a thousand miles.
THE FIGHTING SERVICES
THE ROYAL NAVY
The Royal Navy is governed by the Board of Admiralty, which has four civilian
and six naval members. The First Lord of the Admiralty is the minister responsible
to Parliament for the Navy. The other civilian members of the Board of Admiralty
are the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary and the Civil Lord, both of whom are
ministers, and the Permanent Secretary, who is a civil servant and responsible for
the general conduct of Admiralty business, including finance. The naval members
are the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff; the Second Sea Lord and Chief
of Naval Personnel; the Third Sea Lord and Controller of the Navy, whose
responsibilities include ship construction and repair, research and the provision
and repair of naval aircraft; the Fourth Sea Lord and Vice-Controller, responsible
1 A kiloton weapon is equivalent to one thousand tons or more of high explosive.
2 A weapon is said to be in the megaton range if it is equivalent to 500,000 tons or more
of high explosive.
3 An Anglo-American agreement, signed in July 1958, made possible the exchange of
information on the design and manufacture of nuclear weapons. This agreement was
amended and supplemented by a further agreement, signed in May i959> which contained
provisions to enable the United Kingdom to buy from the United States component Pfjj®
of atomic weapons and weapons systems, other than actual warheads, and to make possible
the exchange of nuclear materials between the two countries.
DEFENCE
117
for supplies and transport, maintenance and dockyard organisation; the Vice-Chief
of Naval Staff, who assists the First Sea Lord; and the Deputy Chief of Naval
Staff and Fifth Sea Lord, responsible for stating requirements for ships, aircraft
and weapons and for laying down Admiralty policy on aircraft research and
development.
The Shape of the Fleet
When rearmament started in 1950, the Admiralty gave particular attention to
the need to build up anti-submarine and minesweeping forces, and to expand the
Fleet Air Arm. The building of aircraft carriers and ‘Daring’ class destroyers
already in hand was therefore pressed forward as quickly as possible, and a large
programme of modernisation and conversion of ships and a much increased
building programme were started.
The new defence plans, announced in 1957, envisage a Navy that is smaller than
in the past but highly mobile. The carrier will continue to be the core of the new
Navy. Grouped round the carriers will be supporting ships carrying the latest
weapons for dealing with air, surface and underwater attacks and capable of acting by
themselves on detached service. Apart from carriers, the number of large ships will
be restricted to the minimum. Many ships in reserve, including battleships, are
being disposed of.
The modern carriers have, or are being equipped with, the angled flight deck,
the steam catapult, the automatic aircraft positioning device, and the mirror and
‘Audio’ landing aids (all British inventions), and an advanced type of radar
equipment. A new carrier, Hermes, is expected to join the Fleet early in i960, and
will be equipped to carry the Scimitar, the Sea Vixen and the NA.39 (when the
latter comes into service) as well as anti-submarine helicopters. The reconstructed
Victorious—one of the best equipped carriers in the world—joined the Fleet in
1958. In 1959, three front-line carriers,—Victorious, Centaur, and Albion—were in
the active Fleet; a fourth, Eagle, was being modernised; a fifth, Ark Royal, was
refitting, and a sixth, Bulwark, was being converted into a commando carrier.
The first of the three Tiger’ class cruisers, with fully automatic armament and
the latest control equipment, was commissioned in March 1959. Construction of
two of the four guided missile destroyers on order began early in 1959, and
construction of a third began later in the year. Trials of the Seaslug missile, with
which these ships will be equipped, have shown this to be a most effective weapon
for the interception of attacking aircraft. The guided missile destroyers, in common
with the majority of other ships, will also carry the shorter-range guided missile
Seacat for close air defence.
In the five-year period from the beginning of 1956 to the end of i960, 24 new
anti-submarine frigates, 8 new anti-aircraft frigates and 13 new submarines will
have joined the Fleet; in the same period, 3 anti-submarine frigates and 14
submarines will have been modernised. Three of the fast long-range submarines
of the ‘Porpoise’ class had been commissioned by the spring of 1959, and by the
end of i960 eight of this class are expected to be in service.
One of the main purposes of the Reserve Fleet is to have ready, at short notice,
ships to replace those in the Active Fleet which are damaged or withdrawn for
refit or modernisation. Under the new defence policy the Reserve Fleet is to be
smaller than in the past, but is being maintained at a higher state of readiness.
Afloat support to the Fleet for replenishment at sea, or in harbours or anchor¬
ages, is provided by the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service, comprising tankers, store¬
issuing ships, tugs and salvage vessels. These ships fly the Blue Ensign and are
manned by Merchant Navy officers and seamen.
n8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and Development
Much experimental work has been carried out, with the Atomic Energy Authority,
on Dreadnought, the Navy’s first nuclear-propelled submarine. Construction work on
Dreadnought was begun in June 1959 and a nuclear-propulsion unit has been l
purchased from the United States. Fundamental investigations are also in hand for IN
the development of counter-measures against submarines with increased under- i
water speed. Research is proceeding with the aim of providing automatic means for j
handling tactical information in warships.
Research and development work to meet the Navy’s modern requirements for
weapons is now concentrated in two establishments. At Portsdown (near Ports- !
mouth), the design and development of ship-borne gunnery and guided missile i
systems is carried out. At Portland (Dorset), all aspects of work on underwater
detection are co-ordinated with work on underwater weapons.
The close relationship between the United Kingdom and the United States of
America is being continued, as well as collaboration with other members of the
Commonwealth. Several valuable items of new equipment have been brought into
service through the United States Mutual Weapons Development Programme and
certain naval projects are being discussed with countries of the Western European
Union.
Commands and Naval Dockyards
The Navy’s main home commands are Portsmouth, Plymouth, The Nore,
Scotland (Rosyth) and the Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet. As one of the
steps to be taken to ensure that available resources are used to the best advantage,
it was announced in February 1958 that the Nore Command (based on Chatham)
would be abolished and its functions transferred to other commands by April 1961. 1
A major reorganisation of the Navy’s dispositions overseas was also announced in
the same month. In the North Atlantic and Mediterranean area, where command
arrangements are integrated with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, United ^
Kingdom naval forces are to be equipped predominantly for an anti-submarine
role, and will consist of two aircraft carriers (with a third in reserve), two cruisers
and a number of destroyers, frigates and submarines. In the Far East, the fleet
(based on Singapore) will be an all-purpose force of one aircraft carrier, one com¬
mando carrier and one cruiser, together with destroyers, frigates and smaller vessels.
Small naval forces continue to operate under the Commander-in-Chief, South
Atlantic and South America Station, who, when not afloat, flies his flag near Cape
Town (by agreement with the South African Government); the Senior Naval
Officer, West Indies Station, who flies his pennant afloat; and the Senior Naval
Officer, Persian Gulf, who, on the abolition of the East Indies Command in 1958,
became Naval Deputy to the Commander, British Forces, Arabian Peninsula.
Naval shore support at home and overseas is also being reorganised in line with
the changes in the operational fleet. The reductions include the closing of H.M.
Dockyards at Hong Kong, Malta,1 Sheerness and Portland and of five air stations
in the United Kingdom. At home, the dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport,
Chatham and Rosyth will continue to provide the Navy with major supplies and
repair facilities. Singapore and Gibraltar are the main dockyards overseas.
Fleet Air Arm
The Hawker Sea Hawk and the de Havilland Sea Venom provide the main day and I
all-weather fighter strengths of the Fleet Air Arm, but they are being succeeded
1 The former naval dockyard at Malta was transferred in 1959 to a Maltese company
set up by a South Wales ship-repairing firm.
Barn Owl (Tyto alba)
Song Thrush {Turdus ericetorum)
SOME
BRITISH
BIRDS
( Robin (Erithacus
■H \ rubecu/a melophilus)
Chaffinch
(Fringilla ccelebs)
Lapwing (Vanellus vanellus)
pkylark (Alauda arvensis)
jannets
Sula bassana)
The Blue Streak ballistic missile in its tej
tower at Hatfield (see p. 116)
The Saladin armoured car, like much of the Army’s
new equipment, is transportable by air.
HMS Porpoise, the first of the Royal Navy’s new class of fast long-range submarines
DEFENCE
ug
respectively by the Supermarine Scimitar, which can carry an atomic bomb and
which is fitted, owing to its high speed, with a ‘flap-blowing’ system to facilitate
landing on carriers, and the de Havilland Sea Vixen, with armament which includes
an air-to-air guided weapon, the Firestreak. The first front line squadron to be
equipped with Scimitars embarked in the carrier Victorious in 1958 and the
equipping of other squadrons with this aircraft is proceeding. The first squadron of
Sea Vixens was commissioned in July 1959.
The anti-submarine turbo-prop Fairey Gannet has been in service since 1954
and is being replaced in that role by helicopters. A new strike aircraft, the
Blackburn NA.39, is being developed to replace the JVyvern; it has a greater range
and speed and is able to carry an atomic bomb.
British-built helicopters, the Whirlwind and the Dragonfly, are now in service
with the Fleet Air Arm. A more powerful all-weather helicopter, the Wessex, has
been ordered as a replacement for the Whirlwind and will become the Navy’s main
anti-submarine aircraft.
Royal Marines
The Corps of Royal Marines is a body of men trained for service on sea or land.
Its official existence dates from 1664. The present-day functions of the corps are:
(1) to provide personnel for the Commando Brigade;
(2) to supply detachments for H.M. ships, which {a) man a proportion of the
ships’ armament, (6) provide emergency landing parties, and (c) carry out
guard duties and the like; and
(3) to provide crews for minor landing craft and certain other parties required
for amphibious assault.
Women’s Royal Naval Service
The Women’s Royal Naval Service (WRNS) is an integral part of the Navy.
Its members serve both at home and overseas. It has its own disciplinary code.
Nursing services for the Navy are provided by Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval
Nursing Service (QARNNS) and Voluntary Aid Detachments (VADs). The replace¬
ment of VADs by a new auxiliary section of the QARNNS began in September 1959.
Recruitment and Training for the Regular Navy
The main entry for naval officers is the cadet-entry. Cadetships on the General
List are available to young men between the ages of approximately 17 and 19
years, and those selected, except electrical specialists, spend two years and four
months at the Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, after which they join
the Fleet as acting sub-lieutenants. Cadets chosen for electrical specialisation
spend one year at Dartmouth and then read for an appropriate degree at a
university at Admiralty expense. From the autumn of 1961 a new scheme of
training will be introduced, whereby cadets of all specialisations will spend one
year at Dartmouth on basic naval training and then spend a year at sea in the Fleet
as midshipmen. They will then return to Dartmouth for academic training.
Short service commissions on the Supplementary List for aircrew duties with the
Fleet Air Arm or in electrical specialisation are available to young men with
appropriate qualifications. Doctors, dental surgeons and instructor officers all enter
on short service commissions after completing their professional training, and
permanent commissions are awarded to them according to the vacancies available.
Ratings may qualify for a commission on the General List, on the Supplementary
List for aircrew duties, and on the Special Duties List which has replaced the
Branch List.
I
120
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commissions in the Royal Marines are gained through the same examination as
are cadetships in the Royal Navy, and successful candidates are given a special
training, part naval and part military, which lasts three years.
The age limits for entry as a rating in the Navy are as follows: seaman, engineer¬
ing mechanic, electrical mechanic and naval air mechanic branches, 15 to 28 years;
communications, naval airman and supply and secretariat branches, 16J to 28;
artificer apprentices, 15 to 17sick berth branch, 17^ to 28; artificers (trained),
19I to 28 years. The initial engagement is for a period of 9 years over the age of 18
except for artificer apprentices, for whom it is 12 years over the age of 18. Age
limits for entry into the ranks of the Royal Marines are: marines, 17 to 28 years;
junior entry (general service duties), 16 to 17; boy buglers, 15 to 16J; junior
musicians, 14 to 17J; musicians (trained), 17 to 28 years. Women may enter the
Women’s Royal Naval Service between the ages of 17^ and 28 years for an initial
period of 4 years; most WRNS officers are selected from serving ratings.
On entry, all naval and WRNS ratings and Royal Marines other ranks are given
a basic training at the appropriate school or shore establishment and are given
‘refresher’ courses at regular intervals during their time in the Service.
Reserve and Auxiliary Forces
The Royal Naval Reserve (RNR) consists of volunteer reserves—serving at sea
in the Merchant Navy or the fishing fleets or in civilian employment ashore—who
carry out training in time of peace to meet the Navy’s mobilisation requirements.
Other reserves include the Royal Fleet Reserve (RFR), composed of men who have
completed their service as regulars; the Royal Naval Special Reserve (RNSR),
which includes most of the National Service men who are discharging their liability
for part-time service; the Royal Marine Forces Volunteer Reserve (RMFVR); and
the Women’s Royal Naval Reserve (WRNR).
Royal Naval Minewatching Service
The Minewatching Service, a civilian organisation composed of men and women
volunteers, is responsible in time of war for manning posts around the coast and
overlooking the main navigable waterways. Its object would be to spot mines
dropped from aircraft, and to plot and report their positions.
Sea Cadet Corps
The Sea Cadet Corps, which is administered by the Navy League in conjunction
with the Admiralty, is the oldest pre-Service movement for boys in Britain; its
origin dates from the time of the Crimean War in the mid-nineteenth century. Its
aim is to give technical training to, and instil naval tradition in, boys under the
age of 18 who intend to serve in the Royal and Merchant Navies and also to those
sea-minded boys who do not intend to follow a sea career but will, given this
knowledge, form a valuable reserve for the Navy. It also aims to provide for the
social and educational welfare of the cadets and to develop character and good
citizenship.
THE ARMY
The control of the Army is vested in the Army Council, of which the Secretary
of State for War is president. The other civilian members of the Council are the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for War and Financial Secretary of the
War Office (who is a minister and vice-president of the Council), and the Permanent
Under-Secretary of State for War, a civil servant who acts as secretary to the
Council. The five military members of the Army Council comprise the Chief of
DEFENCE
121
the Imperial General Staff, who is assisted by the Vice-Chief of the Imperial
General Staff, responsible for strategic policy and plans, operations and intelligence,
and the Deputy Chief of the Imperial General Staff, responsible for war organisa¬
tion, equipment, weapons and training; the Adjutant-General to the Forces,
responsible for manpower, personnel, discipline, medical services, welfare, educa¬
tion, and the women’s services; and the Quartermaster-General to the Forces,
responsible for supplies, transport and, jointly with the Permanent Under-Secretary,
works services.
Organisation of the Active Army
The active Army is organised in 30 arms and services1, which include the
Household Cavalry, the Royal Horse Artillery, the Royal Armoured Corps (the
historic Cavalry Regiments and the Royal Tank Regiment), the Royal Regiment
of Artillery, the Corps of Royal Engineers, the Royal Corps of Signals (which
provides land and wireless communications), the five regiments of Foot Guards
(the Brigade of Guards), the regiments of the Infantry of the Line (grouped into
brigades and the Parachute Regiment), the Army Air Corps (which operates light
aircraft on reconnaissance and undertakes aerial observation and liaison work), the
Royal Army Service Corps (responsible for the provision of food and fuel supplies
and transport vehicles), the Royal Army Medical Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance
Corps (responsible for most equipment and stores), and the Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers.
The Women’s Royal Army Corps (formerly ATS) and the Queen Alexandra’s
Royal Army Nursing Corps (formerly QAIMNS) are both corps of the Regular
Army, their officers and other ranks being subject to military law and the Queen’s
Regulations in the same way as members of the other corps.
Within the United Kingdom, the Army is organised into Scottish, Northern,
Southern, Eastern, and Western Commands, London District, and Northern
Ireland District. There are four main commands overseas: Middle East Land
Forces, East Africa Command, Far East Land Forces, and the British Army of the
Rhine (which forms part of Britain’s contribution to the NATO forces).
In July 1957, plans were announced for reducing the Royal Armoured Corps,
the Royal Artillery, the Royal Engineers and the infantry by a total of 51 regiments
or battalions. Corresponding reductions are being made in supporting and
administrative units.
Following extensive trials carried out in the British Army of the Rhine, Army
field formations are being reorganised on the basis of flexible, self-contained
infantry and armoured brigade groups, able to fight, to move and to maintain
themselves under minimum direction from headquarters.
As the strengths of overseas garrisons are reduced, increased importance is being
attached to a central strategic reserve, based mainly in the United Kingdom, which
is being reconstituted on a brigade group basis.
Equipment
By the end of the five-year programme initiated in 1957, the weapons of the
second world war will have almost completely disappeared and the Army will be
completely rearmed with a new range of weapons, vehicles and other equipment.
The programme of rearmament launched in 1950 concentrated at first on the
production of tanks and other armoured vehicles, infantry weapons, and modern¬
ised engineering and signal equipment. The Army was equipped with a complete
1 These arms and services include the women’s corps.
122
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
new range of wheeled vehicles and with large numbers of the Centurion medium
tank, which proved outstandingly successful during the Korean war. More recently,
a heavy gun tank, the Conqueror, has gone into service.
Increasing emphasis is being placed in current plans on transportability by air,
in order to secure strategic mobility. Certain bulky items of equipment, such as
heavy tanks, cannot be transported by air but, apart from these items, air portability
is a major feature of the Army’s new equipment. Equipment transportable by air in
service or being planned includes the Mobat anti-tank gun and light vehicles for
the infantry, the Ferret scout car and the Saladin armoured car in service with the
Royal Armoured Corps, and an advanced guided missile anti-tank system and
the Thunderbird surface-to-air anti-aircraft guided weapon for the Royal Artillery.
Trials are taking place of an air-portable howitzer of Italian design.
For tactical mobility within a theatre of operations, new engineer equipment
for rapid construction and repair and new bridging equipment are on order. To
assist in achieving mobility on the battlefield itself, the Centurion tank is being
equipped with more powerful armament, pending the entry into service of its
successor, now under development; radio communications in the field are being
greatly improved with new equipment which includes the Manpack portable set,
a radio relay set, and a new set for armoured vehicles; a self-propelled gun of
increased range and performance and an improved type of armoured personnel
carrier are being designed; and the Skeeter helicopter is coming into service as a
reconnaissance aircraft. By i960, half the Army will have been equipped with the
British version of the FN self-loading rifle, a weapon of Belgian origin adopted by
the United Kingdom in the interests of standardisation with other NATO forces, and
deliveries of the Sterling (L.2) sub-machine gun will have been almost completed.
Progress is being made in the introduction of surface-to-surface guided weapons,
the first of which are being supplied by the United States. The first guided weapon
course was started at the Royal Military College of Science in Berkshire as early as
1950. In 1955, groups of Army instructors began to receive training in the United
States in the use of the Corporal guided missile; training in Britain is now given
at the School of Artillery at Larkhill. Two artillery regiments have been equipped
with the Corporal, and one of the regiments has joined the British Army of the
Rhine (BAOR); the other unit will also join BAOR on completion of its training.
Two heavy anti-aircraft regiments are being equipped with the Thunderbird
surface-to-air missile. The Australian Malkara anti-tank guided weapon is on order.
Short-range nuclear weapons are also being developed for the Army.
Recruitment and Training for the Regular Army
The normal method of entry for a regular commission in the Army is through the
Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst (Camberley, Surrey), where selected cadets
undergo a course lasting two years before receiving their commissions. This course
gives a general military and academic background for all arms and services, and
young officers on leaving Sandhurst then attend special arm courses to prepare
them for their own arm, some attending technical courses at the Royal Military
College of Science (Shrivenham, Berkshire) and at Cambridge University. Cadets
may enter Sandhurst direct from school or after they have enlisted in the Army
or been called up for National Service. Up to 40 scholarships are awarded each
year on the results of a competitive examination held twice a year. University i
graduates may be accepted for direct regular commissions without previous service
in the ranks.
The War Office also maintains a boarding school, Welbeck College, at Worksop,
Nottinghamshire, where 150 boys are educated for two years between the ages
DEFENCE
123
of 16 and 18 years. These boys pass into the Royal Corps of Signals, Royal Army
Ordnance Corps or the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers. A few may be
commissioned into the Royal Engineers.
A small number of schoolboys are selected to take engineering or science degrees
at the Royal Military College of Science as National Service officers and thereafter
to be granted regular commissions. Regular commissions may also be granted to
other officers already serving on National Service commissions or on short service
commissions. Candidates for National Service and short service commissions are
trained at the Officer Cadet School, Mons Barracks, Aldershot. At this school the
course, which consists of purely military training, lasts for four months. Young
men suitable for short service commissions are now sent direct to the Officer
Cadet School instead of, as hitherto, having to serve for a period in the ranks.
Men wishing to enlist in the ranks must be British subjects between the ages of
17J and 30 years, of good character, medically fit and able to pass an intelligence
test. Those with certain trade qualifications may be accepted up to the age of 33
years. Men can sign on for 22 years (with the option of finishing their Colour
Service at the end of six years or at the end of any consecutive period of three years
thereafter, provided they give six months’ notice in writing). Recruits may choose
the corps in which they wish to serve and their wishes regarding trade training are
met as far as possible.
On entry into the Army, other ranks are trained at the depots or with the
training units of the arms or services for which they have been selected. This
initial training consists of six weeks’ basic military training common to all arms
and services, and a further period of training which is special to the arm or service
concerned. This latter training varies in length of time, e.g., infantry, four weeks;
Royal Signals electronic technician, 22 weeks.
A boy can enlist in the Army as an apprentice tradesman, between the ages of
15 and 17; a junior leader, between the ages of 15 and i6§; and a drummer band
boy, piper or tailor, between the ages of 15 and 17J years.
After the age of 18 years, Army apprentice tradesmen serve nine years with the
Colours and three years in the Reserve. Boys enlisted for training with junior
leader units may serve either for nine years with the Colours and three years in
the Reserve, or six years with the Colours and six years in the Reserve. The object
of the junior leaders’ units is to produce long-term regular warrant officers and
senior non-commissioned officers, and that of the apprentice schools is to produce
warrant officer and non-commissioned officer tradesmen for the Regular Army,
some of whom may become specialist commissioned officers.
Women may enlist into the Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps or
into the Women’s Royal Army Corps between the ages of 17^ and 33 years.
The Reserve Army
With a smaller Regular Army, the Reserve Army, consisting of the Army
Emergency Reserve and the Territorial Army, will have an increasingly important
part to play.
The Territorial Army consists of volunteer officers and other ranks (including
women), National Service officers and men carrying out their statutory obligation
of three and a half years’ part-time service after completing their whole-time service
with the Army, and the Territorial Army Reserve of Officers. With the end of
National Service it will become a wholly volunteer force. Its main role in the event
of war would be the defence of the United Kingdom, but some units might be
needed overseas and all its members are liable for service in any part of the world
when the army reserve is called out by proclamation. Volunteers are required to
124
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
attend annua) camp and to carry out a minimum number of training periods.
Selected units undergo civil defence training each year and attend a civil defence
camp once every four years. While the military authorities are responsible for
policy, training and discipline, local administration of the Territorial Army is
carried out largely by county territorial and auxiliary forces associations.
The Army Emergency Reserve has as its main function to provide essential com¬
munications and the technical and administrative services required on mobilisation
by both the Regular and the Territorial Armies. It consists of specialist units and
pools of skilled men—both volunteers and part-time National Service men—who
can be called upon at short notice to fill gaps in regular units.
Cadet Forces
The Combined Cadet Force (CCF) and the Army Cadet Force (ACF) provide
training on Service lines for boys between the ages of 14 and 18 years. The CCF
provides training in schools in which education is continued to the age of 17 years
or above. Cadets receive a general basic training and then specialised training in the
Royal Navy, Army or Royal Air Force sections. Contingents are affiliated to
regular units and establishments of the Services. The ACF is recruited from schools
which do not raise contingents of the CCF, and from boys who have left school.
Like all the pre-Service organisations, these forces provide citizenship and character
training as well as specifically military training. There is a training centre for the
CCF and ACF at Frimley Park, Surrey.
THE ROYAL AIR FORCE
The Royal Air Force is administered by the Air Council, composed of the
Secretary of State for Air, who is president, and seven other members. The
Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Air is vice-president and the Permanent Under¬
secretary of State for Air, who is a civil servant, is secretary of the Council. The
Service members are the Chief of the Air Staff, who is responsible for strategic
policy and the fighting efficiency of the RAF; the Vice-Chief of the Air Staff,
responsible for inter-Service policy, operations, intelligence, liaison with other air
forces, standardisation and ground defence; the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff,
responsible for the preparedness for war of the RAF, for command, staff and air
training, and for policy regarding future aircraft and weapons; the Air Member
for Personnel; and the Air Member for Supply and Organisation.
Commands
The Royal Air Force is organised into commands administered by the Air Council:
At Home: Bomber, Fighter, Coastal, Transport, Flying Training, Technical
Training, Maintenance and Signals Commands.
Overseas: The Middle East Air Force (headquarters in Cyprus), the Far
East Air Force (headquarters at Changi, Singapore), Royal Air
Force, Germany (Second Tactical Air Force, stationed in Germany
as part of Britain’s contribution to the NATO forces), British
Forces, Arabian Peninsula (headquarters in Aden), and Royal Air
Force, Malta.
Aircraft and Equipment
The spearhead of the RAF is the force of four-engined jet bombers, which is 1
building up steadily. At first, the majority of squadrons were equipped with
Valiants, but the proportion of Vulcans and Victors, with greater performance,
is rising rapidly. Stocks of nuclear weapons are increasing, together with Bomber
Command’s ability to carry them. Improved marks of the V-bombers, now on
DEFENCE
125
order, will carry a propelled stand-off bomb and will form for many years the
foundation of Britain’s deterrent power, though ballistic missiles will gradually
play an increasing part.
In addition to their strategic role, the V-bombers provide reconnaissance aircraft
of great range and accuracy. The present reconnaissance force is composed mainly
of Valiants, but these are being replaced by Mark 2 Victors.
The tactical bomber force in Bomber Command is at present equipped with
Canberra twin-engined jet bombers, but will later be re-equipped with Valiants.
This force is committed to NATO. A tactical strike reconnaissance aircraft of great
versatility, the TSR.2, is being developed for Army support and other tactical
operations.
Surface-to-air guided weapons are being introduced, but manned fighters will
continue to be needed to deal with manned aircraft, the stand-off bomber and
radar-jamming aircraft, to prevent reconnaissance and to investigate unidentified
movements. Fighter Command is equipped with Hunter day fighter and Javelin
all-weather fighter aircraft. The Lightning, the RAF’s first supersonic fighter, is in
production and is expected to be in service by i960. The aircraft is being fitted with
an electronic computer to aid bomber interception and will be equipped for
flight-refuelling to augment Fighter Command’s capacity for overseas reinforcement.
Air defences are being recast in order to concentrate on the defence of nuclear
bases. In 1957, an organisation was set up in the Air Ministry to co-ordinate
and speed up the introduction of defensive guided missiles and their associated
radar, and to integrate them with the existing control and reporting and fighter
defence systems.
The system of control and reporting, which has been built into a highly efficient
organisation, is closely linked with the radar systems of Continental allies. Great
advances in the development of radar have been made in recent years. A recon-
structed radar chain now covers the whole of the United Kingdom. The high
performance of the latest system makes it possible to have greatly improved cover
with a smaller number of stations.
Full-scale service trials of the RAF’s first air-to-air guided missile, Fireflash,
began in 1957 with Swift aircraft, for experimental work and training purposes. A
more advanced missile, the Firestreak (also in service with the Fleet Air Arm), will
be fitted to Mark 7 and 8 Javelins and will be an integral part of the Lightning
weapon system until replaced by a guided weapon of even greater performance.
The development of surface-to-air guided weapons is well advanced. The first
RAF missile station, at North Coates, Lincolnshire, was brought into use for
service trials and training in May 1958. A surface-to-air missile of the semi-active
homing type known as Bloodhound, after full-scale trials, is now being delivered to
the RAF. The RAF is co-operating with the Army in operational trials of the
Thunderbird. More advanced types are being developed.
Coastal Command’s long-range maritime reconnaissance force, which is com¬
mitted to NATO, is wholly equipped with Shackleton aircraft. An improved
version—the Shackleton Mark 3—is now in service, and earlier marks are being
progressively modernised to an equivalent standard.
Transport Command is being re-equipped to provide increased mobility for the
strategic reserves of both land and air forces. A Comet 2 squadron was formed in
1956—the first all-jet transport squadron in any air force—and has proved very
successful. Britannia aircraft are coming into service during 1959-60 for long-
range transport; for short and medium ranges, use will still be made of piston-
engined Hastings. The Beverley freighter, now in service, is a versatile aircraft
which can lift large loads. A small number of Britannic 3 freighter aircraft are
126
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on order to supply the need for a strategic freighter able to carry large military
loads quickly over long distances. An order has also been placed for a military
version of the Armstrong Whitworth Argosy, which will be used as a tactical
freighter for dropping parachutists as well as for normal movement of troops and
stores. Twin Pioneer short-range aircraft are now in service.
Increasing use is being made of helicopters for operations and for the Search and
Rescue Organisation of Coastal Command, which in peace time also operates for
the rescue of civilians involved in shipping accidents or other difficulties in coastal
waters. The Sycamore and Whirlwind helicopters have given good service, particu¬
larly in Malaya, and the Bristol ig2 twin-engined helicopter is on order.
Basic flying training schools are being re-equipped with the Jet Provost trainer
and an order has been placed for a training version of the Lightning. The RAF was
the first air force to adopt all-jet training.
In recent years there has been a great deal of airfield development in the United
Kingdom to provide for the operation of the V-bombers and the new fighters,
and a major programme of airfields, depots and technical facilities has also been
carried out for units of the United States Air Force stationed in Britain.
Recruitment and Training for the Regular Air Force
It is the aim of the Air Council that all pilots, navigators and air electronics
officers shall enjoy commissioned status. Appointment to a permanent commission
in the General Duties Branch may be obtained either through a cadetship at the
Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, Lincolnshire (pilots and navigators only), or by
entry as a university graduate under special conditions. The majority, however,
enter on short-term commissions or under the direct commission scheme which
offers the choice of serving for eight or twelve years on the active list and going out
with a gratuity, or of staying in the Service to qualify for pension. Except for those
entering through Cranwell, where the course lasts three years, flying training takes
about 18 months for pilots and one year for navigators and air electronics officers.
Officers in ground branches are usually found from people in civil life, some of
whom already hold professional qualifications, who enter the Royal Air Force on
short service commissions. Short service officers may be selected for permanent
commissions while in the Royal Air Force.
Permanent commissions may also be obtained through cadetships at the Royal
Air Force Technical College, Henlow, Bedfordshire (Technical Branch), the RAF
College, Cranwell (Secretarial and Equipment Branches), or the Royal Military
Academy, Sandhurst (RAF Regiment). University graduates are also eligible for
permanent commissions under special conditions. Some technical cadets proceed
after one year at Henlow to a three-year degree course at a university.
Women’s Royal Air Force
Women play an important part in the work of the Royal Air Force and of its
reserve and auxiliary formations. The WRAF is an integral part of the Royal Air
Force and its members train with and work alongside airmen in the same trades,
serving both in the United Kingdom and overseas. Under a scheme introduced in
March 1959, some members of the WRAF are recruited to serve at local RAF
stations while living at home. Nursing services are provided by Princess Mary's
Royal Air Force Nursing Service.
Auxiliary and Reserve Forces
The Royal Auxiliary Air Force consists of fighter control units raised and
maintained by Territorial and Auxiliary Forces Associations.
DEFENCE
127
The Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, which is part of the Royal Air Force
Reserve, provides a pool of officers, airmen and airwomen mainly with previous
Air Force service, who, like the personnel of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force, train
on a part-time basis. It includes members of the university air squadrons.
Part-time National Service men serve in Class H of the Royal Air Force Reserve
or they may volunteer to join the Volunteer Reserve or the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.
Royal Observer Corps
Over 15,000 men and women form the Royal Observer Corps, a predominantly
civilian and voluntary organisation, administered by Fighter Command, and
devoted to the specialised tasks of identifying and reporting the movements of
aircraft, and of measuring and reporting on radioactivity in the event of nuclear
attack. 1 he corps originated in the first world war to report the movements of
German aircraft and Zeppelins over Britain and was officially established in 1925.
By 1961, 1,500 underground operation centres will have been built for the corps;
the first was opened in August 1959.
Air Training Corps
The Air Training Corps provides pre-Service training for boys between the ages
of 14 and 18 years. Like the other pre-Service formations, it seeks to inculcate
good citizenship as well as training for the RAF.
HOME DEFENCE
The second world war showed the importance of having trained and organised
bodies of men and women ready to mitigate the effects of enemy air attacks on the
civil population; and the Civil Defence Act, 1948, recognised that a permanent
system of civil defence was essential to national safety. The development of nuclear
weapons, while it has greatly intensified the problems of civil defence and has
called for much replanning which is still in process, has not lessened the need for
an efficient civil defence organisation. Civil Defence, in the words of the 1958 White
Paper on Defence, ‘remains an integral part of the defence plan’.
In the event of nuclear attack, the problems of rescue, fire-fighting and welfare
operations would be greatly intensified by the presence of radioactivity, which
would have to be detected and its extent and intensity measured. The first call
would have to be met by the civilian services on the spot, and these would be
supported by the armed forces in the country at the time, whether regular or
reserve, which were not immediately required for combat operations. The Minister
of Defence is charged with planning the part which the armed forces would play in
home defence, and with co-ordinating the plans of the military authorities with
those of the civil authorities.
The country’s economic capacity limits the effort which can be devoted to
home defence preparations; and the main defence objective must be to maintain
the nuclear deterrent—not to prepare for war but to prevent it. In home defence
the main task in peace time is to keep a local organisation in being as a framework
for expansion if necessary, to provide training equipment and to proceed with
essential research. The Government has declared its conviction that, if the deterrent
were to fail, countless lives could be saved by civil defence preparations made in
advance.
Organisation of Civil Defence
Civil defence planning in the United Kingdom is the responsibility of a number
of ministers each of wLom undertakes the duties which, in war time, would
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
128
represent a natural extension of his peace-time functions. As the development of
effective civil defence services involves much detailed planning at local level, the
central Government has enlisted the assistance of local government authorities, of
industry and commerce and of public bodies of many kinds, including voluntary
organisations such as the Voluntary Aid Societies and the Women’s Voluntary
Services.
In addition to his direct responsibilities under the Civil Defence Act, 1948, the
Home Secretary is responsible for co-ordinating the defence plans of all the civil
agencies of the Government. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for
civil defence matters in Scotland.
In England and Wales, the Home Secretary supervises the civil defence activities
of the police and fire services, and he administers the Civil Defence Corps and the
Industrial Civil Defence Service as well as such matters as shelter policy and the
national air-raid and fall-out warning and monitoring systems. The Civil Defence
Department of the Home Office is under the charge of a Director-General of Civil
Defence, appointed by the Home Secretary. Other Government departments have
direct responsibility for the civil defence applications of the services which they
control; for example, the Ministry of Health is responsible for the hospital and
first-aid services, and the Post Office for telecommunications.
In Scotland, the Scottish Home Department deals with questions corresponding
to those dealt with by the Home Office in England and Wales, and the Department
of Health for Scotland is responsible for such matters as the hospital and first-aid
services.
In Northern Ireland, the Civil Defence Act (Northern Ireland), 1950, places
responsibility for civil defence matters on the Ministry of Home Affairs, which
may arrange for other departments to undertake some functions on its behalf.
The co-ordination of civil defence planning in Great Britain necessarily involves
much work by interdepartmental committees, on which all departments with civil
defence responsibilities are represented, in order that plans and programmes may
be constantly reviewed to take account of changes in the scale and nature of possible
attacks.
England is divided into ten civil defence regions in charge of Regional
Directors of Civil Defence, appointed by the Home Office, and there is also a
Director of Civil Defence for Wales. Their duties include liaison with the armed
forces and the planning of combined exercises. There is no corresponding regional
organisation in Scotland, where planning is carried out centrally, although the
country is divided into zones for operational purposes.
The Civil Defence Services
To provide the personnel required in war for civil defence tasks, the following
services, in which in times of peace only part-time service is required, are raised
in Great Britain1 by voluntary recruitment of civilians, both men and women:
x. The Civil Defence Corps, which was established in May 1949, to assist
local and other authorities to carry out their civil defence functions.
2. The Industrial Civil Defence Service, which comprises civil defence units
formed in industrial and commercial premises.
3. The Auxiliary Fire Service, to reinforce the fire services maintained by
local authorities under the Fire Services Act, 1947- (The Fire Service
would become a national organisation in time of war.)
1 In Northern Ireland there are three main services: the Civil Defence Corps, the
Auxiliary Fire and Rescue Service, and the Hospital Service Reserve.
DEFENCE
129
4. The National Hospital Service Reserve, limited at present to trained nurses
and persons willing to be trained as nursing auxiliaries to reinforce the
National Hospital Service in England and Wales. In Scotland, there is also
an Ambulance Section of the Reserve to provide the additional manpower
for the war-time operation of the Scottish Ambulance Service.
Subject to restrictions regarding age and obligation to serve in the armed forces,
recruits for all services are drawn from men and women who are willing to serve
and who will undertake to train regularly. The Government does not pay the
volunteers for their services but reasonable out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed.
Strengths in Great Britain at 31st March, 1959, were:
Civil Defence Corps . . . . . . . . . . .. 367,500
Industrial Civil Defence Service (at 31st October, 1958) . . 195,171
Auxiliary Fire Service . . . . . . . . . . 19,821
National Hospital Service Reserve . . . . . . . . 62,603
The Civil Defence Corps. This Corps is recruited and organised by certain local
authorities (mainly the councils of counties and county boroughs in England and
Wales, or counties and large burghs in Scotland) in local divisions. The local
divisions are subdivided into five sections1 as follows:
Headquarters:
Wardens:
Rescue:
Ambulance
and Casualty
Collecting:
control of civil defence operations, communications, recon¬
naissance (including the identification of toxic agents),
public guidance and control, reporting of damage and radio¬
active fall-out, organisation of immediate self-help measures,
and the local control of life-saving operations,
rescue of trapped persons and rendering first aid to them,
first aid, conveyance of casualties to hospital, and the organisa¬
tion of stretcher-bearers.
Welfare: escort and welfare of evacuees, care of homeless, assistance
with billeting, rest centres, emergency cooking and feeding,
public information centres.
The Industrial Civil Defence Service. The Government has invited the manage¬
ments of the larger industrial and commercial undertakings to form civil defence
units for the protection of their own personnel and to assist the public civil defence
services. The Government’s aim is to have an efficient civil defence unit in all
premises where more than 200 people work. Units formed under these arrangements
comprise headquarters, warden, rescue, first aid and fire guard sections. These
units train in much the same way as the Civil Defence Corps, and in war would
operate in close association with it and with the other public civil defence services.
The Auxiliary Fire Service. Fire authorities (see p. 104) are required to enrol
auxiliary firemen as members of fire brigades for service which is restricted, except
in a war emergency, to such duties as are desirable for training. This organisation
is known as the Auxiliary Fire Service, but the personnel are members of the
individual brigades in which they are enrolled.
1 Four in Scotland, where there is no separate Ambulance and Casualty Collecting
section, ambulance services being provided by the National Hospital Service Reserve, and
casualty collecting being a warden duty. In Northern Ireland, the Civil Defence Corps,
which is organised directly by the Ministry of Home Affairs and not by the local authori¬
ties, consists of three sections only—Headquarters, Wardens and Welfare; the Ambulance
Service forms part of the Hospital Service, and the Rescue Section has been integrated
with the Auxiliary Fire Service to form the Auxiliary Fire and Rescue Service.
130
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training
Members of the Civil Defence Corps are required to undertake the training
necessary to enable them to carry out the duties of an ordinary member of the
section of the corps to which they belong, and thereafter to undertake a few hours’
refresher training, including exercises, each year. If they wish to increase their
knowledge they may undertake courses of additional and advanced training.
Civil defence instructors are trained either at one of the three central training
schools or locally, under arrangements made by local authorities, in accordance
with directions given by the Home Office or the Scottish Home Department.
Courses and studies for senior officials concerned with civil defence are held at
the Civil Defence Staff College at Sunningdale, Berkshire, and in Scotland, at
Taymouth Castle, Perthshire.
Auxiliary firemen are trained by officers and men of the regular brigades, who
themselves receive special training in emergency fire-fighting at the Home Office
Fire Service Training Centre at Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. They are
encouraged to gain practical experience of fire-fighting by performing stand-by
duty at fire stations to enable them to respond, with regular members of the
brigade, to calls to fires. Exercises are also held, involving the control and operation
of large numbers of pumping and other fire-fighting appliances.
The Police
In time of war the police would continue to be responsible for the maintenance
of law and order and the control of traffic, and they would also be responsible for
certain additional war-time and civil defence tasks. In all these duties they would
have the aid of the Special Constabulary.
Role of the Armed Forces
The Services have a vital role to play in civil defence; all armed forces, whether
regular or reserve, in the country at the outbreak of war who are not engaged in
active operations against the enemy will have to be prepared to assist in the struggle
for survival. The armed forces are in no sense a substitute for civil administration;
the aim will be to support the civil authorities by all possible means. All units of
the Regular and Reserve Armies are trained in peace time for the civil defence
tasks they may be expected to perform in war. In addition, between 1955 and 1958,
some 25,000 men of the Royal Air Force were trained in emergency fire-fighting
operations at Home Office training centres to enable them to serve as firemen in a
National Fire Service.
There is close liaison in peace time between the civil and military authorities
at all levels. Joint exercises are continually being held and everything possible is
being done to align the civil and military chains of command. As a result, the
functions which the military authorities could undertake in support of the civil
authorities have been more clearly defined: there is also a growing understanding
among the civil authorities of the part that the military authorities can best play.
There are two main ways in which the fighting Services can render assistance:
by helping the civil authorities to maintain control; and by the direct employment
of units on various tasks such as aid to the police in the maintenance of law and
order and traffic control, aid to the fire service, assistance in the reception and care
of the homeless, in the treatment and evacuation of casualties and in the clearance of
radioactive fall-out zones, the provision of guards, the maintenance of road, rail
and water communications, light rescue, reconnaissance and the provision and
running of camps.
IV. SOCIAL WELFARE
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain the State is now responsible, through either central or local government
authorities, for a range of services covering subsistence for the needy, education
and health services for all, housing, employment or maintenance, the care of aged
or handicapped persons, the care of children, the nutrition of mothers and children,
and sickness, maternity and industrial injury benefits, widow’s and retirement
pensions and family allowances. Public authorities in the United Kingdom are
spending nearly £3,500 million a year on social services; that is over £65 a year a
head of the population.
Voluntary organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of nearly all
the social services. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics, dispensaries, and
social and recreational clubs before these were provided by the State. They made
themselves responsible for the welfare of the very young and the very old, the
homeless and the handicapped, before it was generally accepted that the whole
community had a responsibility towards these people. Where the services and the
facilities they provided were adequate, they have been encouraged to continue. The
State now supplements these voluntary services and provides financial assistance,
sees that essential services are brought within the reach of every citizen, and ensures
that the necessary standards are maintained.
Many voluntary social services surround and supplement the State services. The
two types are complementary, not competitive, and they merge into each other.
State services often work through voluntary agencies specially adapted to serve
individual or special needs. The officers of the National Assistance Board, in
carrying out their duties, co-operate with the workers of many voluntary social
service societies, while the institutional provision made by the State and by local
authorities for the care of the chronic sick and the aged is supplemented by
voluntary homes of various types for the care of the sick and elderly, most of
whom receive State pensions or benefits.
Voluntary Organisations
The number of voluntary charitable societies and institutions in Britain runs into
thousands. Some of them are large and some are small and local in character. Some
have general aims and others, such as the Royal National Institute for the Blind,
have been established for a particular purpose. The societies co-operate with each
other and with local authorities engaged on the same work.
Foremost among societies providing general social service are the National
Council of Social Service, with the Scottish Council of Social Service and the
Northern Ireland Council of Social Service, and the Family Welfare Association.
The National Council of Social Service was established in 1919, and the correspond¬
ing Scottish Council in 1943, to create a closer link between the machinery of
government and the voluntary activities of the ordinary citizen. The Family
Welfare Association, formerly the Charity Organisation Society, which was founded
in 1869, works on personal lines to help any individual or family in need or diffi¬
culty. It works mainly in London, but there are some 180 voluntary family case¬
work agencies serving other areas of Britain.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
132
There is a Central Council for the Care of Cripples, and the major societies
caring for homeless children are represented on the National Council of
Associated Children’s Homes. Other examples of co-ordination in a specialised
field are the National Association for Mental Health, the Women’s Group on Public
Welfare and the National Marriage Guidance Council.
Societies working on a national scale whose social work is definitely religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, the Committee on Social
Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of Kngland Children s Society, the
Church of England Moral Welfare Council, the Young Men’s Christian Association,
the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Society of St. Vincent de Paul, the
Crusade of Rescue, the Jewish Board of Guardians and the Catholic Marriage
Advisory Council.
War-time organisations such as the Women’s Voluntary Services (WVS) and
the Citizens’ Advice Bureaux continue, with official support, to do very valuable
work. The Citizens’ Advice Bureaux (there are still over 400 of these) act
as interpreters between the Government departments and the ordinary citizen.
WVS activities are many and various. They include welfare work for children,
the aged and the sick, and for certain foreign workers, as well as relief work in
emergencies.
The old-established British Red Cross Society not only aids the sick and wounded
in time of war but works in peace time for ‘the improvement of health, the preven¬
tion of disease, and the mitigation of suffering’. It is, in particular, developing its
welfare services for civilian disabled, invalid and crippled children and the aged. The
members of the St. John Ambulance Brigade and, in Scotland, the St. Andrew’s
Ambulance Association similarly render voluntary auxiliary medical services and
undertake welfare work for the sick and the infirm.
Social Workers
While the voluntary worker giving full-time or part-time service has done pioneer
work in many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an essential part in
probably every service, social services of all kinds increasingly depend for their
operation chiefly on the professional social worker, that is the full-time salaried
worker trained in the principles and technique of social work. Training for many
forms of social work consists of a basic university degree, diploma or certificate
course in social science followed by a specialised training for a particular service.
The latter is sometimes organised by the profession concerned. An attempt is
being made to lessen specialisation in social work. The working party on social
workers in local authority health and welfare services, which reported in May 1959,
recommended the establishment of a national council for social work training and
a new general training in social work, to be available outside the universities,
leading to a national qualification. The courses of professional training provided in
the universities and one or two other courses of comparable standard would continue
to afford the highest qualifications.
Voluntary organisations were the pioneers in the employment and training of
social workers, but Government departments and local authorities now employ a
considerable number of trained social workers of various kinds. Such workers
include some welfare officers and mental health workers; children’s care
organisers; children’s officers, child care officers and homes residential staff
for work under the Children Act, 1948; neighbourhood workers; youth leaders;
almoners; mental health workers; psychiatric social workers; tuberculosis care
workers; housing managers; personnel managers and probation officers in fact,
representatives of most branches of social work.
SOgiAL WELFARE
133
NATIONAL INSURANCE AND RELATED SERVICES
National Insurance, Industrial Injuries Insurance, Family Allowances and
National Assistance together constitute a comprehensive system of social security
in the United Kingdom which ensures that in no circumstances need anyone fall
below a certain minimum standard of living. The Ministry of Pensions and National
Insurance administers the first three of these measures in Great Britain; in Northern
Ireland they are administered by the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance.
National Assistance is administered by the National Assistance Board in Great
Britain, and in Northern Ireland by the National Assistance Board for Northern
Ireland. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their dependants are
the responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance throughout
the United Kingdom.
Appeals relating to claims for insurance benefits, family allowances or war
pensions, or applications for assistance, are not decided by the ministry or the
board but by independent authorities appointed under the Acts.
The Poor Relief Act of 1601 can be regarded as the starting-point of public pro¬
vision for social security in England and Wales. From the beginning of the present
century, and particularly after the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief
of Distress had issued its report, with the influential Minority Report, in 1909, a
strong movement arose against the form and spirit of the poor law as it had been
administered under the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834. The first departure
from the poor law as the sole means of relief given from public funds was the
introduction in 1908 of non-contributory old age pensions granted on a test of means.
Other changes followed, the broad effect of which was gradually to transfer
the old poor law functions from local to central government administration,
and the process was completed in 1948 with the passing of the National
Assistance Act. In the same period there was a development of compulsory insurance
administered on a national basis. The Workmen’s Compensation Act of 1897 fore¬
shadowed the present National Insurance Industrial Injuries scheme; although the
system introduced was not a State-administered insurance scheme, it required
employers to pay compensation to workers for accidents at work. In 1912
came the National Health Insurance scheme and with it the introduction of the
contributory principle on which all later measures have been based. In return for a
small weekly contribution it provided a small cash payment and medical treatment
without charge during sickness. It applied only to a limited number of the lower-
paid workers. In 1912 also a limited scheme of unemployment insurance was started.
This was extended in 1920 to cover the great majority of employed persons, a very
necessary provision in view of the large-scale unemployment of the inter-war
years. In 1926 contributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans were
introduced.
By the beginning of the second world war the social services in Britain were
among the best in the world, but they lacked co-ordination by the very fact of their
piecemeal development, and they were not universal.
Under the stimulus of war, when plans for post-war reconstruction were being
formulated, Lord (then Sir William) Beveridge was invited by the National Coali¬
tion Government to investigate the country’s existing social insurance system. In
1942 the Beveridge Report was published; it recommended the creation of a com¬
prehensive and unified system of social insurance. The report aroused intense
interest and was accepted in general by the Government as the basis on which the
future social security structure should be built.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
134
In the immediate post-war years a series of Acts introduced a new comprehensive
system which became fully operative on 5th July, 1948. Adjustments have been
made by a number of subsequent Acts.
Family allowances and national insurance benefits or allowances other than
maternity, unemployment or sickness benefit, are included in the taxable income
on which income tax is assessed. On the other hand, various income tax reliefs and
exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of dependants
(see pp. 429 and 430).
Reciprocity
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a single
system. Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man as well as Great Britain are party
to most of the agreements with other countries. Reciprocal agreements on national
insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances are in operation with Belgium,
Norway and Jersey. Agreements with Malta, France, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia cover national
insurance and industrial injuries insurance. With Australia and New Zealand
there are agreements on national insurance and family allowances. There is an
agreement with Guernsey on family allowances only, with Cyprus on national
insurance, with Denmark on industrial injuries insurance, and an agreement with
the Irish Republic which covers national insurance and contains some industrial
injuries provisions in relation to seafarers. Other agreements are under negotiation.
FAMILY ALLOWANCES
Family allowances have been provided by the State since August 1946, under the
Family Allowances Act of June 1945- Nearly si million allowances are being paid
in Great Britain to just under 3^ million families with two or more children. An
allowance is paid for each child other than the first or only child below the age
limits. The age limits are 15 years for children who leave school at that age, 16
years for those who are handicapped, and 18 years for those who remain at school
or are apprentices. The rate of the allowance is 8s. a week for the second child and
jos. a week for the third and each subsequent child below the age limits.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit the
family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid either to the mother
or the father. There is no insurance qualification, and parents who are not British
subjects may claim allowances if they satisfy a special residence qualification.
The corresponding scheme in Northern Ireland makes similar provision for
family allowances.
NATIONAL INSURANCE
The National Insurance Act, 1946, came into full operation on the 5th July, 1948.
It has been amended by the National Insurance Acts, 1949 and 1951, the Family
Allowances and National Insurance Acts, 1952 and 1956, and the National Insurance
Acts, 1953-59. The Acts apply, in general, to everyone over school-leaving age
living in Great Britain. There are similar schemes in Northern Ireland and the
Isle of Man.
Contributors are divided into three classes:
Class 1—Employed persons. Those who work for an employer under a contract
of service or are paid apprentices about 22 million.
omen’s Voluntary Services’ meals-on-wheels bring a hot dinner to this blind man twice a week.
Commonwealth students at the Northampton College of Advanced Technology,
London. Many Commonwealth students from overseas are in Britain (see p. 172).
A tutorial at Sidney Sussex College in the University of Cambridge (see p. 167).
SOCIAL WELFARE
I3S
Class z—Self-employed persons. Those in business on their own account and
others who are working for gain but do not work under the control of an
employer—nearly i j million.
Class 3—Non-employed persons. All persons insured who are not in class 1 or 2
—about half a million.
This general classification is subject to certain modifications, made by regulations,
to meet special circumstances. Married women engaged only in their own house¬
hold duties are, in general, provided for by their husbands’ insurance and cannot
be insured in their own right unless they were insured under the old scheme
on the 5th July, 1948, and continued to pay contributions as non-employed persons,
or unless they have since taken up paid work. Employed married women may choose
whether to pay separate contributions themselves or to rely on the cover provided
by their husbands’ contributions, which make them eligible for maternity and
home confinement grants, retirement pension at lower rate, widow’s benefit and
death grant. Students receiving full-time education and unpaid apprentices need
not pay contributions. Up to the age of 18, contributions are credited to them.
Over that age they may, if they wish, pay as non-employed persons (class 3) and
thus safeguard their title to widow’s benefit and to retirement pension at full rate.
Self-employed and non-employed persons whose income is not more than £156 a
year can apply to be excepted from liability to pay contributions.
Contributions
The main weekly rates of contribution in August 1959 are shown in Table 7.
TABLE 7
Weekly National Insurance and National Health Service Contributions
Class 1
Employed persons:
Paid by employee
Paid by employer
Totals
Class 2
Self-employed persons
Class 3
Non-employed persons
men(<z)
National
Insurance
(b)
s. d.
8 OJ
7 n
15 10
9 10
7 5
Health
Service
1 m
5|
2 4
2 2
2 2
Totals
s. d.
9 11
8 3
18 2
12 0
9 7
WOMEN(<2)
National
Insurance
(.b)
6 7J
6 3-0-
12 11
8 4
5 11
Health
Service
s. d.
1 4|
54
1 10
1 8
Totals
5. d.
8 0
6 9
14 9
10 0
7 7
(a) Boys and girls under 18 years of age contribute at lower rates.
(b) Including, for class 1, the industrial injuries insurance contribution of 8d. from
employee and gd. from employer for a man, and 5d. from employee and 6d. from
employer for a woman.
K
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
136
The Exchequer supplements these contributions from general taxation. They
are normally paid on a single contribution card by national insurance stamps
bought from a post office. It is the employer’s responsibility in the first place to see
that the class 1 contributions are paid, but he can deduct the employee’s share from
his or her wages. The self-employed and non-employed must stamp their own cards.
Contributions are usually credited for weeks of unemployment, sickness or injury,
or if widow’s benefit is being paid.
An insured person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions when
he retires, or is deemed to have retired, from regular employment. If such a person
does any work as an employed person thereafter, he must pay an industrial injuries
contribution; his employer’s liability remains the same as shown in Table 7.
Benefits
The scheme provides sickness, unemployment, maternity and widow’s benefit,
guardian’s allowance, retirement pension and death grant. Persons in class 1 are
covered for all benefits; those in class 2 for benefits other than unemployment and
industrial injuries benefits; and those in class 3 for benefits other than sickness,
unemployment and industrial injuries benefits, and maternity allowance.
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before any
benefit can be received, a minimum number of contributions must actually have been
paid since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit cannot be received
unless a certain number of contributions have been paid or credited over a specified
period. For guardian’s allowance and industrial injuries benefits there are no
contribution conditions.
Rates of benefit have been increased since the scheme began. The rates current
in August 1959 are set out below.
Sickness Benefit
The standard weekly rate of sickness benefit for a man or woman over 18 years
of age (except a married wroman) is 50s., with an increase of 30s. for an adult
dependant and 15s. a week for the first or only child under the family allowances
age limits, with 7s., in addition to any family allowance payable, for each subsequent
child. The weekly rate for a married woman is 34s., but she is paid at the 50s. rate
if she is maintaining an invalid husband or is separated from her husband and
cannot get financial support from him.
Unless 156 class 1 or class 2 contributions have been paid since the entry into
insurance, sickness benefit can be drawn only for a year but, in general, it continues
for as long as sickness lasts, provided that 156 contributions have been paid.
Unemployment Benefit
The rates of unemployment benefit are the same as for sickness benefit.
Unemployment benefit is payable in the first place for 30 weeks, but it may be
continued for a maximum of 19 months in all, according to the person’s record of
contributions paid as against unemployment benefit drawn in recent years.
Maternity Benefit
A maternity grant of £12 10s. is payable for a confinement, provided the required
contribution conditions have been satisfied, and a further grant of £12 10s. for
each additional child born at the confinement who is alive twelve hours after birth.
A home confinement grant of £5 is payable where the mother is confined elsewhere
than in accommodation provided free under the National Health Service or other¬
wise paid for out of public funds. A maternity allowance of 50s. a week, begin¬
ning the eleventh week before the expected week of confinement, payable for
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
18 weeks, is available for working women who satisfy the contribution conditions.
These are that in the 52 weeks ending 13 weeks before the expected week of her
confinement, the claimant must have paid 26 contributions at the full rate as an
employed or self-employed person and, for an allowance at the maximum rate, have
a total of at least 50 contributions paid or credited. Increases of maternity allowance
for dependants are payable in certain circumstances at the same rates as increases of
sickness benefit.
Widow's Benefit
There are three kinds of widow’s benefit, paid only on the deceased husband’s
insurance. A widow’s allowance of 70s. a week plus 20s. a week for the first or
only child under the age limits and 12s. a week for second and subsequent children
(in addition to family allowances) is paid for 13 weeks. A widowed mother’s
allowance of 70s. a week is paid following widow’s allowance to a widow who has
a child under the age limits; she also receives 12s. a week, in addition to any family
allowance, for each child after the first. A widowed mother’s allowance at the
lower rate of 50s. a week may be paid, in certain circumstances, to a widow who
has residing with her a young person under 18 years of age (for example, where
there is a son or daughter aged 17 who is neither at school nor an apprentice and,
therefore, is no longer regarded as a child for family allowance purposes). A widow’s
pension of 50s. a week is paid to a widow who is 50 years of age or over at the time of
the husband’s death and has been married three years, or who is 50 (40 if the husband
died before 4th February, 1957) or over when her widowed mother’s allowance ends,
provided three years have elapsed since the marriage. Widowed mother’s allowance
and widow’s pension are reduced by 6d. for each complete is. of the first 20s. of
earnings in excess of 80s. and bos. respectively, and by is. for each shilling of
higher earnings. In the case of widowed mother’s allowance the total deducted in
any one week cannot exceed 50s., whatever the earnings may be.
There are special rules to help widows to qualify for sickness or unemployment
benefit if they are unable to obtain work when widow’s allowance or widowed
mother’s allowance ends.
Guardian's Allowance
A guardian’s allowance of 27s. 6d. a week may be paid to a person who has in his
family a child whose parents have died and one of whom was insured under the
National Insurance Acts. This continues while the child remains in the guardian’s
family and is a child within the meaning of the Family Allowances Act. In certain
circumstances an allowance is paid on the death of one parent only: in the case of
an illegitimate child, a child of divorced parents, or a child one of whose parents is
missing on the death of the other parent.
Child's Special Allowance
A woman whose marriage has been dissolved or annulled may, on the death of
her former husband, be paid an allowance for any children of that marriage who
are below the family allowances age limits. The rate of the allowance is equal to
the rate of the contributions the former husband had been making towards the
support of the children, subject to a minimum of 5s. a week for each child and a
maximum of 20s. a week for the first child and 12s. for each subsequent child, in
addition to any family allowances.
Retirement Pension
Retirement pensions are paid to men at the age of 65, and to women at the age of
60, provided the required contribution conditions have been satisfied and subject
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
138
to retirement from regular employment. From the age of 70 (men) and 65 (women),
however, the pension is payable whether or not the claimant has retired. The
standard rate is 50s. a week. A married woman ordinarily qualifies for pension on
her husband’s insurance at the standard rate of 30s. a week. If after retirement a
pensioner below the age of 70 (65 for a woman) earns over 60s. a week, 6d. is
deducted from the pension for each is. earned over that amount up to 80s. and
is. is deducted for each shilling earned over 80s.
Men and women are encouraged not to retire at minimum pension age and are
able to earn a larger retirement pension by continuing at work and paying contribu¬
tions. For every 12 contributions they pay for weeks of work between the ages of
65 and 70 (men) or 60 and 65 (women) their pension is increased by is. a week.
The pension of the wife of such a contributor is increased by 6d. a week for
every 12 contributions paid by the husband after he has reached the age of 65
and the wife has reached 60, and it continues at this rate up to the time of the
contributor’s death; if his wife survives him her increments of pension are re¬
calculated at the is. rate if the 6d. increases were earned after 16th July, 1951.
A man reaching the age of 65 who continues at work for a further five years can
therefore receive a pension of as much as 71s. a week at the age of 70. If he has a
wife not more than five years younger than himself, their combined pensions can be
1 ns. 6d. a week; if the wife survives her husband her pension can be 71s. a week.
A retirement pensioner is entitled to an increase of 30s. a week for his wife if she
is not entitled to a retirement pension herself, either on her own or on his insurance.
He is also entitled to an increase of 15s. for the first child under the family allowances
age limits, and 7s. for each succeeding child, in addition to any family allowance
payable. If he is not entitled to an increase for his wife, or if his wife is not herself
entitled to a retirement pension, he may, in some circumstances, claim an increase
for a woman having the care of his child or children.
Under the National Insurance Act, 1959, a system of graduated contributions
and pensions, related to earnings, is to be introduced for employed contributors
whose employers do not contract out of the scheme on the grounds that comparable
benefits, not liable to be forfeited on change of employment, are already available
under an occupational scheme.1 Contributors earning less than £9 a week will pay
a minimum contribution, at less than the present rate, but will receive a flat rate,
and not a graduated pension.
The minimum joint contribution will be 15s. 4^- a week for men and 13s. 6d.
a week for women, compared with the present contributions of 18s. 2d. and 14s. gd.
respectively (see Table 7). On earnings above £9 and up to £15 a week, there will
be graduated contributions of 8-| per cent of earnings, divided equally between
employer and employee, running up to a maximum of 10s. 2d. a week for those
earning £15 or more a week, in addition to the minimum contribution.
These contributions, besides qualifying for the present flat-rate national insurance
and industrial injuries benefits, will earn additional retirement pension on the
following scale: each £15 of graduated contributions paid by an employed man, with
the matching £15 paid by his employer, will add one shilling a week to his standard
pension of £2 10s. if he is single and £4 if he is married. For a woman, who becomes
entitled to her pension five years earlier, each shilling unit will correspond to £18 of
graduated contributions paid by her with the matching contributions from her
employer.
The new system will not come into operation before April 1961.  
1 Occupational pension schemes, organised by employers and outside the National
Insurance scheme, at present cover more than one-third of the working population,
including half of the men.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Death Grant
A death grant of up to £25 is paid on the death of an adult, and a smaller sum
on the death of a child, provided the required contribution conditions have been
satisfied. Grants are not paid for persons who were already over pension age on
5th July, 1948. Reduced grants are paid on the deaths of men who were over 55 years
of age and women who were over 50 on 5th July, 1948.
NATIONAL INSURANCE (INDUSTRIAL INJURIES)
The Industrial Injuries Insurance scheme, which replaced the Workmen’s Com¬
pensation scheme in July 1948, provides benefits for personal injuries caused by
accidents arising out of, and in the course of, employment, and for prescribed diseases
due to the nature of employment. It covers practically everyone in class 1 of the
National Insurance scheme and certain others. The relevant Acts are the National
Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946 to 1957. Cover against industrial
injuries and diseases in Northern Ireland is provided to the same extent by the
separate legislation of the Parliament of Northern Ireland.
Benefits
Injury Benefit
Injury benefit for an adult is 85s. a week plus 30s. for an adult dependant
and 15s. for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits and
7s. for each other eligible child, in addition to any family allowance payable. It
is paid when the insured person is incapable of work as a result of an industrial
accident or disease, and payment can continue for a maximum of 26 weeks from
the date of the accident or development of the disease.
Disablement Benefit
Disablement benefit may be paid when injury benefit stops. The amount
depends on the extent of the disablement, as assessed by a medical board; it varies
from 85s. for 100 per cent disablement to 17s. a week for 20 per cent disablement.
For disablement of less than 20 per cent a gratuity is normally paid, ranging up
to £280.
In the following circumstances disablement benefit may be increased:
1. It will be made up to the 100 per cent rate during in-patient treatment in a
hospital for the relevant injury or disease, and increases for dependants may
also be paid.
2. If benefit is being received at the 100 per cent rate and someone is needed to
look after the insured person, a constant attendance allowance not exceed¬
ing 35s. a week (70s. in cases of exceptionally severe disablement) may be
paid.
3. If the insured person is permanently unfit for work an unemployability
supplement of 50s. a week may be paid, with allowances for dependants.
4. If the insured person is unfit to return to his former job, or work of a similar
standard, benefit may be increased (subject to a maximum of 85s.) by a
special hardship allowance of up to 34s. a week.
Death Benefit
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit is
paid to the dependants. ^
For widows living with their husbands at the time of death, a pension of 70s. a
week is payable for the first thirteen weeks of widowhood. Thereafter, if the widow
BRITAIN-. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
140
(1) is entitled to a child’s allowance or was over the age of 40 on ceasing to be so
entitled, or (2) was over 50 years of age, or was permanently incapable of self-support,
at the time of her husband’s death, or (3) is not entitled to child’s allowance, but has
residing with her a young person under the age of 18 who was in her late husband’s
family, or (4) is over 40 years of age when (3) ceases to apply, or (5) is pregnant by
her late husband, she is entitled to a pension of 56s. a week. If none of these
conditions is satisfied, the widow may receive a pension of 20s. a week.
In addition, allowances will be paid for children under the family allowances age
limits. For widows, these allowances are normally at the rate of 20s. a week for the
first or only child and 12s. a week for each other child. For other beneficiaries, the
rate is 15s. and ys. a week respectively.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, are entitled to
pensions, allowances or gratuities. The amounts vary with the closeness of the
relationship and the extent to which the dependants were maintained by the
deceased during his lifetime.
NATIONAL ASSISTANCE AND WELFARE SERVICES
The National Assistance Act, 1948, came into operation on 5th July, 1948. It
provides a unified State service of financial assistance for those in need, replacing
the various services of this kind provided in the past by the State and local authori¬
ties. As the residual service, National Assistance meets the financial needs of all
those people who are unable to maintain themselves (for example, because they
fall outside the scope of the other social security services) and it supplements the
insurance benefits when they are insufficient.
The National Assistance Board is responsible for administering these weekly
cash grants. It has various other duties, including the administration of non¬
contributory pensions under the Old Age Pensions Act, 1936 (still payable on a
nationality, means and residence test to a diminishing number of persons aged
70 years or over and to blind persons aged 40 years or over, who do not receive
pensions under the contributory scheme); the administration of hostels provided
under the Polish Resettlement Act, 1947; and the determination (under the Legal
Aid and Advice Act, 1949, and the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act, 1949)
whether a person’s resources bring him within the Legal Aid Scheme and, if so,
what, if anything, is the maximum amount he may be called upon to pay towards
the cost of his case.1
The National Assistance Board is responsible for influencing ‘persons without a
settled way of living’ to lead a more normal life. It provides temporary accommoda¬
tion for such persons, usually through the agency of local authorities. The board
also runs two re-establishment centres for men who have become demoralised by
long unemployment and who are in receipt of national assistance grants or are
resorting to reception centres.
The provision under the National Assistance Act of residential accommodation
for the aged, infirm and others, of temporary shelter for persons who lose their
homes, and of special welfare services for the blind, the deaf, the crippled and other
handicapped persons is the responsibility not of the National Assistance Board but
of county and county borough councils in England and Wales and, in Scotland, of
councils of counties and large burghs.
In Northern Ireland, financial assistance to persons in need is given under the
provisions of the National Assistance Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, and there is
1 For further information on legal aid see pp. 89-91.
SOCIAL WELFARE
141
also a system of non-contributory pensions similar to that operating in Great
Britain. Under the Welfare Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1949, local authorities,
in their capacity as welfare authorities, provide residential accommodation for
aged, infirm and other persons in need of care and attention. The welfare authorities
also provide special services for the blind, deaf and other handicapped persons.
Welfare Services for the Blind and the Disabled
All local welfare authorities provide services for the blind, either directly or
through voluntary organisations acting as their agents. Most authorities are
providing, or are arranging for, welfare services for the deaf and other handicapped
persons; voluntary organisations also play an important part in this work by
supplementing local authority services.
Services for the blind include a home visiting and teaching service, employing
qualified home teachers, to assist the blind to adjust themselves to their blindness
(special attention is given to the newly blind and to those with more than one
disability, such as deaf-blind persons); instruction in craft work and in the use of
embossed letters for reading and writing; social clubs, holiday and other recreational
facilities; the supply or loan of apparatus, such as wireless sets, embossed and
recorded books, adapted tools and games; residential social rehabilitation and
placement in employment; and an advisory service on the special financial and
other benefits available to the blind (including preventive and medical treatment,
special education, and training for employment). Voluntary organisations for
blind welfare include the local societies and also national bodies, notably the Royal
National Institute for the Blind, the National Library for the Blind, St. Dunstan’s
(for those blinded in the wars), the Scottish National Federation for the Welfare
of the Blind and the Scottish National Institution for the War Blinded.
Welfare services for the blind are well established and progress is being made
with similar services for other severely and permanently disabled persons. The
teaching of handicrafts, the organisation of social centres, clubs and other social
activities, the adaptation of premises to meet individual disabilities, and the
arrangement of holidays, are some of the services most generally provided. Local
authorities are required to keep, in their areas, registers of the blind and of other
physically handicapped persons who wish to register.
Old People’s Welfare
The newer homes provided by local authorities for aged and other infirm persons
usually have accommodation for 25 to 40 residents; over a thousand have been
opened in Great Britain since the end of the second world war. County welfare
authorities in Northern Ireland have provided over 20 similar homes. These
smaller homes are gradually replacing the larger institutions which were previously
maintained by local authorities. There are also about 1,800 small homes for old
people run by voluntary bodies or by private individuals. Most of the 850 voluntary
homes have been established since the second world war, usually with the assistance
of grants from public funds.
A number of home services for old people are provided by statutory and voluntary
bodies with the object of enabling old people to continue to live in their own homes
for as long as possible. Local health authorities supply, under the National Health
Service, home nursing and domestic help (see p. 153); over half the district nurses’
time is spent on the aged or the chronic sick and the same group makes the heaviest
demands on the home help service.
Local authorities are enabled by the National Assistance Act to contribute to
the funds of voluntary organisations ‘whose activities consist in or include the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
142
provision of recreation or meals for old people’. Some 7,000 social clubs for
elderly people have been started by voluntary effort in recent years in all parts of
Britain. Other voluntary welfare services for old people include ‘meals-on-wheels’
(cooked meals delivered to their homes), the organisation of regular friendly
visiting, holidays, chiropody services, and laundry services.
Local Old People’s Welfare Committees have been formed by those concerned
in this work, and are aided by the National Old People s Welfare Council, an
associated group of the National Council of Social Service widely representative
of voluntary and statutory bodies having direct contact with old people, or by the
Scottish Old People’s Welfare Committee, a committee of the Scottish Council of
Social Service. A National Corporation for the Care of Old People was established
in 1947 by the Nuffield Foundation1 to stimulate and to give financial support to
schemes for the welfare of the aged, to maintain an expert technical advisory
service, and to encourage and to undertake research and experiment for the welfare
of old people. The corporation is now concentrating its main effort on home services
for old people. The King George VI Foundation, financed from the fund raised in
memory of the late King, has spent nearly £600,000 on schemes for old people.
The foundation’s aid to old people’s welfare has taken three forms: grants for the
development of existing clubs for old people, the establishment of new clubs, and
the training of workers to help old people.
CARE OF CHILDREN DEPRIVED OF NORMAL HOME LIFE
The Children Act, 1948, which came into force with the ending of the Poor Law,
places upon local authorities in Great Britain a duty to receive into their care any
child under the age of 17 who has no parent or guardian, or who has been abandoned
or whose parents are unable to provide for him temporarily or permanently. Local
authorities must keep a child in care until he is 18 years of age or until he no longer
requires it. Under the Children and Young Persons Acts, 1933-52, as regards
England and Wales, and under the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Acts,
1937 and 1956, local authorities are required also to accept children committed to
their care, until the age of 18, by juvenile courts, as needing care or protection. Both
categories of children are to be treated so as to further their best interests and to
afford them opportunity for the proper development of their characters and interests.
Children in care are, if possible, boarded out with foster parents, who receive
an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home cannot be
found, a child may be placed in a children’s home managed by a local authority or
a voluntary organisation. Many children’s homes are now provided in small houses,
on housing estates or in ordinary streets, where a group of ten or fewer children
live in the care of a housemother or houseparents, the husband following his normal
employment. Other children may be placed in hostels or lodgings or in other accom¬
modation specially suited to their needs. The desirability of returning a child to his
family circle as soon as possible is fully appreciated, and work is carried out to
rehabilitate the family where this is necessary.
To carry out their functions under the Children Act, each local authority (county
council and county borough council or, in Scotland, council of a large burgh) is
1 The Nuffield Foundation was established by Lord Nuffield in 1943 for the advancement
of health and the prevention and relief of sickness; the advancement of social well-being;
the care and comfort of the aged poor; the advancement of education; and such other
charitable purposes as might be declared by Lord Nuffield in his lifetime and by the
trustees after his death. Prominent among the foundations many activities are th(j
promotion of medical, scientific and social research and the development of medical
services and of technical and commercial education. Its resources consist ot a tund 01
£10 million provided by Lord Nuffield and of gifts and bequests from other persons.
SOCIAL WELFARE
143
required to appoint a children s committee and a children’s officer to be respon¬
sible for the care and upbringing of children in the authority’s care. Children’s
officers are assisted by a staff of child care officers who undertake inquiries and who
supervise children placed in foster homes. Regulations for England and Wales safe¬
guarding the boarding out of children by local authorities and voluntary organisa¬
tions and the conduct of children s homes have been made by the Home Secretary.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is the responsible minister in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland, the Children and Young Persons Act (Northern Ireland),
I95°> gave to the welfare authorities of each county and county borough (under the
general direction of the Ministry of Home Affairs) the duty of caring for homeless
and neglected children. Legislation relating to children and arrangements for their
care follow the same general principles as in Great Britain.
War orphans are the responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions and National
Insurance, see p. 144.
\ oluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care, continue to
play a valuable part in this work. The larger societies, such as Dr. Barnardo’s, the
Church of England Children’s Society and the Catholic Child Welfare Council, are
constituent societies of the National Council of Associated Children’s Homes, to
which a large number of smaller voluntary homes are also affiliated. In Scotland,
a valuable contribution is also made by the Children’s Homes and Hostels under the
auspices of the Church of Scotland Committee on Social Service, and by other
voluntary organisations, including the Quarriers’ Home (formerly the Orphans’
Homes of Scotland).
Children’s homes provided by voluntary organisations (there are about 660 such
homes in Great Britain and 23 in Northern Ireland) are required to be registered
under the Children Act (in Northern Ireland under the Children and Young Persons
Act). The boarding out of children and all children’s homes in Great Britain,
whether local authority or voluntary homes, are subject to inspection by Inspectors
of the Home Office Children’s Department, of the Scottish Home Department or
of the Northern Ireland Ministry of Home Affairs.
The cost of the local authorities’ child care service, including the provision of
training for houseparents and child care officers, is shared between the local
authorities and the Exchequer.
The practice of adoption, for which legal provision was first made in England
and Wales in 1926 and in Scotland in 1930, has considerably increased during
recent years. Over 14,000 adoption orders are made annually in Great Britain;
there are always more would-be adopters than children available for adoption!
Adoption is now regulated by the Adoption Act, 1958, in Great Britain and by the
Adoption of Children Act (Northern Ireland), 1950, in Northern Ireland. The
Registrars General keep registers of adopted children; adoption societies (there
are over 60 societies which arrange adoptions) must be registered with the local
authority (in Northern Ireland with the Ministry of Home Affairs).
To safeguard the welfare of children living with their own parents or guardians,
the children’s departments have a duty to cause inquiries to be made in any case
in which it is reported that a child may need care or protection, unless they are
satisfied that such inquiries are unnecessary. In addition, local authorities, at the
request of the Government departments concerned, have appointed local committees
to co-ordinate local authority and voluntary services dealing with unsatisfactory
families; one of their officers is designated as co-ordinating officer for the purpose
of calling meetings of interested bodies to discuss particular ‘problem families’
and to decide on a course of action. Local health authorities have wide powers
under the National Health Service Act to make arrangements for the prevention
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
144
of illness, and for care and after-care; these arrangements enable preventive and
remedial measures to be taken to safeguard the physical and mental health of
the children of problem families. These problem families, a very small minority
in the community, are the focus of much attention from health, housing, educa¬
tion, children’s and welfare authorities and voluntary bodies. The voluntary
Family Service Units undertake intensive and prolonged casework with such
families and there are several voluntary recuperative centres to which mothers, with
their children, can be sent for a period of residential training, sometimes as a
condition of a probation order. The old-established National Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children and its Scottish counterpart maintain inspectors
and visitors for the investigation of cases of reported cruelty to, or neglect of,
children in their own homes; when necessary they resort to law for the protection
of such children, but they prefer to achieve their purpose by warning and advice.
WAR PENSIONS AND RELATED SERVICES
Pensions to persons disabled or bereaved through the wars are paid under Royal
Warrants and other instruments administered throughout the United Kingdom by
the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance (see pp. 56-7)- . .
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private soldier is
85s. a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the degree of disable¬
ment. The latter is assessed by comparing the disabled person with a normal
healthy person of the same age and sex, without taking earning capacity into
account. Allowances for a wife and children are paid in addition to the basic pension
and there are various supplementary allowances, the main ones being for un¬
employability (55s. a week), constant attendance (up to 35s. and, exceptionally,
70s. a week), comforts (10s. or 20s. a week), and lowered standard of occupation
(up to 34s. a week). There is an allowance (at rates varying between 5s. and 15s. a
week) for persons drawing disablement pensions who are aged 65 or over and whose
assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary payments are tree ot
income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any allowance payable
under the Family Allowances Acts.
War pensioners have priority (except over more urgent cases) for treatment ot
their war disabilities in National Health Service hospitals.
Pensions are paid to war orphans and to war widows. The standard rate of
pension for war widows of private soldiers is 66s. a week, an addition being made
for higher rank, and they also receive allowances for their children (25s. tor each
child), and, in certain cases, an allowance for rent (up to 25s. a week). Widows over
70 years of age receive an extra 10s. a week. Parents or other relatives who were
dependent on a person whose death resulted from the wars may receive pensions
if they are in financial need. _ .
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance maintains a welfare service tor
war pensioners, with a special branch for war orphans.
Many voluntary associations, such as the British Legion and other ex-Service
organisations, give financial aid and personal service to disabled ex-Service men and
women and their families. The ministry and these bodies work in co-operation.
HEALTH
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of the
years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second half of the
SOCIAL WELFARE
145
nineteenth century saw the growth of the environmental or public health services,
such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal of refuse and cleaning of streets,
and also building by-laws and other measures designed to promote healthy living
conditions in Britain. Local authorities provided hospitals for smallpox and other
infectious diseases and poor law infirmaries in the nineteenth century, but the major
hospital and medical services remained in the hands of voluntary hospitals and
private practitioners until the twentieth century. This century has seen the main
development of publicly provided personal health services, as distinct from environ¬
mental services. The medical benefit introduced under the National Insurance Act
of 1911 was the first step in the provision of a State-aided general practitioner
service outside the Poor Law. The early years of the century were notable for the
development of maternity and child welfare and measures for the prevention and
treatment of tuberculosis; there was also progressive development in the hospital
services provided by local authorities until these were absorbed in the National
Health Service created in 1948.
Over the past forty years advances have been made in many directions: medical
research, discovery of important new drugs, blood transfusion, control and treat¬
ment of venereal disease, and research into diet. The second world war served to
emphasise the importance of a sound diet and as a result the Welfare Foods Service
for expectant and nursing mothers and young children was introduced, and the
School Meals Service and industrial canteens were expanded. War also stimulated
developments in industrial health services and in the rehabilitation of the disabled.
Scientific discoveries and improved services are reflected in declining mortality
rates and improved physique.
PUBLIC HEALTH
The Public Health Act of 1936 brought up to date and consolidated preceding
Acts; it constitutes the present basic public health code in England and Wales.
Local authorities are mainly responsible for its implementation and they have exten¬
sive powers for the making and administration of by-laws relating to matters of
public health. The local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of county and
non-county boroughs, urban and rural district councils, and, to a limited extent,
parish councils. Local authorities also have power to secure clean air by establishing
smoke control areas (see p. 300).
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed on
much the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on separate
Acts and there is a different allocation of services as between the various types of
local authority. The Public Health (Scotland) Act, 1897, and the Burgh Police
(Scotland) Act, 1892, constitute the basic legislation for Scotland. The local
authorities concerned are the councils of counties and burghs. In Northern Ireland,
the councils of county and non-county boroughs and urban and rural district
councils are mainly responsible for administering the Public Health Acts (Northern
Ireland), 1878-1955.
Control of Infectious Diseases
Local authorities are responsible to the Minister of Health (or the Secretary of
State for Scotland or the Ministry of Health and Local Government for Northern
Ireland) for recording notifications of the prescribed infectious diseases; they are
also responsible for the investigation by the Medical Officer of Health of outbreaks
of infectious diseases, and for disinfection and other measures advised by him for
preventing the spread of infectious diseases in the area.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
146
The same ministers have a general responsibility for supervising the operation
of health control at seaports and airports, the primary object of which is to prevent
the introduction of infectious disease into the country. This health control is
undertaken by health authorities using the services of medical officers, public
health inspectors, rodent inspectors and others.
Pure Food
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by legislation now
consolidated for England and Wales in the Food and Drugs Act, i955> f°r Scotland
in the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act, 1956, and for Northern Ireland in the
Food and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland), 1958. In England and Wales, the
Act and regulations made under it are, in general, carried out and enforced by
food and drugs authorities (i.e. county councils, county borough councils and,
generally, the larger borough and urban district councils) in relation to composition,
adulteration and description, and by local authorities (i.e. county borough,
borough, urban district and rural district councils) in relation to purity and
hygiene; the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food are the central departments responsible for advising and for making regula¬
tions under the Act. Premises where food for sale for human consumption is
prepared, sold or stored are required to conform to certain hygienic standards.
Authorised officers of food and drugs authorities and of local authorities are
empowered to take samples of any food for sale for human consumption, for
analysis or for bacteriological or other examination. Special regulations are in
force for certain foods such as milk, meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland, the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of counties
and large burghs; the central department is the Department of Health for Scotland.
In Northern Ireland, administration is in the hands of the county and county
borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry of Health
and Local Government.
THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE
The National Health Service was established in 1948. The relevant Acts, the
National Health Service Act, I946> the National Health Service (Scotland) Act,
1947, and the Health Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, came into force
simultaneously on 5th July, 1948.
The National Health Service Act, 1946, aims ‘to promote the establishment in
England and Wales of a comprehensive health service designed to secure improve¬
ment in the physical and mental health of the people of England and Wales and the
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness, and for that purpose to provide or
secure the effective provision of services’. The National Health Service (Amend¬
ment) Act, 1949, and the National Health Service Acts, 1951 and 1952, make some
modifications in the scheme for Great Britain and provide for charges to be made
for certain parts of the service, which is otherwise available free of charge to all
according to medical need without regard to any insurance qualification, although
all national insurance contributors are required to pay a separate weekly national
health contribution under the National Health Service Contribution Acts, 1957-58.
Health Service Administration in Great Britain
In England and Wales the Minister of Health has direct responsibility for (1) the
provision on a national basis of all hospital and specialist services, including those for
mental disorder, (2) the conduct of research work into matters relating to the causa-
ORGANISATION OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE IN ENGLAND AND WALES
SOCIAL WELFARE
147
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
148
tion, prevention, diagnosis or treatment of illness or mental defect, (3) a public health
laboratory service, and (4) a blood transfusion service. He has indirect responsibility
for the general practitioner services and local health authority services. He is
advised by the Central Health Services Council and by standing advisory com¬
mittees on various aspects of the service.
The hospital and specialist services are administered through regional hospital
boards and hospital management committees or, in the case of teaching hospitals,
by boards of governors. The hospitals themselves have been grouped into admini¬
strative units; these consist sometimes of several formerly independent hospitals
and sometimes of one. There are nearly 400 such groups under the control of
hospital management committees, which are in turn under the control of 15 regional
hospital boards. The regions are arranged so that the hospital and specialist services
can conveniently be associated with a university having a school of medicine.
The members of the hospital management committees are appointed by the
regional hospital board. The committees, by their constitution, reflect the com¬
munities concerned, for they usually include not only medical practitioners but
members of local authorities, trade unionists and others. The regional hospital
boards are appointed by the Minister of Health and are similarly constituted. The
term of office is three years, one-third of the board or committee retiring each year
but being eligible for reappointment. The boards of governors of teaching hospitals
are appointed by the minister, a proportion of the members being nominated by the
teaching faculty of the university, the regional hospital board and the medical staff.
All appointments to hospital management committees, regional hospital boards and
boards of governors are honorary.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the minister; but it is
his responsibility to provide clinical facilities for the training of medical students.
The universities are responsible for the provision of teaching.
The administration of the general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and optical
services is in the hands of 138 executive councils, each covering the area of a
county or county borough. In a few cases, two areas are combined under one
council. Each council has an ophthalmic services committee responsible for
administering the supplementary ophthalmic service. Doctors, dentists and phar¬
macists are represented on the executive councils and each profession also forms a
local committee. Councils of counties and county boroughs are the 146 local health
authorities in charge of local health services.
In Scotland, the Secretary of State for Scotland is the responsible minister; 31
county councils and 24 town councils of large burghs are the local health authori¬
ties; hospital and specialist services are administered by five regional hospital
boards appointed by the Secretary of State, assisted by 83 boards of management
(the equivalent of hospital management committees in England); and there are 25
executive councils, each serving the area of one or more local health authorities.
The teaching hospitals in Scotland come under the control of the regional hospital
boards, but special medical education committees consider matters relating to
medical teaching. The Scottish Health Services Council and its standing advisory
committees advise the Secretary of State and keep closely in touch with the Central
Health Services Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 155.
Health Service Finance
Annual expenditure on the National Health Service in the United Kingdom
amounts to nearly 3^ per cent of the total national income. The greater part of the
cost falls on the Exchequer, to be met from general taxation, and a small part is
SOCIAL WELFARE
149
met from local rates. Other income is derived from the national health contri¬
bution paid with the national insurance contribution and from the payments
for those parts of the service for which charges are made.
To help to limit expenditure without reducing the services offered, it was found
necessary in 1951 and again in 1952 to introduce charges for certain items.
There is a charge of is. for each item entered on a prescription form, and
charges are also made for dentures and spectacles (except children’s spectacles
in standard frames), for elastic hosiery supplied in the family doctor service or
hospital out-patients department, for certain appliances supplied to out-patients,
for treatment in the dental service (but not for examination only or for treatment
given to persons aged under 21 years or to nursing or expectant mothers), and for
some local health authority services. Certain exemptions or refunds are made and
anyone may apply to the National Assistance Board for help in meeting any of these
charges. Under the 1946 Act, a limited number of beds may be put aside for hospital
patients wishing for privacy, provided that this accommodation is not needed on
medical grounds for non-paying patients. Charges for these ‘amenity’ beds are fixed
by statutory regulations. Provision is also made at certain hospitals for patients who
wish to occupy private patients’ accommodation on payment of the whole cost of
this accommodation and treatment. Such patients may make private arrangements
for treatment by a doctor of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried or part-time; part-time
medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept private
patients. General medical practitioners in public service are remunerated mainly
by capitation fees according to the number of persons on their lists.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed scale
of fees according to the treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists dispensing
on their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions they dispense.
Doctors and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the supplementary ophthalmic
service are paid prescribed fees for each sight test made; opticians who dispense
spectacles are paid according to the number of pairs supplied.
A committee set up to review the cost of the health service found no scope for
recommendations which would either produce new sources of income or reduce
substantially the annual cost of the service. It found that the real cost of the service,
after allowing for rising prices, had increased little during the years 1949-54, while
many of the services provided were substantially expanded and improved.1'
The General Practitioner Services
The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to individuals
by doctors and dentists of their own choice, from among those enrolled in the
service. Doctors and dentists normally work at their own surgeries; in a few places
they practise in health centres established under the National Health Service Acts.
About 25,000, or almost all, general medical practitioners (principals and assistants)
in Great Britain take some part in the service.
Doctors previously in practice were entitled to join the service at its start in the
place where they were practising. Those now wishing to enter practice have to apply
through their executive councils to the central Medical Practices Committee, so
that a better distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated.
The maximum number of patients’ names permitted to be on a family doctor’s list
is normally 3,500; the average number in England and Wales is about 2,200. It is
1 Report of the Committee of Enquiry into the Cost of the National Health Service
Lmrf. 9663, January 1956.
I50 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
normally through the patient’s own doctor that access to most other parts of the
health service is obtained.
Of about 11,200 dentists in England and Wales available for general practice,
about 10,200 are in the service, and in Scotland 1,090 dentists (practically all those
in general practice) are in the general dental service.
Over 900 ophthalmic medical practitioners and over 7,000 ophthalmic and dis¬
pensing opticians in England and Wales, and 70 ophthalmic medical practitioners
and 900 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in Scotland, are engaged in the
supplementary ophthalmic service. This service provides for the testing of sight
and provision of spectacles. Cases requiring treatment are dealt with through the
hospital eye service. , ^ • o
Almost all chemists (nearly 16,000 in England and Wales and 2,600 in Scotland)
are taking part in the service.
Hospital and Specialist Services
The hospital and specialist services include the provision of consultants; hospitals
of all kinds including maternity accommodation, tuberculosis sanatoria, mental
hospitals and institutions for the mentally defective, infectious-disease units, con¬
valescent homes and rehabilitation centres; and all forms of specialised treatment.
In the service in England and Wales there are nearly 3,000 hospitals (including
teaching hospitals) with over 500,000 available beds and a nursing and midwifery
staff of over 150,000 full-time and over 40,000 part-time nurses. In Scotland, there
are 400 hospitals with nearly 67,000 beds and some 22,000 full-time and 5,000 part-
time nurses and midwives. A small number of hospitals remain outside the service
for special reasons. Most of these are run by Religious Orders; some, such as the
Italian and French hospitals, serve a special group of persons, and others are
maintained for the chronic sick or for convalescents by charitable organisations.
There are also private nursing homes, which must be registered.
An expanded programme of new hospital building and capital improvements in
existing hospitals, begun in 1956, is proceeding on an ever increasing scale.
Teaching Hospitals
The 26 London teaching hospitals are in fact groups of hospitals, and include
about 100 hospitals, convalescent homes, branches, annexes or treatment centres.
The 10 teaching hospitals elsewhere in England or in Wales cover some 70 hospitals
and other establishments.
Rehabilitation
The importance of rehabilitation as a facet of medical treatment is firmly estab¬
lished and, today, hospital treatment is not limited to the relief of pain, or alleviation
or cure of pathological conditions, but aims to restore the individual’s functional
capacity without delay. Special rehabilitation facilities are provided, for those
requiring them, in the departments of physical medicine and occupational therapy
at the main hospitals, and in a few special rehabilitation centres which are not
attached to any hospital. The work is carried out under the guidance of the appro¬
priate medical specialist by physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational
therapists and social workers, working as a team. Experience has shown that efficient
medical rehabilitation reduces the stay in hospital, the incidence of permanent
disability and the period of incapacity for full work. The departments work in close
association with the Disablement Resettlement Service of the Ministry of Labour
and National Service. Rehabilitation methods have been applied with advantage
in the care of the chronic sick, the aged and the handicapped and have enabled
SOCIAL WELFARE
ISI
many patients to become self-sufficient or to be discharged from hospital and to
resume an independent life in their own homes.
Blood Transfusion
The National Blood Transfusion Service is administered by the regional hospital
boards under the National Health Service. Each region maintains an organisation
for collecting blood within the region. Voluntary donors, recruited from the public,
give their blood without payment. It is kept in the regional blood bank, or
issued to area blood banks maintained at general hospitals in each region.
There are two central laboratories administered by the Medical Research Council
on behalf of the Ministry of Health: the Blood Group Reference Laboratory, which
prepares grouping serum and investigates blood grouping problems referred to it,
and the Blood Products Laboratory, which prepares dried plasma and plasma
fractions.
Medical and Psychiatric Social Work
There are over 1,000 trained almoners working in Britain; the majority work in
hospitals, others in local authority services or elsewhere. The almoner co-operates
with the medical staff in the investigation and treatment of disease by elucidating
and adjusting social and economic factors which contribute to a patient’s disability
or impede his restoration to health. Psychiatric workers are specially trained for work
in the mental health services and in child guidance clinics. They are an invaluable
complement to doctors, not only in mental and mental deficiency hospitals but also
in the local health and education services, in assessing the environmental factors in
mental abnormalities and in helping patients to make the necessary adjustments.
Mental Health Services
Persons who are suffering from mental illness can consult the family doctor and
receive specialist advice at hospital out-patient clinics in the ordinary way. In
England and Wales, the treatment of mental disorder is regulated by the Mental
Health Act, 1959. Persons who need to enter a hospital for mental treatment,
whether a general or a mental hospital, can do so as voluntary patients with no
special formality. If patients, or their relatives, are unable or unwilling to make the
necessary arrangements for admission to a mental hospital, it is the duty of a duly
authorised officer of the local health authority to do so. Where necessary in the
interests of society or of the patients themselves, mental patients can be compulsorily
detained in hospital. There are procedural safeguards to protect the patient from
unnecessary detention and he, or his relatives, may appeal against detention to a
mental health tribunal. The local health authority is expected to offer a welfare
service to the mentally ill, either before admission or to help their rehabilitation on
discharge.
Local health authorities have a duty to ascertain mental defectives in the com¬
munity, to supervise them and to provide, where practicable, suitable training or
occupation. This is given in occupation centres where the defectives attend daily,
as at school, or by home teaching. If supervision affords insufficient protection, it
is the duty of officers of the local health authority to take the initial steps to place
such defectives under guardianship within the community or to arrange for their
admission to a mental deficiency hospital.
Local Health Services
The Local Health Services administered by the county and county borough
councils (in Scotland, county and large burgh councils) include those for maternity
and child welfare (but not hospitals and maternity homes), domiciliary midwifery,
L
jg2 BRITAIN! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
health visiting, home nursing, the provision of domestic help (in such circumstances
as sickness, confinement or old age), the ambulance service (in Scotland, the
responsibility of the Secretary of State), the prevention of illness and the care and
after-care of the sick (including the mentally ill and also the mentally defective),
vaccination and immunisation, and the establishment and maintenance of local
health centres (in Scotland, the responsibility of the Secretary of State).
Welfare Centres
Maternity and child welfare centres have existed for many years. They are part of
the advisory and preventive services of the local health authority; they offer regular
supervision by nurses and doctors to expectant and nursing mothers and young
children. Special sessions for test feeding and for remedial exercises are held at
some centres, and a feature of the service is the education of mothers by means of
talks discussion groups, demonstrations and classes. Practically all centres are
distribution points for the national dried milk and vitamin preparations provided
for expectant mothers and young children (see below). In England and Wales
more than 75 per cent of all babies are taken to the centres.
Maternal Care
According to the advice given by the doctor or midwife or her own preference,
the expectant mother may arrange to have her baby at home or in hospital, in
allocating hospital beds, priority is given to those for whom domiciliary confinement
is inadvisable for medical or obstetric reasons or because of adverse home conditions.
The proportion of confinements taking place in hospital varies considerably
between different areas; the national average has increased continuously over the
past 25 years and, for England and Wales, is now 65 per cent. The departmental
committee, which reported in February 1959 on the maternity services in England
and Wales, recommended that the hospital service should make provision for
70 per cent of all confinements, which is the actual present proportion of hospital
confinements in Scotland. Local needs will continue to vary within this average.
For a home confinement, every mother can call upon the services of either
a general practitioner obstetrician or her own family doctor if he is willing to
undertake her maternity care, besides those of a trained midwife in the domici¬
liary service of the local health authority. The doctor carries out certain ante-natal
and post-natal examinations, attends at the confinement if he thinks it necessary,
and gives any other medical care required. The services of a consultant obstetrician
are also available if the doctor seeks his advice. Routine supervision and advice is
given by the midwife, who visits regularly before the confinement to examine,
advise and help the mother. The expectant mother may attend the ante-natal
clinic for instruction in preparation for motherhood and in some cases for interim
ante-natal supervision. The midwife delivers the patient (unless the doctor considers
it necessary to be present) and continues in attendance for the first 14 days after
the birth. Midwives work in close touch with the welfare centres in the care of the
mother both before and after the birth of the child.
Welfare Foods Service
Local health authorities distribute the welfare foods, other than liquid milk, that
the Welfare Foods Service1 provides for expectant and nursing mothers and young
1 The service began as a war-time measure with the National Milk Scheme in 194°. but
in 1946 the Government decided to continue the extended scheme as part of the peace¬
time social services. Beneficiaries now obtain the necessary tokens from the Ministry ot
Pensions and National Insurance.
SOCIAL WELFARE
iS3
children at a low cost or free of charge. These foods are national dried milk as an
alternative to liquid milk1 and at an equivalent price; orange juice, at 5d. a six-
fluid-ounce bottle, for expectant mothers and children under two; cod liver oil,
free of charge, for expectant mothers and children under five; vitamin A and
D tablets, free of charge for expectant mothers as an alternative to cod liver oil,
and also for mothers for 30 weeks after confinement. These supplies of milk and
orange juice are provided free of charge if the families cannot afford to pay.
Other Maternity and Child Welfare Services
Many local health authorities make special arrangements for premature babies
remaining in their own homes, by lending equipment and appointing experienced
nursing staff to supervise their care.
There are some 550 day nurseries for children under five in Great Britain pro¬
vided by local health authorities or voluntary associations working with them. The
National Health Service Act, 1952, gave local authorities power to make charges
for the use of day nurseries. Private or factory nurseries (of which there are about
460 altogether) must be registered with the local health authorities; this regulation
applies also to persons who mind for payment more than two children, not all of the
same family.
Most local authorities contribute to the cost of the work done by voluntary
denominational and other bodies which care for unmarried mothers and their
babies; a few authorities make direct provision for their special needs through their
health departments. The voluntary associations for moral welfare employ specially
trained workers to help the unmarried mother in making plans for herself and
her child. Most homes and hostels for the ante-natal and post-natal care (and, in
some cases, the confinement) of these mothers are provided by such organisations.
Health Visiting
Health visitors are State Registered Nurses, with at least six months’ training in
midwifery, who have had special training in health visiting. They are employed by
local health authorities to visit people in their own homes to give advice on the care
of young children, expectant and nursing mothers, persons suffering from illness,
including mental illness, and any injury or disability requiring medical or dental
treatment, and on measures necessary to prevent the spread of infection. Their
duties include health education and attendance at ante-natal and child welfare
clinics. They may also undertake tuberculosis visiting and school nursing.
Home Nursing
The employment of nurses to attend persons who require nursing in their own
homes is the responsibility of the local health authorities. Although many authori¬
ties employ nurses directly for this purpose, others have arranged for voluntary
district nursing associations to provide a service on their behalf.
Domestic Help
Local health authorities have the power to make arrangements for domestic
help (or, as it is more commonly called, home help) in households where it is
needed owing to illness, confinement, or the presence of children, old people or
1 The liquid milk allowance (which is obtained through the usual retail channels) is one
pint a day at 4d. a pint for expectant mothers, children under five years of age, and children
of five years or more but under sixteen years who are physically and mentally handicapped
and who are unable to attend school or an occupation centre (where they would receive
milk).
I54 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mental defectives. This service is mainly used in the care of old people, in maternity
cases and, increasingly, for families where such help is needed, for example, during
the absence of the mother, to prevent children having to be cared for away from
home. Home help is not one of the free services, and authorities are authorised to
recover from those assisted such charges as the authorities consider reasonable,
having regard to the person’s means.
Ambulance Services
Free conveyance by ambulance between home and hospital or clinic is provided
where necessary, either directly by local health authorities or, on their behalf, by
voluntary organisations. The Hospital Car Service (organised by the St John
Ambulance Brigade, the British Red Cross Society, and the Women’s Voluntary
Services) supplies special transport in many areas for patients needing it who are
not stretcher cases; such patients are conveyed in private cars whose owners
volunteer to give this service, and the authorities make a mileage payment to cover
expenses. In Scotland, ambulances are run by the Scottish Ambulance Service
(St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association and the Scottish branch of the British Red
Cross Society) on behalf of the Secretary of State.
Prevention of Illness: Care and After-Care
Measures for the prevention of tuberculosis, e.g., the tracing of sources of infec¬
tion the prevention of its spread, and the removal of the cause of infection, are the
responsibility of all local health authorities. Facilities for diagnosis and treatment
are the responsibility of the hospital service and are provided through sanatoria
and chest clinics. The chest physicians staffing these clinics are often employed
jointly by the hospital authorities and local health authorities, to ensure that diagnosis
and treatment are properly co-ordinated with prevention and after-care. Among the
duties of these officers are those of making recommendations for residential treat¬
ment, visiting the homes of patients, and examining and advising ‘contacts . They
are assisted in this work by tuberculosis health visitors and nurses and, in most
areas in England and Wales, by almoners or other chest clinic social workers. Most
local health authorities have statutory or voluntary tuberculosis care committees.
Mass miniature radiography was introduced in i943 as a means of early diagnosis
of tuberculosis. About 75 units now operate under the regional hospital boards in
England and Wales, in close co-operation with local health authorities; there are
10 units in Scotland. They examine nearly four million persons a year, concentrating
increasingly on areas with a bad record for tuberculosis, on specially susceptible
groups in the population, and on adults in regular contact with organised groups
of children. , , • j
Care and after-care of patients is supplemented by general advice and assistance
to the households in which they live. Local health authorities send suitable
patients to the village settlements for tuberculous persons which are run by volun¬
tary bodies or by local health authorities of other areas; training for employment
is carried out in conjunction with the training and resettlement schemes of the
Ministry of Labour and National Service. . .
Care and after-care arrangements are made by all local health authorities for ot er
types of illness, including mental illness or mental defectiveness. A chiropody
service may be included in these arrangements.
As part of their preventive work, local health authorities give help and advice to
families which may be in difficulties and in danger of breaking up.
A charge may be made for some of these services, if the person wishing to make
use of them can reasonably be expected to contribute towards their cost.
SOCIAL WELFARE
155
Vaccination and Immunisation
Arrangements for vaccination against smallpox and immunisation against
diphtheria, without charge, as part of the National Health Service, are made by
all local health authorities; in addition, most local health authorities have similar
arrangements for immunisation against whooping cough, and some provide for
immunisation against tetanus. In 1958 there were only eight deaths from diphtheria
in England and Wales, as against 2,641 in i94I> and in Scotland, none as against
517 in 1941.
Vaccination against poliomyelitis, which was introduced for children in 1956
and made available to some adults in 1957, was extended in 1958 to all persons
up to the age of 25 years as well as to certain others. BCG vaccination against
tuberculosis is available to certain adults and children.
Health Centres
A few health centres have been established to provide facilities for several
services under one roof; they differ widely in size and character according to local
need. Experience shows that they are likely to be most successful in areas of
housing development where new services are needed. The need to observe the
working of the experimental centres already set up and to conserve scarce resources
is likely to prevent any general expansion of the service in the near future. In
Scotland, the provision of health centres is not the responsibility of local health
authorities but of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
HEALTH SERVICES IN NORTHERN IRELAND
In Northern Ireland, the historical development of the health services has taken
broadly the same course as in other parts of the United Kingdom, and the health
services established under the Health Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, corre¬
spond fairly closely to the medical care system established under the National
Health Service in Great Britain. The essential principle is that the same range of
services shall be available to citizens in Northern Ireland as in England, Wales and
Scotland. The services in Northern Ireland are financed a£ in the rest of the
United Kingdom.
In hospital administration the role of the central Government is not quite so
immediate or direct as in Great Britain: hospital property, for example, is vested
not in the Minister of Health and Local Government but in the Northern Ireland
Hospitals Authority. The Hospitals Authority has under its control 64 hospitals
and three special care institutions containing in all about 15,000 beds.
The tuberculosis service was established in 1947, a little earlier than the main
hospital service. There are seven hospitals in Northern Ireland for the treatment
of tuberculosis.
Vaccination against smallpox is compulsory in Northern Ireland but otherwise
the range of preventive and domiciliary services is similar to that existing in Great
Britain. Domestic help (whole-time or part-time) for aged or handicapped persons
and expectant mothers is provided by county welfare authorities under the Welfare
Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1949.
VOLUNTARY AID FOR THE SICK AND HANDICAPPED
A number of voluntary organisations provide extensive welfare services for sick
and handicapped persons in co-operation with, or supplementary to, the provision
made by central and local authorities. Some convalescent homes, for instance, of a
IS6 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
type outside the scope of the hospital service, are administered by such bodies. In
many areas invalid children and others needing care in their own homes are visited
and helped by voluntary organisations. Though the need for material aid from
private sources becomes less as public provision extends, many forms of help to
meet individual needs that would not otherwise be met are given by voluntary
agencies. Their most valuable service is probably to pioneer in aspects of personal
service as yet not touched by the public services. These voluntary agencies are
able to make use of many part-time or full-time unpaid volunteers.
A great deal of voluntary help is given to hospitals by voluntary bodies and indi¬
vidual voluntary helpers. More than half the hospitals in England and Wales have
their own Leagues of Friends or similar bodies of voluntary workers who organise
and undertake a variety of services for their hospitals. Many hospitals also have help
from the British Red Cross Society, the Order of St. John, the Women s Voluntary
Services, or a similar organisation. The operation of canteens for out-patients and
trolley-shops and book and picture library services for in-patients, visiting in the
wards, receiving new patients, and mending linen are among the tasks commonly
undertaken.
THE MEDICAL, DENTAL AND ALLIED PROFESSIONS
Only persons whose names are on the medical register can practise as doctors
under the National Health Service. Apart from medical practitioners, only persons
whose names are on the dentists’ register can practise dentistry in Britain. 1 he
minimum qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven years
training in medical school and hospital, plus one year as an intern; for a dentist,
four or more years at a dental school are required. The governing body of the
medical profession is the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858; that of the
dentists is the General Dental Council, which succeeded the Dental Board m 1956^
The British Medical Association is the doctors’ professional association; that of
the dentists is the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for State registra¬
tion as a general trained nurse is three years. Training is available also in sick
children’s, mental, and mental deficiency nursing. The qualifying period for enrol¬
ment as an assistant nurse is one year’s practical training followed by one year s
work under supervision. The governing body of the nursing profession is the
General Nursing Council, set up in 1919- Midwives must be certified by the
Central Midwives Board. Most pupil midwives are already State registered general
nurses or sick children’s nurses; for them the two-year midwifery training period is
reduced to one year. The Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of
Midwives are the professional bodies for nurses and midwives.
Only registered pharmaceutical chemists may practise as pharmacists or describe
themselves as such, and qualifications requiring four to five years’ academic study
and practical training are necessary for registration. The Pharmaceutical Society of
Great Britain is the governing body of the profession. Training as an ophthalmic
optician takes three years followed by a year under supervision. Under the
Opticians’ Act, 1958, a General Optical Council regulates the profession and, in
due course, only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practi¬
tioners) will be allowed to test sight. ,
For the professions of almoner, chiropodist, dietitian, medical laboratory tech¬
nician, occupational therapist, psychiatric social worker, physiotherapist, radio¬
grapher and speech therapist a good general education is required followed by a
professional training. The length and nature of the training varies according to the
profession, and may be as long as three years.
SOCIAL WELFARE
157
MEDICAL RESEARCH
The Medical Research Council (see also pp. 209-10) is the main governmental
organisation engaged in medical research in Britain. A considerable amount of
research is also carried out in the universities and their associated medical schools
and teaching hospitals, while the Minister of Health and the Secretary of State for
Scotland, and hospital boards and committees, are also able to initiate and maintain
research within the National Health Service. The Public Health Laboratory
Service, administered by the Medical Research Council for the Ministry of Health,
also undertakes research in addition to its more routine duties, and this provides an
important complement to the work of the council.
A valuable contribution to research in particular branches of medicine is made
by private organisations, of which the British Empire Cancer Campaign and the
Nuffield Foundation are the largest. There is close co-operation between the
Medical Research Council and these organisations to ensure the best allocation of
their respective resources.
Medical Research Council
The Medical Research Council’s programme of work is carried out both in its
own research establishments and by independent investigators, in the universities
and elsewhere, who receive grants from the council. The programme includes
fundamental studies of the structure and natural processes of the body; clinical and
laboratory studies of disease; the development and evaluation of special methods
of treatment and also of prophylaxis and diagnosis; and the study of social and
occupational factors affecting health and the efficiency of body and mind.
In planning and carrying out its programme, the council is assisted by special
advisory committees which it appoints. One of the more important of these is the
Clinical Research Board, set up in consultation with the health departments to
assist the development of clinical research.
The Public Health Laboratory Service
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England and Wales to assist in the diagnosis,
prevention and control of epidemic diseases. Its largest establishment is the
Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale, in north-west London, which
includes the National Collection of Type Cultures, the Standards Laboratory for
Serological Reagents, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, the Epidemiological Research
Laboratory and reference laboratories specialising in the identification of certain
infective micro-organisms. In addition to the central laboratory, there are 8 regional
laboratories and some 50 area laboratories.
In Scotland and Northern Ireland there is no separate public health laboratory
service; bacteriological work is undertaken mainly in hospital laboratories.
EDUCATION
There are nearly nine million children and young people in full-time attendance
at schools, universities, training colleges or technical colleges in the United King¬
dom. Over 90 per cent of school children attend publicly provided or aided schools.
The universities are independent, self-governing institutions but are aided from
public funds. Most technical colleges and other centres of further education are
publicly maintained. Many schools and colleges continue to benefit from the endow¬
ments provided by benefactors in past centuries.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
IS8
The bulk of the expenditure on education in the United Kingdom therefore comes
from public funds. It is estimated that the total public expenditure on education,
including university education, will exceed £900 million in the year 1959-60.
In England and Wales, the main development of publicly provided primary
education dates from 1870, and that of secondary education from the beginning of
the present century. In 1833 the Government had begun to make annual grants to
the voluntary societies which were providing schools, and the Elementary Educa¬
tion Act of 1870 accepted the principle of compulsory education. By the end of the
nineteenth century, elementary education had become virtually both compulsory
and free. Public provision of secondary education (already begun in Wales) started
in England under the Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now governs public
education in England and Wales. It seeks to widen and improve educational oppor¬
tunities at every stage.
The Scottish and Northern Ireland educational systems both have long histones
independent of that of education in England, but the same general policy is now
being implemented throughout the United Kingdom, with some national variations.
Educational Administration
Administration of publicly provided education in Britain is divided between the
central Government departments (the Ministry of Education for England and
Wales, with its separate Welsh Department, the Scottish Education Department,
and the Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland), local education authorities,
and various voluntary organisations. The relation between these three groups is
based on consultation and co-operation, both by direct contact between the parties
and through Her Majesty’s Inspectors who act as liaison officers, particularly
between local education authorities and the departments.
The local education authorities (called education authorities in Scotland) are
responsible for ensuring that adequate provision is made in their areas for the two
stages of school education (primary and secondary), and that those pupils who
would profit by proceeding to a university have the opportunity of doing so. They
are also responsible for the provision of all forms of ‘further education’, i.e. post¬
school education outside the universities.
The planning of the curriculum is largely in the hands of the head teacher or
each school and the individual teacher. In England and Wales, teachers are not
subject to direction from the central department on questions relating to curricula
or methods. Her Majesty’s Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of
all schools including independent schools (which must be registered), review and
report on the content and value of the education provided and, during their visits,
are available as advisers. Local education authorities also employ inspectors to
advise on the schools which they maintain. In Scotland, the broad outline of
schemes of work in primary and secondary schools is subject to the approval of one
of Her Majesty’s Inspectors, and no pupil may be presented for the Scottish
Leaving Certificate examination unless he has followed a course approved by the
Scottish Education Department. In Northern Ireland, the curriculum of each
grant-aided school is subject to the approval of the ministry, but considerab e
latitude is afforded both in the scope of the curriculum and in the methods
employed.
SCHOOLS
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive efficient
full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 15. In England
and Wales over 6,914,000 children, including about 190,000 under and 295,000 over
SOCIAL WELFARE
159
compulsory school age, are attending publicly maintained schools, besides 113,000
others (including 1,600 under and nearly 33,000 over school age) who are at schools
receiving direct grants from the Ministry of Education. There are also 505,000
children of all ages at about 4,500 independent schools. In Scotland, 860,000 children
are attending publicly maintained or aided schools and about 22,000 are at indepen¬
dent schools. In Northern Ireland, 270,000 children (including 11,000 under and
12,600 over compulsory school age) are attending publicly maintained or aided
schools; independent schools are few. The number of schoolchildren in Britain is
increasing; as the exceptionally large number of children born shortly after the
second world war pass from primary to secondary schools, reduced numbers of
primary school children will be more than offset by larger numbers in secondary
schools, especially as more children each year stay on beyond the minimum school¬
leaving age. There is, therefore, a continuing demand for more teachers and more
school buildings.
In England and in Northern Ireland it is usual for boys and girls to be taught
together in primary schools, but rather more than half the secondary schools are
for boys or girls only. Mixed schools are more common in Wales; and in Scotland
all but a few city schools take both boys and girls.
The majority of independent schools are for boys or for girls only, except in classes
for small children. There are, however, a few schools which are co-educational.
In England and Wales, three kinds of school are supported from public funds:
county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained by local
education authorities, i.e. their full cost falls on public funds; voluntary schools
(mostly ‘aided’ or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been provided by a voluntary
body, usually of a religious denomination, but which are maintained by local
education authorities1; and direct grant schools which are completely independent
of local education authorities but receive a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of
Education. These last (the smallest group) mostly provide education of the
grammar school type; they include some schools of ancient foundation.
In Scotland, most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is used
for a type of independent school of which there are also a few in Scotland and
Northern Ireland, see p. 162). There are also a few grant-aided schools (some of
ancient foundation) conducted by voluntary managers and receiving grants direct
from the Scottish Education Department.
In Northern Ireland, there are county schools, managed by local education
authorities, and voluntary schools, which are grant-aided schools under voluntary
management.
In England and Wales, no fees are charged to parents of children attending schools
maintained by local education authorities, and books and equipment are supplied
free. Grammar schools (see p. 160) receiving grants direct from the Ministry of
Education still charge fees but they are required to offer each year, to pupils who
have at any time previously attended a grant-aided primary school for not less
than two years, free places to the extent of not less than 25 per cent of the previous
year’s admission to the upper school; and a further 25 per cent of the places must
be put at the disposal of the local education authorities if they require them. Pupils
occupying these latter places need not previously have attended a grant-aided
primary school. Day pupils not holding free places are entitled to claim a remission
of fees in accordance with an approved income scale, and the Ministry of Education
1 Aided schools have more independence than controlled schools, but they are partly
responsible for maintaining their buildings (see p. 165) whereas controlled schools are not.
I6o BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pays the governors of the school the amount of the fees so remitted. Local education
authorities also psy for some free places in independent schools, which normally
charge fees. A number of independent schools are able to offer some scholarships
from endowments.
In Scotland, education authorities may charge fees in certain schools provided
that this does not prejudice the provision of free education for all who desire it.
In Northern Ireland, no fees are charged to parents of children attending any
county or voluntary primary, intermediate or special school, qualified pupils
attending both county and voluntary grammar schools receive scholarships from
the local education authorities which cover the whole or most of the fees charged
by the school.
Primary Schools
A child’s primary education continues until about the age of 11 in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland and 12 in Scotland. There are some nursery schools and classes
for children between 2 and 5 years old. In England and Wales, there are infant schools,
or departments, for all children between 5 and 7 and junior schools for those aged 7 to
n, while in Scotland there are primary departments for children aged 5 to 12 years.
In Scotland, primary pupils must be taught reading, writing, arithmetic,
English, music, art and handwork, nature study, physical training and, at the
appropriate stage, history, geography, and written composition; girls must learn
needlework. Religious instruction is also given. In England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, the curriculum is similar in scope, with the addition in Wales of the
teaching of Welsh. (Children who speak Welsh at home normally receive their
primary education in Welsh and are taught English as a language.)
Secondary Schools
Public provision of secondary education is being greatly extended with the aim
of giving all children an education suited to their particular abilities.
England, Wales and Northern Ireland
Since the organisation of schools is a responsibility of local education authorities
in England and Wales, subject to the approval of the ministry, the type of provision
made for secondary education varies to some extent between areas. In some areas,
different types of school specialise, in particular in the later years, in different types
of course, with arrangements for the transfer of pupils between schools where
desirable; in some areas, flexibility is achieved by an overlap of the courses provided
in different types of school. There are, however, two main types of publicly main¬
tained secondary schools in England and Wales: grammar schools and secondary
modern schools.
Grammar schools take children who hope to reach a university and others likely
to profit from an academic type of education. A large proportion of university
students are recruited from these schools which, in England and Wales, are
attended by about one secondary school pupil in four. Secondary modern schools
form the largest group of secondary schools. They give a general education with
a practical bias, closely related to the interests and environment of their pupi s.
There is also a small group of secondary technical schools; these schools offer an
education related to industry, including commerce, and agriculture, but still
general, and not vocational, in purpose. .
Each local education authority decides how the selection shall be made for its
secondary schools: generally speaking, this selection depends upon an assessment
of the child’s ability as shown in the primary school, often coupled with objective
SOCIAL WELFARE
161
tests taken at about eleven years of age, which are commonly known as the ‘eleven-
plus’. There is provision for an appeal to the Minister of Education in the event of
a dispute between a local education authority and a parent, and almost all authorities
reconsider original decisions when subsequent events prove this to be necessary.
Both the system of allocating children to different types of secondary school and the
selection methods used have been the subject of much public discussion and critical
thought. Local education authorities are constantly experimenting with methods of
selection which will minimise any strain on children or their parents. At the same
time, the authorities are seeking to organise their schools in such a way that every
child will have, and feel that he has, the opportunity to develop his talents to the full.
The London County Council and some other local education authorities are
establishing comprehensive schools providing all types of secondary education for
all, or most of, the children of a district. In urban areas, such schools tend to be
larger than the other types of school and may have as many as 2,000 pupils.
In Northern Ireland, there are grammar schools, secondary intermediate schools,
which are the equivalent of the secondary modern schools in England and Wales,
and technical intermediate schools which offer the same facilities as secondary
technical schools in England and Wales.
The number of pupils remaining at school beyond the minimum leaving age
has been increasing steadily for some years. Twenty-one per cent of the 16-year-old
age group is now still in full-time education, at schools or technical colleges, and
12 per cent of the 17-year-old age group. Most grammar school pupils remain at
school until they are 16 years old, some until they are 17, 18 or 19 years old. Most
secondary modern pupils at present leave at the age of 15, but the number staying
on until the age of 16 is increasing.
Scotland
Scottish secondary schools fall into two main categories, those providing courses
extending normally to three years, generally called junior secondary schools, and
those providing courses of five or six years, known as senior secondary schools. In
each type of school the courses are intended to provide a general education, but
they are differentiated in character to suit the varying needs and abilities of the
pupils, and include literary, commercial, boys’ technical, domestic and rural courses.
While some schools are purely junior secondary and some purely senior secondary,
there are also a number of schools of the comprehensive type in which all kinds of
courses, both junior secondary and senior secondary, are provided. Over one-third
of all pupils go on to senior secondary courses on reaching secondary school age.
Many schools also provide modified courses for pupils of limited ability for whom
the normal courses are too exacting.
Promotion from the primary to the secondary school takes place usually between
the ages of 11 and iz\. The fitness of pupils to profit from the various types of
secondary course is assessed on the basis of teachers’ estimates of attainment, intelli¬
gence tests, and attainment tests, with due regard to the wishes of the parents. There
is provision for an appeal to the Secretary of State for Scotland in the event of a dis¬
pute between the education authority and the parent and also for the reconsideration
of original allocations if, later, transfer to another course appears to be necessary.
Independent Schools
The largest and most important of the independent schools are known in England
as public schools, although not all schools classed as public schools are indepen¬
dent (those which are not are mostly direct-grant schools) and public schools form
only a minority of all independent schools.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
162
The public school is a characteristic English institution which has made a notable
contribution to English education. Many public schools date from the sixteenth
century, some are older (e.g., Winchester, founded in 1382, and Eton, founded in
1440), and many have some income from endowments. Each is controlled by its
own board of governors. Public schools have emphasised the importance of
character-building, and in these schools were developed the prefect system, whereby
day-to-day discipline is largely maintained by the pupils themselves, and the house
system, whereby a school is divided into groups of about 50 pupils, each under the
care of a housemaster. The public school is also characterised by a high staffing
ratio and a high proportion of pupils doing advanced work. A public school is often,
although not necessarily, a boarding school; day boys are also taken at some of these
boarding schools. The usual age of entry to the independent public schools for boys
is 13 and the leaving age about 18. There are some girls’ public schools modelled
to a certain extent on the public schools for boys.
Independent schools also include preparatory schools, many of them boarding
schools, for boys aged from about 8 to 13 years most of whom are intending to
enter public schools; some similar schools for girls; and a wide range of other day
and boarding schools covering every age group and grade of education and every
variety of educational method. Some of these schools are owned and managed,
often under a trust deed, by independent non-profit-making bodies. Others are
privately owned by proprietors for whom the running of the school provides a
living.
Secondary School Examinations
In 1951, the General Certificate of Education superseded the former School
Certificate and Higher Certificate examinations in the secondary schools (State-
aided and independent alike) of England and Wales. This examination, which may
also be taken by candidates not attending school, is conducted at three levels
(ordinary, advanced and scholarship). Most grammar school pupils and an
increasing number of pupils from other secondary schools take the examination at
ordinary level. Many technical college students also take the certificate examinations.
The advanced and scholarship examinations are at university entrance and scholar¬
ship level respectively. Most candidates are at least 16 years old on 1st September
of the year of their first examination, but pupils can sit at an earlier age at the
discretion of the headmaster or headmistress of their school, and many do so.
In Scotland, the courses in senior secondary schools lead to presentation for the
Scottish Leaving Certificate at about the age of 17, although many pupils who are
under that age take the examination. The certificate, which can be taken only by
pupils in attendance at Scottish schools, is awarded on examinations conducted by
the Scottish Education Department. To encourage pupils who might leave at the
age of 15 to stay at school for at least another year, a new ordinary grade leaving
certificate for fourth year senior secondary school pupils (who are usually about
16 years old) is to be introduced in 1962.
In Northern Ireland, the Junior Certificate Examination is taken at about the
age of 15 and the Senior Certificate Examination, which is conducted at two levels,
at about 17 years of age.
Teachers
Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing bodies
or managers. In 1958, there was one full-time teacher to 26 pupils in publicly
maintained primary and secondary schools in England and Wales; the figure was
24 for Scotland and 28 for Northern Ireland. The high birth rate at the end
SOCIAL WELFARE 163
of the second world war is the chief of several factors in the present need for
more teachers.
There are about 155 teachers’ training colleges in England and Wales; their
total capacity is to be increased by 16,000 places, or two-thirds, over the next
few years, by expansion of about a third of the existing colleges and the building of
several new ones. At present, the usual training course lasts for two years, but there
are three-year courses for women taking housecraft or physical education and the
ordinary course is to be extended to three years in September i960. There are 24
university departments of education providing a one-year course for graduates.
In Scotland, there are four colleges of education, two denominational colleges and
a college for training women teachers of physical education. Courses are normally
of one year’s duration for graduates or the equivalent, and of three years for non¬
graduates. Northern Ireland has two general teachers’ training colleges, one
university training department and three specialist colleges—one for training
teachers of physical education, one for teachers of domestic science and one for
teachers of art. The basic course in the general training colleges lasts three years.
The education departments, the universities, local education authorities and other
bodies provide a variety of short courses for practising teachers.
Teachers from schools in the United Kingdom go to a number of overseas
countries each year under interchange schemes or schemes for temporary overseas
posts. Nearly 100 teachers from the United States and about 50 teachers from
Canada exchange posts for a year with teachers from Britain, and similar exchange
schemes, on a smaller scale, operate between Britain and Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa and the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. There are also official
schemes operating between Britain and several other European countries for similar
exchanges and for temporary assistants’ posts for language specialists.
There are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
institutions maintained from public funds in England and Wales, in Scotland, and
in Northern Ireland; and these scales influence the salaries paid to teachers in
independent schools. There are also national superannuation schemes which are
administered by the central departments.
In England and Wales, agreed salary scales are submitted to the Minister of
Education by joint committees of representatives of local education authorities’ and
teachers’ associations. The best-known of these committees are the Burnham
Committees dealing with the salaries of teachers in primary and secondary schools
and in establishments of further education. The minister can accept or reject (but
not modify) the committees’ recommendations and make the approved scales
mandatory on local education authorities.
Broadcasting and Visual Aids
The School Broadcasting Department of the British Broadcasting Corporation
sends out over 55 sound transmissions a week which reach more than 28,000 schools
in the United Kingdom, over 70 per cent of the possible total. School broadcasting
does not attempt to cover the whole school curriculum, or to replace the teacher,
but to supplement existing work in the schools.
Television broadcasts to schools were begun in 1957 by both the British Broad¬
casting Corporation and the Independent Television Authority. In June 1959,
1,282 schools were equipped to receive the daily television programmes. From
September i960, the BBC hopes to broadcast to schools ten television programmes
a week, with daily repeat broadcasts; the ITA programmes for schools are
also to be extended. Other visual aids to education—films, film strips, wall
charts, pictures, and models—are being increasingly used in Britain’s schools.
164
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Religion in Schools
In England and Wales, all children in county or voluntary schools, that is, all
schools wholly or partly financed by local authorities, receive religious instruction
and take part in a daily corporate act of worship unless their parents object. In
county schools, and in certain circumstances in voluntary schools, religious instruc¬
tion of an undenominational Christian character is given. In all kinds of voluntary
school there is opportunity for denominational instruction. Over a third of the
schools maintained by local education authorities in England and Wales are \ olun-
tary schools and the majority of these are Church of England primary schools.
There are nearly 2,000 Roman Catholic voluntary schools and smaller numbers
belonging to other religious bodies. In county schools in Northern Ireland, clergy
have a right of access to give religious instruction to children of their denomination
for a limited period each week. In Scotland, subject to safeguards for the
individual conscience, matters relating to religious instruction are in the hands of
the school managers, but there are a number of denominational schools conducted
by education authorities.
Services in the school chapel and religious teaching are an essential part of the
life and education of the independent public schools and most of these schools are
linked to some religious denomination.
Health and Welfare of School Children
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum of all
schools (see p. 496). . . .
The School Health Service provides regular medical examination and certain
free treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local education
authorities. Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child guidance centres.
(There are also child guidance clinics in the National Health Service.) In Northern
Ireland the School Health Service is operated by the health authorities.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to all school children
who wish to have it, and the School Meals Service provides a daily dinner at a
subsidised price (remitted where there is need) to nearly half the pupils in county
and voluntary schools. Education authorities have power to provide free transport
for children who live more than a reasonable distance from the schools which they
attend; this distance is defined as two miles for those under eight years (11 years
in Northern Ireland) and three miles for those over eight years.
Special educational treatment, either in special schools or otherwise, is provided
between the ages of five (or less) and 16 for children who require it on account of
any physical or mental handicap, including maladjustment. There are about 950
special schools in the United Kingdom, including hospital schools, day and board¬
ing schools, and boarding homes for handicapped children attending ordinary
schools.
School Building
An extensive building programme for education has been undertaken in Britain
since the end of the second world war. In the early post-war years, schools, together
with factories and houses, were given priority over less essential forms of building.
Many war-damaged schools had to be repaired or rebuilt. Entirely new schools,
both primary and secondary, were needed to provide for the increased number ot
school children and their longer school life, and for the many post-war housing
estates and for the new towns; new buildings were also needed to replace or improve
those which, by modern standards, were out of date and ill-equipped. Although
SOCIAL WELFARE
165
nearly 5,000 new post-war schools had been completed in the United Kingdom by
the end of 1958, and 800 more were under construction, much remains to be done.
Early in 1959, the Government announced a school building programme for the
five years 1960-65 amounting in value to about £300 million in England and Wales
and £65 million in Scotland.
To help voluntary schools to keep pace with county schools in the standard of
their buildings, the Education Act, 1959, raised the rate of grant for alterations,
improvements and external repairs to 75 per cent of the approved cost. With a few
exceptions, the schools affected are Church of England or Roman Catholic aided
schools. (The whole cost of maintenance of all denominational schools in Scotland,
as of voluntary controlled schools in England and Wales, is borne by public funds.)
Grants will also be made for building new aided secondary schools needed for
children from aided primary schools which existed on 15th June, 1959.
Advantage is being taken of the opportunity afforded by the extensive post-war
building programme to raise standards in public educational building and to
introduce new ideas and methods in the design and construction of schools.
Education authorities are using both traditional and new methods of building.
Post-war school buildings are light and airy, with an imaginative use of colour
and generous provision of practical rooms and space for outdoor games.
Local education authorities are responsible for providing the schools and other
buildings needed for public education in their areas. The central departments
exercise control by approving annual building programmes, framing regulations,
fixing cost limits and approving or rejecting the authorities’ plans; they also offer
guidance to authorities by means of building bulletins and in other ways.
UNIVERSITIES
There are 22 universities in the United Kingdom, comprising 16 in England, four
in Scotland, the University of Wales, and the Queen’s University of Belfast in
Northern Ireland.
The English universities are: Oxford, Cambridge, London, Birmingham, Bristol,
Durham, Exeter, Hull, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Nottingham,
Reading, Sheffield and Southampton. There is also the University College of
North Staffordshire, which is empowered to award its own Bachelor of Arts degree.
A new University College of Sussex is planned to open in 1962 or 1963.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and
Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the other universities
were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge are each composed of a number of
residential colleges. These colleges are corporate bodies governed by their own
Fellows and distinct from the university. Most of the Fellows of the colleges are
university teachers or officers and the majority of university teachers are also
Fellows of colleges. The universities, as distinct from the colleges, own the main
libraries, laboratories, and other buildings used for teaching and research.
The other universities in Britain are in the main non-residential and most are
non-collegiate. Those composed of groups of largely autonomous colleges are
London, which with over 20,000 students is by far the largest of Britain’s univer¬
sities; Durham, which includes King’s College, Newcastle upon Tyne; and St.
Andrews, which consists of colleges in St. Andrews itself and in Dundee. The
University of Wales comprises the University Colleges of Aberystwyth, Bangor,
Cardiff and Swansea, and the Welsh National School of Medicine at Cardiff.
j66 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The education departments have no jurisdiction over the universities, and their
relations with them are concerned mainly with the training of school teachers, the
provision of extra-mural education, and the award of scholarships from public
funds. The universities receive aid from the State mainly in the form of direct
grants from the Treasury which, in Great Britain, are made on the advice of the
University Grants Committee, a committee appointed by the Chancellor oi the
Exchequer from persons with wide experience of schools and universities, or
experience in industry. . .
The proportion of university income provided by the Exchequer is increasing
and in 1957-58 was 71 per cent for the United Kingdom. Another 3 per cent was
contributed by local authorities, 12 per cent by fees, and the balance by endowments
and other sources.
Students
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no religious
test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with men but at
Cambridge their numbers are limited by statute (as they were at Oxford until i957)-
The general proportion of men to women students is three to one; at Oxford it is
six to one, and at Cambridge ten to one. .
All universities in Britain limit the number of undergraduates; in spite ot the
increase in these limits which has taken place since the end of the second world
war, the demand for places continues to be very keen and many candidates are
unable to gain entrance to the university of their first choice.
At the beginning of the academic year 1958-59, there were 102,600 full-time
students at universities or university colleges in the United Kingdom (99,5°° in
Great Britain and 3,100 in Northern Ireland). This total, already double the
pre-war figure, is to be still further expanded (see p. 167).
Scholarships and Other Awards
Scholarships and other awards are now very widely available, for it is the national
educational policy that no able boy or girl shall be prevented by lack of means
from taking an advanced course at a university or elsewhere. About 75 per cent ot
university students in Great Britain are now aided from public or private funds.
The Ministry of Education offers about 2,000 State scholarships annually on open
competition for full-time honours courses at universities and, in addition, it gives
some 1,500 new supplementary grants each year to winners of open scholarships
awarded by the universities and colleges from their own funds. The ministry
also awards 225 technical State scholarships annually. (These and the ordinary
State scholarships may be held at a technical college instead of a university for ^
courses of appropriate level.)
Local education authorities in England and Wales make awards to over i5,500 j
other students each year to enable them to enter a university.
State studentships for postgraduate study in arts subjects are offered annually by
the Ministry of Education; 256 were awarded in 1958. Postgraduate awards tor
scientists and technologists are made by the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research and the research councils. . v
In Scotland, the power of awarding bursaries and scholarships is confined m the
main to the education authorities who, in exercising this power, are required to
comply with regulations made by the Secretary of State. There are no State scholar¬
ships, but the Secretary of State supplements scholarships at English universities
won in open competition by Scottish students.
SOCIAL WELFARE
167
University scholarships in Northern Ireland are awarded by the local education
authorities. The Ministry of Education awards State exhibitions. Scholarships
awarded by the universities and State exhibitions may be supplemented by local
education authorities. Postgraduate awards are made by the Ministry of Education.
Studies and Degrees
Courses in arts and science are offered by all universities and, at nearly all
universities, courses are available in one or more applied sciences. At the beginning
of the academic year 1958-59, 43 per cent of full-time university students in Great
Britain were taking arts courses and 57 per cent were studying science or technology
(including medicine).
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though in
medicine five or six years are required. The first degree of Bachelor (Master in
Scotland) is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending on satisfactory
examination results. In most universities an ordinary (or pass) degree or an honours
degree can be taken, although the majority of students in England and Wales take
honours courses. Further study or research is required at the modern universities,
for the degree of Master and by all universities for that of Doctor. Actual degree
titles vary according to the practice of each university; some differentiate between
the arts and sciences and some do not. Diplcmas and certificates are awarded after
shorter courses in some subjects.
The tutorial system of individual tuition to supplement the lecture system is a
traditional and valued feature of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; it is
now being developed in the other universities and colleges of Britain.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all univer¬
sities there are postgraduate students engaged in research. There has been an
expansion particularly of research and study in science and technology in recent
years (see pp. 203-4).
University Expansion
The universities of Britain are expanding rapidly to meet the greatly increased
demand for university education which will arise during the next decade and also
to meet the need of a modern democracy for a highly educated population and the
particular need, in a technical age, for scientists and technologists.
An increase in the number of students to about 124,000 by the mid-1960s, with
a further 10 per cent increase in the latter half of the decade, is planned for Great
Britain alone. About two-thirds of the additional students who are expected to
be in the universities by about 1965 will be students of science or technology.
An extensive building programme is in progress to provide for the increased
number of students. In particular, halls of residence are being built to enable a
higher proportion of students to enjoy the intellectual, social and cultural advantages
of community life, and many new science buildings are needed to provide up-to-
date facilities for the increasing proportion of science students.
A large programme of building for science and technology was begun in the
universities in 1953. The programme includes extensions to the Imperial College
of Science and Technology in the University of London to enable the number of
students to be increased from 1,650 to 3,000 by the end of 1962, major develop¬
ments at Glasgow, Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds and Belfast Universities, and
specialised developments at other universities. In addition to the large sums
required for the expansion of Imperial College, other university buildings of all
kinds to the value of about £4-8 million were begun in 1956, and of £10-4 million in
1957. Building projects to the value of £12 million were begun in each of the years
M
i68
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ig-8 and 1959, and projects valued at £15 million a year have been authorised to
start in the four years 1960-63. These amounts will be met from Exchequer funds;
further sums will be collected by the universities.
FURTHER EDUCATION
Outside the universities there is a great variety of further education, full-time
and part-time, for those of all ages who have left school. Local education authorities
are required to secure such provision either directly or by aiding voluntary bodies
and institutions. Vocational and non-vocational courses at all levels and m all
subjects are available in technical, commercial and art colleges1 and m evening
institutes These courses may lead to a wide variety of qualifications ranging from
external university degrees and the highest technological awards to craftsman s
certificates, or they may offer opportunities for pursuing leisure-time interests. In
the year 1957-58, there were some 86,000 full-time students at the technical and
commercial colleges (excluding art colleges) in Great Britain and some ii million
part-time students. An increasing number of young employees, apprentices and
others (468,000 in Great Britain in 1957-58) are released by their employers to
attend technical or general education classes during working hours. Nearly a
million other students attend evening institutes.
Technical and Technological Education
Within the field of further education, facilities for technical and technological
education have been expanded greatly since the second world war and the Govern¬
ment is promoting further development. In 1956, the Government announced a
five-year programme for the expansion of technical colleges designed to provide
for an increase of about half as many again in the number of students completing
advanced courses and to double the numbers released by their employers for part-
time courses during the day. The cost of the programme for buildings and equip¬
ment in the five years from 1956 to 1961 was estimated at nearly £100 million,
comprising £70 million to be spent on buildings and £15 million on equipment in
England and Wales, and £10 million for buildings and £2 million for equipment
in Scotland. A further £15 million a year in England and Wales and £2 million
in Scotland is to be spent on buildings for technical education in each of the
three years from 1961 to 1964. The expansion of advanced courses of further
education is being helped by sharing the cost among all local education authorities.
The largest group of students attending technical colleges are young employees
and apprentices who are released by their employers for study, usually on one day
a week; day release study is often supplemented by attendance at evening classes.
A wide variety of craft courses is available for young workers in various trades and
occupations leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course of three to
five years. Courses of a more professional character which are suitable for technicians
or for those who aim ultimately at membership of a professional institution are also
provided, leading to the National Certificates approved by joint committees
representative of the education departments and the appropriate professional body,
e.g., the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Such courses are normally at two
levels, ordinary and higher. Most courses for the ordinary certificate last three years
and students usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19. The higher
certificate requires a further two years’ part-time study and is generally considered
to reach a level corresponding to a pass degree in the subject concerned.
1 For further information on art colleges see p. 225.
SOCIAL WELFARE
169
Full-time courses are taken by large numbers of younger students who leave
school to enter secretarial or clerical work and also as an introduction to apprentice¬
ship. But the most important group of full-time students are those following
advanced courses leading to an external degree of the University of London, to the
Higher National Diploma (awarded by joint committees in the same way as the
Higher National Certificates) or to the Diploma in Technology (a national qualifi¬
cation first awarded in 1958). The Diploma in Technology (Dip. Tech.) is granted
on the successful completion of an approved course in a technical college and is
intended to be equivalent in standard to a university honours degree. It is
administered by the National Council for Technological Awards, an autonomous
body set up by the Minister of Education in 1955. The council has also instituted
an award higher than the diploma—Membership of the College of Technologists
(MCT).
One form of advanced course which is rapidly gaining favour is the ‘sandwich
course’. This lasts from three to five years and consists of periods usually of three
or six months spent alternately in studying full-time in a technical college and in
gaining practical experience in industry; the majority of Diploma in Technology
courses are sandwich courses. It is through a major increase in the number of
students taking sandwich courses that the technical colleges are expected to
achieve a 50 per cent increase in the output of advanced students.
There is a growing demand for courses of postgraduate standard in technical
colleges for students who have already obtained a first degree, a diploma, or a
Higher National Certificate. A wide range of advanced short courses of a very
specialised nature is also offered for senior technical staffs engaged in industry. A
considerable amount of research is also carried on in the technical colleges: the
arrangements vary widely and frequently take the form of a contract between the
college and a local industrial concern.
Under this system there is great flexibility in the arrangement of courses. As a
result, young people can start courses at various ages on leaving school and can attain
the highest qualification to which their abilities entitle them.
Technical colleges in England and Wales vary greatly in size, range of subjects,
level of work and type of course. The largest has a total of some 14,000 students on
the roll. The large colleges usually offer a wide variety of subjects, covering the
basic technologies and the fundamental sciences. The colleges are organised in five
broad groups:
(1) Local Colleges (350), providing mainly part-time courses, some (lasting two
to five years) leading directly to craftsman and technician qualifications such
as Ordinary National Certificates and City and Guilds of London Institute
Certificates;
(2) Area Colleges (170), providing also some advanced courses from two to four
years in duration for students starting at 18 or 19 years of age, and leading
to Higher National Certificates and Diplomas;
(3) Regional Colleges (22), covering wider areas than the local and area colleges,
and doing a substantial amount of advanced work, including full-time and
sandwich courses;
(4) Colleges of Advanced Technology concentrating entirely on advanced work,
including postgraduate and research work, and comprising the following
nine colleges: the Birmingham College of Technology; the Bradford
Institute of Technology; the Welsh College of Advanced Technology,
Cardiff; Loughborough College of Technology; the Royal Technical
College, Salford; the Bristol College of Technology (from September i960);
I70 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and, in London, the Battersea, Chelsea and Northampton Colleges of
Advanced Technology; (in the north-east of England, the Rutherford
Technical College, Newcastle upon Tyne, has been selected as a potential
college of advanced technology); and
(5) National Colleges, of which seven have been established to provide advanced
courses for the particularly specialised techniques of certain industries.
These include colleges such as those for Rubber Technology and Food
Technology and the National Foundry College; they are managed by
independent bodies with grants direct from the Ministry of Education.
At present, in England and Wales, there are over 370 technical colleges (other
than art colleges) that provide for full-time students, besides some 190 others
which take part-time students only.
Scotland has 16 Central Institutions for further education, of which seven are
technical colleges. Five of these have full-time courses leading to their own diploma
or associateship and, in some, the greater part of the work is full-time. The
courses are of three or four years’ duration and comparable in scope and standard
to university degree courses. There are close ties between the central institutions
and the universities. The central institutions, working on a regional basis, are
supported by some 50 local technical colleges, offering full-time and part-time day
courses, and by evening classes at local centres. Sixteen new colleges are expected
to open in the early 1960s.    ^ .
In Northern Ireland, the system of technical education is similar to that in
England and Wales and includes courses leading to National Certificates, ihe
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland awards junior and senior trade scholar¬
ships to apprentices, to enable them to follow full-time courses of study at the
Belfast College of Technology. The junior course lasts five months and the senior
course eight months. . , ,
Most of the technical colleges and other further education establishments
in the United Kingdom are either maintained or aided from public funds.
Tuition fees are therefore moderate, and often nominal for young people under
18 years of age. Many full-time students are helped by awards from local education
authorities. The awards are generally based on the results of the General Certificate
of Education or a corresponding examination; they are assessed to cover tuition fees
and a maintenance grant, but parents who can afford to contribute towards the cost
are required to do so. There are also some scholarships available from endowments,
and others are awarded under schemes organised by particular industries or
companies for the most promising of their young workers. In England and Wales,
State scholarships (see p. 166) are available for advanced technological courses.
Commercial Education
Commercial education is provided in local authority commercial and technical
colleges, in independent colleges and by bodies organising correspondence courses
Well over half the candidates taking professional examinations in commercial
subjects do so through correspondence courses. ... , ,
In England and Wales, local education authorities maintain about 200 establish¬
ments that offer commercial courses at or above intermediate (i.e. Ordinary
National Certificate) level: there are 15 colleges of commerce, over 170 commerce
departments in technical and other colleges, and nearly 20 establishments which
have advanced courses in commercial subjects in the evenings only.
The tradition of relying mainly on evening study has continued longer in
commercial education than in technical education, but the Advisory Committee on
Further Education for Commerce of the National Advisory Council on Education
SOCIAL WELFARE
171
for Industry and Commerce, in a report published in March 1959, recommended
a big expansion of facilities for commercial education in England and Wales, on the
lines of that already taking place in technical and technological education. In
particular, the report recommends the wider adoption of commercial apprenticeship
schemes and the expansion of day release and sandwich schemes.
Adult Education
Adult education (non-vocational study, outside the universities, for those who
have left school) is organised by local education authorities (sometimes in association
with voluntary bodies) in evening institutes, schools of art, adult education centres,
community centres and youth clubs. Many of the classes are practical (e.g., handi¬
craft classes), but there are also wide opportunities for academic study at all levels.
Voluntary organisations, such as the National Federation of Women’s Institutes
and the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds, offer courses in handicrafts
and other subjects to their members; the local education authorities usually supply
the teachers.
In general, courses at the highest levels in arts subjects are provided by the
extra-mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time staff
appointed for this purpose and can call on the services of other members of the
university staff; by the Workers’ Educational Association, which also employs
organising tutors; and by other voluntary bodies. In 1957-58, 160,000 students in
England and Wales attended such courses, which are grant-aided directly by the
Ministry of Education and, in many cases, are assisted financially and in other
ways by local education authorities.
Voluntary bodies with a particular view-point, such as the National Council of
Labour Colleges and the Co-operative Union, also organise adult education courses
without grant-aid. Six residential colleges (five in England and Wales and one in
Scotland) directly aided by the education departments offer one-year or two-
year cultural, non-vocational courses for adult students. In addition, there are
about 30 other residential colleges where students can take short courses of a
similar kind lasting for a few days or a few weeks. Most of these latter colleges are
maintained or aided by local education authorities.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of
information and research for adult education, as well as a channel of co-operation
and consultation for the many organisations in England and Wales which are
interested in the subject. It is assisted by a grant from the Ministry of Education.
The Scottish Institute of Adult Education performs similar functions in Edinburgh.
Local education authorities can provide community centres for urban areas; these
centres normally supply facilities for both vocational and non-vocational classes
for the further education of young people and adults. The centres are usually
managed by community associations, many of which are affiliated to the National
Federation of Community Associations. Similar classes in rural areas are held
in village halls and a variety of other premises by local education authorities and
voluntary bodies.
Financial assistance is given by the education departments to local voluntary
organisations towards the capital cost of community centres, village halls, playing
fields and similar facilities for social and physical recreation for adults.
OVERSEAS STUDENTS IN BRITAIN
Opportunities for students from overseas to come to Britain to study in univer¬
sities or other educational institutions, or to obtain specialised training in industry
or elsewhere, have greatly expanded since the second world war. There are some
172
Britain: an official handbook
40 ooo overseas students in Britain, of whom about one-third are at universities,
another third at technical colleges, and the remainder training for the law, m
industry, or at hospitals as doctors or nurses. In the year 1958 59, Britain s .
universities contained 7,000 students from Commonwealth countries overseas and
4000 students from foreign countries. About 300 British Councd scholar¬
ships, tenable usually for one year in the United Kingdom are awarded annual y
to graduates of overseas universities. Twelve Marshall Scholarships for university
study in Britain are offered annually by the United Kingdom Government to
graduates from the United States of America, and the universities and colleges
themselves offer many scholarships for which graduate students of any nationality
are eligible. Some two-thirds of all overseas students are from the Commonwea .
Some universities and other educational institutions in the United King om
annually reserve a proportion of their places for students from the United King om
dependencies. At the end of 1958, there were over 11 000 students from United
Kingdom dependencies studying in the United Kingdom or the Irish Repubhc
over 3 000 of them at universities. Of the total, 2,630 held scholarships. The ch ef
sources of grants are funds set aside by Colonial GovernmefS (S(?fmet,7eS^PPa1ne-
mented by United Kingdom Colonial Development and Welfare funds) and
funds contributed by public boards and corporations in the territories.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers from
Commonwealth countries overseas. In the year 1958-59, United King om ^em¬
inent funds amounting to about £620,500 were available for this purpose. Under
the Athlone Fellowship Scheme, for example, the United Kingdom Governm
has from 1951 awarded 38 fellowships a year to engineering graduates in Canada
for up to two years’ further study, training or research in institutions or industries
in Britain. The United Kingdom is offering 500 awards under the Commonwealth
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan adopted in 1959- , ,,, nf
Under the United Nations Programmes of Technical Assistance, 500 holder
fellowship awards came to Britain in 1958 for study or training a larger nmnber
than were received in any other country. Similarly under the Technic
operation Scheme of the Colombo Plan for Economic Development in South and
South-East Asia, 460 trainees came to Britain in 1957-58 for industrial training
or postgraduate research, for specialised instruction or for study visits of some kind.
Under the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO), about 40 fellowship holders
a year, mainly in medicine or veterinary science, come to Britain; and under the
British Technical Assistance Programme for Yugoslavia, about 150 trainees ca
to Britain over a two-year period between 1957 and 1959-
Arrangements for Overseas Students
Various bodies in the United Kingdom, official and unofficial, have assumed
responsibility for the welfare of overseas students. Guidance is available from the
1 The British Council exists to promote a wider knowledge of the
instrument for the implementation of cultural conventions to which the .uni£aJH, * ,• h
professional visitors from overseas.
SOCIAL WELFARE
173
External Relations and General Branch of the Ministry of Education. The
Commonwealth Relations Office is also closely associated with educational schemes
for students from the overseas member nations of the Commonwealth and from the
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, and is concerned with their welfare. The
Students Branch of the Colonial Office is responsible for placing scholarship
holders and recommended students from the United Kingdom dependencies in
universities and teacher training colleges. Student offices, set up in the United
Kingdom by the majority of the dependencies and by some overseas Common¬
wealth member nations, are responsible for the placing of students from their
territories in technical colleges, and for practical training and the general welfare
of their students.
Students from overseas are given many opportunities to get to know more of
Britain in their leisure time and to make friends with British people. The British
Council offers a wide range of interesting and instructive activities. The council
has overseas students centres in London and in other university cities, which
organise a varied programme of lectures, discussions and social and other activities.
Many British people like to invite students to their homes and the British Council
arranges introductions. In the vacations, there are courses in many parts of the
United Kingdom which offer excellent opportunities for getting to know more
about British life in town and country. In term time there are visits to various
places of interest, and theatre and concert parties are arranged. The British Council
assists many students to find accommodation, particularly those from the United
Kingdom dependencies and from a number of other Commonwealth and foreign
countries. They are met on arrival and helped to settle down quickly in their new
environment.
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas students
are the East and West Friendship Council, Rotary, Round Table, the Victoria
League, the Royal Over-Seas League, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the
National Union of Students, the English-Speaking Union and Churches of all
denominations. The Conference of Voluntary Societies on the Welfare of Overseas
Students in London, on which the British Council and Government departments
are represented, co-ordinates their work in the metropolis. In some London
boroughs there are committees which help students to make contact with local
residents and organisations.
YOUTH SERVICES
The object of the youth services in Britain is to provide for the leisure of young
people and to offer them opportunities—complementary to those of home, formal
education and work—for discovering and developing their personal resources, so
that they may be better equipped to be responsible members of a free and civilised
society. Young people are free to join any of the youth organisations, or none. The
aim is that the facilities for recreation, educational pursuits and social contacts
offered should be sufficiently varied to appeal to every type of boy and girl and
should be an attractive and constructive alternative to less desirable ways of
passing time. Youth leaders of today are working in a very different context from
their nineteenth-century predecessors (see p. 22); the increased leisure and higher
earning power of the present generation of young people, and other social factors,
have changed but not lessened the leaders’ task.
Responsibility for youth services is shared by the education departments, local
education authorities and numerous voluntary organisations. There is no attempt
to impose uniformity or to create a national youth movement. Youth groups, the
174
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
oldest-established of which have been active for over a century, have been developed
and financed mainly by voluntary effort. Some of them now receive aid from public
funds but all retain their independence of action. The practice of democratic
self-government has an established place in most youth organisations and service
to the community is encouraged. Over two million young people under 21 years
of age are members of national voluntary youth organisations in Britain, ihere are
also numerous clubs and groups which are not part of a national organisation. Many
of these are connected with a church or chapel. There are also some play centres,
organised by local education authorities or by social settlements and held in schools
or other premises after school hours. An interesting recent development is the
adventure playground; these playgrounds are established on bomb sites or other
waste ground, where, with a necessary minimum of supervision, children are
encouraged in imaginative and constructive play, using ‘junk such as odd bits of
wood car tyres and even old cars, in place of conventional swings and seesaws.
Many of the youth organisations formed during the nineteenth century are
religious in origin and purpose; for example, the Young Men's Christian Association
(1844) the Young Womens Christian Association (1855), the Girls Friendly Society
I875 the Boys' Brigade (xSSs), and the Church Lads' Brigade ^)- Later
organisations, such as the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides Associations which, as move¬
ments have no definite affiliation to a religious body although local groups are often
attached to a church or chapel, also recognise the importance of spiritual values in
the formation of character and seek to inculcate high ideals of personal conduc
and of service to others. , •
Local education authorities have been indirectly concerned with youth services
since 1918, and in i939 the then Board of Education decided to give actwe en-
couragement to youth welfare. The board urged local education authorities to
stimulate the provision of leisure activities for young people, both by co-operating
with voluntary agencies and by establishing Youth Centres and other recreational
facilities of their own. The status of youth services as an essential part °t the
educational system, thus recognised in i939, was confirmed by ^ Education Act
of 1944 and the Education (Scotland) Act of i945- In November 1958, the Mmister
of Education set up a committee to review the youth services in England an a •
In Scotland, the Secretary of State is setting up a Standing Consultative Ccmnc
for Youth Service; it will be representative of the statutory and voluntary bodies
COAliriocai education authorities are required to ensure that adequate facilities for
the recreational and social needs of young people exist in their areas. In areas where
voluntary youth organisations are well established, local education ^*onties co¬
operate with them, for example, by making grants, by offering the use of premises
and playing fields, by lending equipment, and by employing youth organisers to
help in the development of local youth work; where existing services are inadequate
the authorities make provision themselves (usually in the form of youth centr
and clubs). Most local education authorities have appointed local youth committees
or councils, on which official and voluntary bodies are represented.
In Northern Ireland also, in accordance with strong local tradition, youth work 1
carried out mainly by voluntary organisations, which are eligible to receive feianaa^
assistance by way of direct grant from the Minlstry EduCfatl0nA ^ ^ ^
Ireland under the Youth Welfare, Physical Training and Recreation Acts (Northe
Ireland), 1938-47. In practice, most of the necessary funds for the support of thes
organisations are found from voluntary sources. Under these Acts the loc
authorities provide facilities such as playing fields and swimming baths. In addition
some of the provision for further education made by the local education authorities
SOCIAL WELFARE
175
under the Education Acts (Northern Ireland), .947-56, is similar to the youth work
of the voluntary organisations.
Youth leadership training courses are provided by many of the larger youth
organisations and by some educational training establishments. At the latter the
cost to the students is met, either wholly or in part, by the education departments
or the local education authorities.
ml St 7lT?TY y°Uth organisations, each with an adolescent
membership in England and Wales of at least 10,000, belong to the Standing
Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organisations. The conference, with which
smaHer youth groups are associated, was founded in 1936 as a consultative body
which takes action only in the name of its constituent members and with their
consent. Its member organisations have a common aim in the development of
character through educational and recreational interests, and in the physical
mental and spiritual training of their members. Scotland and Northern Ireland
have separate standing conferences, and there is a regional standing conference for
In addition, each °f the leading political parties maintains a junior organisation-
and there are a number of bodies which, although not specifically youth organisa ’
rf^Tm0te u °f sroung pe°ple gi™« them oPPortumtL for
physical training, holidays, camping and travel.
Contacts with youth movements in other countries are promoted by the World
Assembly of Youth {WAY), which was founded in 1949, following a youth con-
ference held in London in the previous year. The British National Committee of
WAY includes representatives of most of the leading youth organisations.
Finance
Finance for youth work is provided by voluntary subscriptions from members of
you h organisations and others, by the money-raising efforts of members, by con¬
tributions from local education authorities and direct grants from the education
departments and by grants from charitable trusts such as King George’s Jubilee
Trust and the King George VI Foundation.
The local education authorities finance youth work under their direct control and
a so assist the local clubs and branches of voluntary youth organisations. For their
expenditure on this work they receive grant-aid from central Government funds.
Direct grants are made by the education departments to some national voluntary
youth organisations towards the cost of headquarters administration and training
and to local youth organisations and local clubs towards the cost of new and
additional facilities for young people’s social and physical recreation
Smce its inauguration in 1935, King George’s Jubilee Trust has contributed well
over £1 million for youth work. The King George VI Foundation (created in
J953) spent nearly £1,200,000 in five years from the King George VI Memorial
und, through existing national voluntary organisations, on schemes for the benefit
° young people. It has supported leadership training schemes and has provided
youth hostels and also a centre for the training of leaders and instructors in each of
e our countries of the United Kingdom, besides making a grant for the hostel
r °Ca °f p™Jected National Youth and Sports Centre at the Crystal Palace in
London. I he foundation also undertook to provide £50,000 to finance the five-year
experimental period of the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award.
The Duke of Edinburgh's Award
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme was started for boys in 1956 and
extended to girls in 1958. It was designed by the Duke of Edinburgh to encourage
i76 Britain: an official handbook
teerests advenLI, and giving service. During the
“"HSS=ir5£r^=-^
who do.
Some Voluntary Youth Organisations
The following examples are s.^ “^^“g^atiols inBrkain.
the services and activities provided by vo^^J°^olicgYoung Men’s Society,
Among the other numerous organisa ions A iationfor jewish Youth and other
and the WeUH Lea^e oS You*.
Scouts and Guides Association, which were founded
by^mrd^^^n-Poweinrw^^^d^io^^pect^ely^aim^to^devehi^dwracter^rl
wide affiliations, and are undenominanonal md^non-pohticd in c^ Senior
In March i959> there were 2 ,S2 ^ :n the United Kingdom. This total
Scouts (15 to 18) and Rovers (ewer 17 2 year ) Cubs (aged
includes Sea Scouts and Art ^ grl Guides (aged over ..
8 to ii years). At the end of 95 Land Sea and Air Rangers
vears) in the United Kingdom, including Cadets and La , a
(aged 15 to 21 years). There were also a49,ooo Brown.es (aged 7l to rr years).
Other Uniformed Organisations essentially a Protestant religious organi-
The Boys’ Brigade, found^ ” ?8®3’Xrc“ " d regular attendance at church
LTvha^Sc^affies have frequent irill parades, there are club rooms
for games and other pastimes, and summer camps are held.
of the incumbent. Summer camps are a special feature of the bnga .
The Girls’ Life Brigade, founded in .90a, is an inter-denominational organ,sa-
J Ea^hlompany if connected with a church or other religious body. _
SOCIAL WELFARE
177
physical education, health and hygiene, craftsmanship and public affairs. Cadets
are trained for responsibility through personal service.
National Associations of Clubs
The National Association of Boys' Clubs and the National Association of Mixed
Clubs and Girls Clubs provide recreational facilities for young people designed to
develop their mental, physical and spiritual well-being. Discussion groups, handi¬
crafts, drama, music and many other activities are encouraged.
Pre-Service Organisations
Dhe Sea Cadet Corps, the Army Cadet Force, the Combined Cadet Force and the
Air Training Corps (see pp. 120, 124 and 127), have connections with the respective
Service departments and receive grants from them. In these organisations, the
training of boys for entry into the armed forces is linked with training to promote
their social, educational and physical development.
Young Farmers' Clubs
The National Federation of Young Farmers' Clubs (see p. 288) instructs its
members in agricultural subjects and rural crafts; each club has the support of an
advisory committee on which local farmers are represented.
Youth Sections of Adult Organisations
Youth sections are maintained by some adult voluntary organisations which
have a particular function; for example, the British Red Cross Society and the
St. John Ambulance Brigade train young members in first aid and home-nursing.
Political Party Youth Groups
Each of the leading political parties in the United Kingdom maintains a youth
group to stimulate interest in politics, to spread knowledge of party policy among
young people, and to obtain party recruits. Members are encouraged to hold debates
and to engage in other social activities, and they are trained to take an active part in
party politics. These groups receive no aid from public funds.
Other Bodies Concerned with Youth Work
Outward Bound Trust
The Outward Bound Trust, founded in 1946, maintains mountain schools at
Eskdale and at Ullswater, in the Lake District, sea schools at Aberdovey, in North
Wales, and at Burghead, Morayshire, in Scotland, and a fifth school at Holne, near
Dartmoor, opened in July 1959. In these schools it provides four-week character¬
building courses for boys, mainly young employees of industrial firms sent at their
employers’ expense. The boys live as a community and are given the opportunity to
assess and develop their qualities of courage, endurance, initiative and self-
disciphne in learning the techniques of sailing or of rock-climbing, in various
physical tests, and in expeditions over rough hill country lasting several days.
Similar, but modified, courses are held for girls. In 1958, 3,415 boys and 115 girls
attended courses at the first four schools.
Youth Hostels Associations
The Youth Hostels Association (YHA), founded in 1930, seeks to promote
knowledge and love of the countryside. It caters for young people of limited means
by providing hostels where they can stay for a small charge when on walking or
cycling tours or canoe trips. In 1958, the YHA in England and Wales had a member¬
ship of 187,500 and about 270 hostels. The Scottish YHA has 35,000 members
178
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and about 90 hostels, and the Northern Ireland Association, 4,75° members and
16 hostels The YHA is linked closely with similar organisations in other countries
and, through its International Travel Bureau, it facilitates the exchange of visits.
The Councils of Physical Recreation
The Central Council of Physical Recreation, on which the leading voluntary
youth organisations are represented and from which they receive practical and
advisory services, is grant-aided by the Ministry of Education by the corresponding
department in Northern Ireland, and by the King George \ I Eoundatiom
council which was established in 1935, arranges training courses and provides
instructors in games and athletics for young people and aduhs who wish to learn
new forms of physical recreation or to improve their standards and it organises
athletic competitions and demonstrations of sport and physical training,
arranges training holidays for young people in its three National Recreation Centres
The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation, which is grant-aided by the Scottish
Education Department, maintains the Scottish Centre of Outdoor Training and
also the National Recreation Centre, established with funds from the ing eorge
VI Foundation.
The National Playing Fields Association
The National Playing Fields Association, founded in 1925, has about 50 affiliated
county and1 city associations throughout England and Wales, and branches covering
Scotland and Northern Ireland. The association encourages the provrsion and
preservation of public playing fields and playgrounds for the use of all sections
*e community and advises local authorities and sports organisations on the
Zuis^Z, layout, construction and use of grounds. It keeps a watch on all matte,*
relating to playing fields, promotes recreational activity by grants, publications a
persuasion carries out technical research and pioneers new ideas. The association
has spent ’about £ii million on public playing fields and playgrounds. It also
provides an information service for Commonwealth countries overseas.
V. HOUSING AND
PLANNING
PROBLEMS AND ADMINISTRATION
Britain is a small country with a large population and, moreover, a population
which has increased sevenfold in the last two and a half centuries. This increase
as been accompanied by rapid industrial expansion. In consequence, the problems
of planning, in town and country alike, spring mainly from the intensity of com¬
peting demands for land and from the unplanned concentration of most of the
population in a few very large industrial areas. Similarly, many of the problems
o ousmg reflect the attraction of population into industrial areas, and also the
poor quality of much of the housing erected in the nineteenth century, now in
course of replacement. Need and scope for much rebuilding resulted from the
second world war, in which approximately one house in three was damaged or
destroyed by enemy action.
Ministerial Responsibility for Housing and Planning
wTherMl?1Ster,°f H°USing and L°Cal Government is responsible in England and
Wales for formulating housing policy, for housing standards and for general super¬
vision of the housing programme. In planning, the minister is responsible for
implementing general policy regarding the use and development of land throughout
England and Wales, and for the direction and guidance of local planning authorities
the new towns development corporations and the National Parks Commission
in the carrying out of their planning functions.
The Secretary of State for Scotland has similar responsibilities in Scotland
In Northern Ireland, the Minister of Health and Local Government is responsible
tor housing and planning.
The Ministry of Works acts as production authority in Great Britain for the
building industry. The agricultural departments are responsible for advising on
the agricultural value of land proposed for housing or other development. The
hoard ot Trade is responsible for regulating the distribution of industrial develop¬
ment. An inter-departmental committee on the Services’ land requirements meets
to harmonise Service and civilian needs and proposals for land use.
•
HOUSING
While responsibility for housing policy and for the general execution of the
bousing programme rests with the minister (see above), local authorities have
executive responsibilities (as set out below) for housing in their areas.
HOUSING AUTHORITIES
In England and Wales and Northern Ireland, the local housing authorities are the
councils of county boroughs, boroughs (including metropolitan boroughs), urban
nfU!Ct^and iyrTal dlStrictS’ the London County Council and the Common Council
a h.011:7 of London- In Scotland, all town and county councils are housing
179
l8o Britain: an official handbook
Housing Powers and Duties of Local Authorities , .
The local housing authorities are responsible for ensuring as far as possible that
demolished or closed.
Scottish Special Housing Association , . •
Scotland.
Northern Ireland Housing Trust
1 tlt • rr 'Tt-iict stamtorv body, was established in 1945
toTm^t^hou^es^or letdng, to^upplement building by local authorities. The trust
has Wit about a quarter of Northern Ireland's post-war houses.
PROGRESS AND POLICY
There are in all about 16 million houses in the United Kingdom. 14 million in
England and Wales, i£ million in Scotland, and 400,000 in ort e^n re ^ ’ B
ElSse-building was restarted after ‘"nd
Worn:
of 1956.
^Thflgetdes for building houses in Britain are local
new towns development corporations, °™ h services, and housing
^iir^^r^r^e^ Itous'es mostly for
local authorities have bu.lt 68 pe^c iodi when resources were very
the second world war. In the h p ^rirlpsnread local authorities were
limited and the demand for houses urgent and widesp ’ 1 beginning of
made responsible for the greater oft"^ e^P^o" of the
i952, private enterprise has been post-war licensing
new houses; the restrictions on private building i p V
system were finally abolished in November i954-
HOUSING AND PLANNING Igi
In 1958, 241,525 new houses were completed in England and Wales, 32,170 in
Scotland, and 4,938 m Northern Ireland. Of the United Kingdom total of 278 633
51 per cent were built by housing authorities and new towns development
corporations, 47 per cent by private builders, and the remainder by Government
departments and voluntary housing associations.
Local authority houses are normally built for letting, and privately built houses
for owner-occupation. In England, Wales and Scotland, local authority houses may
be sold on certain conditions, with the consent of the minister, to occupying tenants
or to persons in need of a house for their own use.
The central departments have issued manuals of guidance for local authorities
setting standards of space, structure, design and equipment for different types of
houses, and describing how estates can be laid out attractively while saving land
and money, by the use of new and improved types of layout.
Slum Clearance
Because of the need to concentrate on providing new houses for families without
a separate home of their own, slum clearance was virtually in abeyance for some
years after the end of the second world war, and the number of houses demolished
was relatively small. With the increase in the number of new houses it became
possible to resume the slum clearance campaign which the war had interrupted
Returns made by local housing authorities in 1955 indicated that there were about
°nj , S Um dwellings in Great Britain which ought to be cleared. In England
and Wales, about 850,000, or 6-5 per cent of all houses, were estimated to be unfit
tor habitation; in Scotland, over 150,000 houses (about 10 per cent of all houses)
were estimated to be unfit and due for demolition. In Northern Ireland the
number of such houses was estimated by a survey completed in 1958 to be just’over
50,000.
In the three years 1956 to 1958, local authorities in England and Wales demolished
or closed 138,624 unfit houses, involving 434,239 occupants; while in Scotland
31,000 houses were demolished or closed during the same period.
At the present rate of progress, many local authorities will have completed their
programmes by the end of i960 or soon after; in some of the larger industrial
towns, however, where there are a great number of small, obsolete dwellings, mostly
dating from the nineteenth century, completion will necessarily take much longer.
1 o help in those areas where the number of slum houses is so large that it would
not be practicable to replace all of them within the next few years, local authorities
can acquire houses unfit for human habitation and repair them so that they may be
occupied for a strictly limited period pending their demolition. The intention is
hat these houses should be demolished as soon as possible: temporary repairs are
not intended as an alternative to slum clearance. Exchequer contributions are
available to meet part of the costs of acquisition and essential repairs.
Housing authorities are under a statutory obligation to see that other accommo-
ation exists or can be provided by them for persons to be displaced from slum
clearance areas. Compensation is not payable for the demolition of a house unfit
tor human habitation, but, in England and Wales, owner-occupiers and business
occupiers may, in certain circumstances, receive payments to alleviate hardship,
ayments are also awarded, where appropriate, in recognition of good maintenance,
ardship payments are not provided in Scotland, where the basis of compensation
or unfit houses is different, but payments in recognition of good maintenance are
available as m England and Wales.
An Exchequer subsidy is payable to the local authority for every dwelling built to
rehouse a family displaced from an unfit house.
Britain: an official handbook
182
I
Preservation of Old Houses of Distinction
Special consideration is given to safeguarding old houses of charm and distinction
As a result of a national Purvey, all those of outstanding merit are listed for the
guidance of planning and housing authorities, with a view to their P-servaUon
although, where their condition makes it necessary, they may be closed and
longer used for habitation. Certain other buildings possessing architectural
artistic merit though not qualifying for inclusion in the national list, have been
saved from demolition by works of repair and reconstruction undertaken as a result
of local efforts.
HOUSING FINANCE
The average 3-bedroom house built by a local authority in England and Wales in
iQt.g had a superficial area of about 903 square feet and cost about £1,485 to build.
Trends a^XgThe cost of building in recent years have been a reduction m size
lue to space-saving designs, and improved productivity to which the greater use
of mechanical plant and better organisation and mana8™“* '
These factors have helped to offset increases in wages and cost of materials.
The initial capital cost of houses built by or for local authorities is met by raising;
Building Subsidies • , ,
Housing subsidies at varying rates and for varying purposes, have been provided
in Bn"™, when they were first introduced to facifitate the bu.ld.ng of
hTte°th™n:X“sidies at higher rates, payable annually for
60 years from the date of building completion, were provided for all new h'MSi g
accommodation built with ministerial approval by the local authorities, y
mwn rveiopment corporations, or by housing associations under arrangements
""in Engtodand'wales, a standard rate of subsidy was paid for ordinary houses
1956, provided an extended range of subsidies for special categories of housmg,
reduced and provided for the abolition of, the standard subsidy on dwell. |
buik foi oeneral needs. This subsidy was abolished as from November .956,
except for one-bedroom dwellings, on which it was retained to encourage
Pri^gk"atiLa™^sid"s0for°netihous“g inlngW^nd Wales is now cons*
dated in the Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 1958- The categories o
bS ding by public bodies for which subsidies are available are: dwellings bu«f|
the purpose of slum clearance rehousing, or for rehousing persons in unsatisfacton
temporary accommodation (£22 is. a dwelling a year); housing f°t‘he popu'
moved out of a congested area (e.g„ to a new town or as part of an approved schem
of town development) or moving to meet the urgent needs of industry (£24 ay )
dwellings with not more than one bedroom (£.0 a year); housing provided to met
HOUSING AND PLANNING jgg
the needs of the agricultural population; housing on expensive sites, or where
measures have to be taken against subsidence, or to preserve the character of the
surroundings; and housing in areas where more accommodation is urgently required
than could be provided by the local authority without imposing an unreasonably
heavy burden on the local rates or necessitating the charging of unreasonably high
rents. On flats in these categories, higher rates of subsidy are paid for blocks of
four or more storeys. Grants are also available to local authorities for the provision
of hostels.
Housing subsidies are separately provided for in Scotland and Northern Ireland
where the amounts are generally higher on account of the different circumstances.
Subsidy rates m Scotland were revised under the Housing and Town Development
(Scotland) Act, 1957. These include a subsidy of £24 a house a year for housing
to meet general needs, with higher rates of subsidy for special needs, particularly
houses built to meet the urgent needs of industry and to relieve congestion in
overcrowded areas. In Northern Ireland, annual subsidies are paid for 60 years to
Heal authorities, the Northern Ireland Housing Trust and housing associations
The Housing Subsidy Order (Northern Ireland), 1956, altered the basis on which
subsidy is paid, and prescribed a subsidy higher than the standard rate on houses
built for persons displaced from slum houses. In addition ‘lump sum’ subsidies
are paid to private persons who build houses for letting or for owner-occupation.
Under the Housing on Farms Act (Northern Ireland), 1950, grants are available
for the provision of new houses and for the reconditioning of existing premises to
accommodate farmers and approved workers.
The cost of housing subsidies (including improvement grants) in the United
Kingdom for the financial year 1958-59 was £115 million (£86 million paid by
the central Government and £29 million paid by local authorities).
Improvement Grants
The Housing Act, 1949, provided Exchequer assistance for the improvement of
existing housing or for the adaptation of buildings for housing by local authorities or
private owners in England and Wales. Grants can be made by local authorities, with
Exchequer assistance, to persons converting or improving existing buildings for
housing at a cost of over £100 a dwelling. The grants may amount to half the cost
with a maximum grant of £400 for each dwelling thus provided. There are certain
technical conditions which the dwellings as improved or converted must fulfil to
ensure that public money is only spent on property that will provide satisfactory
accommodation for a sufficiently long period. The Housing Repairs and Rents
Act, 1954, considerably eased the conditions attaching to these grants; and
legislation on improvement grants was consolidated in the Housing (Financial
Provisions) Act, 1958, and amended by the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959.
fhe 1959 Act also places on local housing authorities an obligation to make
standard grants for the provision in houses of a bath in a bathroom, hot-water
supply, water closet, wash basin, and food store; these grants are to cover half the
cost of the work, subject to a maximum grant of £155, or smaller sums if all five
items are not needed. Building societies will be able to make loans, additional to
those for house purchase, to make it possible for house owners to meet their share
of the cost of such standard improvements. Provision for improvement grants is
made m Scotland by the Housing (Scotland) Act, 1950, and the Housing (Repairs
and Rents) (Scotland) Act, 1954, and the arrangements for standard grants also
apply there. In Northern Ireland, an improvement grants scheme is operated under
e provisions of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) and Rent Restriction Law
(Amendment) Act (Northern Ireland), 1956.
N
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
184
House Purchase Schemes
Loans to enable persons to buy their houses by a system of instalment purchase
are provided by many local authorities as well as by building societies, certain
insurance companies and other financial institutions.
Many local authorities also operate a scheme whereby, for a house costing up to
£2,500, they guarantee part of the loan made by a building society so that an
advance greater than normal (up to 95 per cent of the value of the house in some
cases) may be made to the purchaser. The Exchequer undertakes to share any
liability local authorities may incur under this scheme.
Under the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959. the Government can
advance money to building societies for re-lending to prospective house purchasers.
Loans can be made available to enable designated building societies to advance up
to 95 per cent of the value of a private house bought for owner-occupation, provided
that it was built before 1st January, 1919, and does not exceed £2,500 in value (or
£3,000 in the metropolitan area). Building societies are already lending some
£40 million to £50 million a year for the purchase of pre-1919 houses, in addition to
some £330 million a year for newer houses. Exchequer loans for the purchase of
older houses would, therefore, enable the societies to lend substantially more than at
present for newer houses.
Rent Control
The majority of the privately owned houses in Great Britain which are let un¬
furnished are subject to rent control. Houses owned by local authorities, new towns
development corporations, housing associations, and the Scottish Special Housing
Association are, in general, free from control, as are new houses completed since
30th August, 1954.
Since the autumn of 195b, the Government has pursued a policy of progressive
abolition of rent control on the grounds that the previous system was leading to
deterioration and wasteful use of the nation’s stock of housing accommodation.
The first Rent Restrictions Act was passed in 1915. The main Acts now in force,
either wholly or in part, are the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions Acts,
1920 to 1939, the Landlord and Tenant (Rent Control) Act, 1949, the Housing
Repairs and Rents Acts, 1954, and the Rent Act, 1957.
The Rent Restrictions Acts, which before 6th July, 1957, applied, with few
exceptions, to all unfurnished dwellings below a certain rateable value, limited the
rent a landlord might legally recover from the tenant, while at the same time
usually giving the tenant security of tenure. The Acts also made illegal most
premiums for the grant of a tenancy of rent-controlled premises. Landlords
restricted in this way were themselves protected against an increase in mortgage
interest rates and the calling in of the mortgage, provided they paid the restricted
interest due. The Housing Repairs and Rents Acts, 1954, allowed landlords to
increase their rents to pay for repairs, subject to certain conditions and to a maximum
limit.
The Rent Act, 1957, amended the Rent Restrictions Acts. It established, for
the houses remaining in control in England and Wales, revised rent limits more in
keeping with the current value of money and the cost of maintenance, and
permitted in Scotland an increase in controlled rents subject to certain conditions.
It provided that new unfurnished lettings should be free of control, both in the
4-J million houses in owner-occupation when the Act was passed which, previously,
if let unfurnished would have been subject to rent control, and in controlled
houses which fall vacant and are re-let. In addition, over 800,000 houses let at
controlled rents were released from control by the lowering of the limits of rateable
HOUSING AND PLANNING
l85
value below which rented houses are subject to control.1 The Act provided for the
de-control from time to time of further categories of houses by Order, subject to
approval by Parliament; it also made certain exceptions and safeguards for the
protection of tenants. The Landlord and Tenant (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1958,
which is in force for three years, enables decontrolled tenants to remain for a
limited time after a notice to quit has expired, if they can satisfy a court that they
are unable to find other accommodation and would suffer hardship.
In England and Wales, the rents payable for houses (or parts of houses) let fur¬
nished or in which services are provided, are controlled by the Furnished Houses
(Rent Control) Act, 1946. The Rent Act, 1957, provided that if the premises let
unfurnished would be above the rateable value limits for control, they should not,
if let furnished, come within the scope of the Act of 1946. Local rent tribunals,
appointed for the purpose, determine the rents of furnished lettings in cases referred
to them by either party or by the local authority. Similar legislation for controlling
rents of furnished lettings was passed for Scotland in 1943.
Somewhat similar measures of control apply in Northern Ireland. In 1951,
legislation was passed which permitted prescribed increases in the rent of controlled
houses, provided that they were maintained in good repair; and the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) and Rent Restriction Law (Amendment) Act (Northern
Ireland), 1956, permitted an increase of one-third in the rent levels fixed by the
1951 Act where the landlord had recently incurred expenditure of a certain amount
on repairs. The 1956 Act also released from control houses with a net annual value
of over £50 (with certain safeguards) and houses with a net annual value of over
£26 of which the landlord was in actual possession when the Act came into force,
or of which he subsequently obtained possession.
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
The land of Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world and
it is therefore of vital importance in the public interest that competing claims to its
use should be settled in such a way that the necessary balance between them is
maintained.
From 1909 onwards, the idea of the planned use of land was given a degree of
expression in successive Acts of Parliament, but because the pattern of development
over much of the country had already hardened into large unplanned urban con¬
centrations (as a result of the industrialisation processes of the previous century)
the powers granted to planning authorities by the early Acts were inadequate for
the task in hand.
The twenty years between the two world wars were decades of expansion in
industry, engineering and house-building; population was increasing, and there was
a general movement towards better standards of living, and consequently a greater
need for systematic planning than had hitherto been required. At the beginning
of the nineteen-thirties, a major effort was made to consolidate and strengthen
planning law and to extend the planning powers of central and local authorities to
the point at which they could exercise effective control. Despite this effort, which
culminated in the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932, inter-war planning
legislation had only a limited effect, mainly because it failed to deal adequately with
the question of compensation, which had always been an obstacle to satisfactory
planning. By the nineteen-twenties, it had become generally accepted that the
1 The limits under the Act are £40 a year in the London metropolitan police district
and in Scotland and £20 a year elsewhere. For definition of rateable value see p. 76.
jg^ BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
property of an individual might be subjected to restrictions in the public interest,
provided that just and due compensation (out of public funds) were paid. In theory,
such payments should, to some extent, have been balanced by revenue from better¬
ment charges (i.e. charges payable by those whose property had been enhanced in
value by development), but, in practice, such charges proved almost impossible
either to determine or to collect. As a result, local authorities often hesitated to
acquire land necessary for development for fear of being involved in compensation
liabilities beyond their means; and, therefore, in spite of improved sanitary and
environmental conditions and some progress in preserving amenities, many ot the
outstanding problems of land use remained unsolved.
Renewed efforts were made to deal with these problems immediately before and
during the second world war. Between i937 and 1942 three expert committees were
appointed to study and report upon (1) the unregulated growth and spread of
industry, (2) the hampering of planning by the financial and administrative difficu -
ties of compensation and betterment and (3) the encroachment of urban develop¬
ment upon the countryside. After the war, other committees studied the question
of new towns and national parks.
Almost all the principal planning recommendations of these committees have now
been incorporated in Acts of Parliament, as follows: the Distribution of Industry
Acts 1945 and 1950; the New Towns Acts, 1946 and 1959; the Town and Country
Planning Acts, 1947 to 1959; the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act,
1949- the Town Development Act, 1952; and the Housing and Town Development
(Scotland) Act, 1957. Town and country planning in Northern Ireland is governed
by the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931; the Planning (Interim
Development) Act (Northern Ireland), 1944; and the Planning Acts Amendment
Act (Northern Ireland), 1944-
Planning in Great Britain
The pattern of land use in Great Britain is governed by the Town and Country
Planning Act, 1947, and the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act, 1947,
which are the principal Acts and provide for (a) the co-ordination of planning by
means of development plans drawn up by local planning authorities and approved
by the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for
Scotland, and (b) for the control of development by making it subject, generally,
to the permission of a local planning authority or of a central Government depart¬
ment. The Acts also give extensive powers to public authorities to acquire and
develop land for planning purposes, provide for grants from public funds towards
the cost of schemes of major redevelopment, and deal with certain questions ot
amenity, e.g., the preservation of buildings of special historic or architectura
interest, and of trees and woodlands, and the control of advertisement display.
Compensation for loss of development value through the refusal of planning
permission is paid by the Government according to a formula laid down in the
1954 Town and Country Planning Acts. Compensation to owners whose land is
compulsorily purchased is paid by the acquiring authorities, the amount being
based (under the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1959) on the price the land
might have fetched if sold in the open market, with safeguards for local authorities
against paying for value brought about by their own activities and for owners
against depreciation which the threat of public acquisition might cause. In general,
expenditure on planning purposes (other than schemes of major redevelopment)
is taken into account in the amount of the general grant paid to local authorities
under the Local Government Act, 1958, and the Local Government and
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions (Scotland) Act, 1958.
HOUSING AND PLANNING
l87
Development Plans
Local planning authorities (in England and Wales, the councils of counties and
county boroughs and, in some areas, joint planning boards; and in Scotland,
councils of counties and of large burghs, and the councils of the two small burghs
of St. Andrews and Thurso) are required to prepare and submit development plans
covering the whole of their areas to the Minister of Housing and Local Government
and to the Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Each development plan
is expressed by an authoritative written statement describing the major projects
in the plan, supplemented by a series of maps based on a survey of the physical and
other resources of the area. Fresh surveys must be carried out every five years and
plans may be extended and altered at any time, so that they may be kept up to date.
Local authorities must advertise their plans when they submit them for approval,
and the ministers concerned must consider objections and representations from the
public, and when necessary, arrange for local inquiries to be held. Once a plan has
been approved, it cannot be challenged except on the grounds that it is ultra vires
or that statutory requirements have not been fulfilled.
All the planning authorities in England and Wales had submitted their plans by
1957, and by the beginning of 1959, 129 plans had been approved. By the same date,
43 of the 57 local planning authorities in Scotland had submitted plans or part-plans;
26 of them had received approval to whole plans and 7 to part-plans. A number
of authorities in both countries had also submitted amendments and additions to
their original plans. During recent years, emphasis has been placed increasingly
upon the need to preserve open country round large towns, and a number of plan¬
ning authorities in England and Wales have put forward sketch maps showing plans
for the extension or maintenance of ‘green belts’ for incorporation in approved
development plans. In Scotland, a number of green belts have been defined in the
original development plans as submitted and approved.
The Distribution of Industry
The Distribution of Industry Acts, 1945 and 1950, and the Town and Country
Planning Acts, 1947, contain provisions (described on pages 253-4) to control the
location of industry throughout the country.
General problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a number of
Government departments, but the main responsibility for controlling the siting of
industry as apart from its general location rests with the local planning authorities,
for it is their duty, subject to the consent of the Board of Trade, to ensure that
industrial development fits properly into existing and expanding communities and
is consistent with the best use of land.
New Towns
The New Towns Act, 1946, gives the Minister of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are the responsible ministers,
powers to make an order designating any area of land (which may include as its
nucleus the area of an existing town) as the site of a proposed new town, after
consultation with the local authorities concerned and if it is in the public interest to
do so. Once the site has been designated, the responsible minister appoints a
development corporation (consisting of a chairman and up to eight other members)
to be responsible for the development of the new town. One of the first tasks of the
development corporation is to prepare a master plan which becomes the basis for
development proposals, each of which covers a part of the area. Every proposal
is submitted to the responsible minister who must consult the local planning
jgg BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
authority and, together with the Treasury, be satisfied with the proposal on
economic grounds before giving approval.
The development corporations have powers in general (subject to the consent ot
the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for
Scotland) to acquire, by agreement or compulsory purchase, any land or property
in the designated areas which is necessary for their purposes, and they may provide
housing, commercial and industrial premises, estate roads and other buddings or
services essential for the development of the towns. In England and Wales, the
Minister of Housing and Local Government has made a special development order
to exempt the development corporations from the necessity of obtaining planning
permission from the local planning authorities; but in Scotland, permission to
develop has to be obtained from the local planning authority.
The capital cost of developing the new towns is advanced to the corporations
from public funds and must be repaid on terms approved by the ministers with
the concurrence of the Treasury. The corporations must submit their reports
(which must include copies of their audited accounts) annually to the Minister ot
Housing and Local Government or to the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are
responsible for laying them before Parliament. .
As each new town in England and Wales is substantially completed (a point
which has almost been reached in some towns), the development corporation will
be dissolved and, under the terms of the New Towns Act, 1959)lts assets and habih-
ties will be handed over to a central agency—the Commission for New Towns. The
commission, which will operate during the period of new town consolidation, will
consist of not more than fifteen members, appointed by the Minister of Housing
and Local Government, and it will be responsible for maintaining and enhancing
the value of the land entrusted to it. No new towns commission is, as yet, proposed
for Scotland, since, in that country the completion of the initial stage of new town
development is not yet in sight. . ^ , , T1(7 , ,
There are fifteen new towns in Great Britain—twelve in England and Wales and
three in Scotland. Eight of the new towns in England and Wales—Basildon and
Harlow in Essex; Hemel Hempstead, Stevenage, Hatfield and Welwyn in
Hertfordshire; Crawley in Sussex; and Bracknell in Berkshire are designed to
help in absorbing excess population from the Greater London area; four others—
Corby in Northamptonshire; Aycliffe and Peterlee in Durham; and Cwmbran in
Monmouthshire—are to serve the special needs of their areas. Of the Scottish new
towns, East Kilbride in Lanarkshire and Cumbernauld in Dunbartonshire are being
established to assist in housing the surplus population from Glasgow; Glenrothes
in Fife will also make a contribution towards the relief of Glasgow overspill, but its
primary function is to provide housing and other facilities for miners and their
families transferring to an area where mining activities are steadily expanding.
The new towns are generally recognised as one of the most successful experiments
of the post-war years, industrially, financially and socially, and they represent a
notable achievement in the translation of planning into reality. By the end of
June 1959, the total population of the new towns in England and Wales, designed
to be 550,000 when the towns are completed, had reached an estimated total o
408,000 (including the people previously living in the area); 70,346 houses had been
built by the development corporations, and a further 8,717 were under construction,
358 factories had been established and a further 14 were being erected; 1,471 shops
had been completed, and 281 more were being built; 129 schools had been finished
and 19 more were under construction. Considerable progress had been made in the
construction of the town centres of most of the towns; many miles of roads had been
laid; large main sewerage works had kept pace with industrial and domestic needs.
HOUSING AND PLANNING
189
an increasing number of police, fire and bus stations and services had been provided;
and sites had been reserved in the town centres for municipal buildings of all kinds.
Sites had also been reserved for general hospitals, on one or two of which building
had already begun.
In addition, some advance had been made in the provision of permanent com¬
munity buildings and other communal amenities, which is the responsibility of the
local authorities of the towns. Approximate overall figures for certain amenities,
including temporary buildings and some which are adequate for limited use only,
are (in England and Wales): 190 halls for hire; 30 community centres; 70 churches
and church halls; 30 public libraries; 25 health centres and clinics; and 40 public
houses.
In the Scottish new towns, at the end of June 1959, the population, eventually to
be 130,000, had reached an estimated figure of just over 40,500; 9,214 houses had
been built, with a further 2,688 under construction; 114 shops had been completed
and 25 were under construction; 11 new schools were in use, and the extension of
communications, public services and communal amenities was under way.
Under the New Towns Act of 1946, Parliament approved a consolidated fund
of £50 million to provide for advances to the development corporations for work
on the new towns. This fund was increased by subsequent Acts and, under the 1959
Act, stood at £400 million.
Town Development Schemes and War-damaged Cities
Provision for town development schemes was made in the Town Development
Act, 1952, and the Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act, 1957. These
Acts were passed to help relieve congestion in overcrowded urban areas in England,
Wales and central Scotland, by encouraging the transfer of population, together
with the necessary industrial and other employment, to appropriate county
districts and other areas. In England, Wales, and Scotland, negotiations between
a number of exporting and receiving authorities had been completed by 1959,
and in several areas rebuilding was under way. Receiving authorities participating
in town development schemes may receive special Government subsidies or grants.
Individual plans for the reconstruction of areas of extensive war damage have
also been drawn up and approved and, by 1959, the central areas of several
provincial cities, e.g., Bristol, Coventry, Exeter, Kingston-upon-Hull, Portsmouth,
Plymouth, and Southampton, had been almost entirely rebuilt. In addition, by
the end of June 1959, projects valued at more than £50 million had been completed
in the square mile of the City of London, while in other areas of east and south-east
London scheduled for redevelopment, e.g., Stepney, Poplar, Bethnal Green,
Bunhill Fields, Bermondsey, the South Bank, Elephant and Castle, Lewisham
Clock Tower, and Woolwich, considerable progress both in layout and actual
building had been made.
National Parks and Access to the Countryside
The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949, provided for the
designation of a number of extensive areas of beautiful country in England and
Wales as national parks. In these areas the characteristic landscape is to be carefully
preserved, and facilities for open-air recreation may be provided or improved.
A National Parks Commission for England and Wales was set up by the Act of
1949, and by June 1959 its work had resulted in the establishment of ten of the
twelve national parks recommended by the National Parks (England and Wales)
Committee, which reported in 1947.
The established parks are: the Peak District, the Lake District, Snowdonia in
North Wales, Dartmoor in Devon, the Pembrokeshire Coast, the North York
I90 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Moors, the Yorkshire Dales, Exmoor in Devon and Somerset, Northumberland
(comprising most of the upland country from the Cheviots in the north to the
Roman Wall in the south), and the Brecon Beacons in South Wales. These parks
cover a total area of 5,254 square miles, almost one-eleventh of the area of England
and Wales. The administrative arrangements for the parks are as follows: the Beak
District and Lake District National Parks are administered by joint planning boards;
for Dartmoor, the Pembrokeshire Coast, the North York Moors and Northumber¬
land, special park planning committees of the respective county councils have been
set up; while in Snowdonia, the Yorkshire Dales, Exmoor and the Brecon Beacons
(which include areas of more than one county council) there are park planning
committees representative of each of the county councils concerned, advised
by a park joint advisory committee. All these authorities control development in
the parks and take such positive action as they deem necessary to enhance natural
beauty (e.g., by restoring derelict land, by removing unsightly structures, and
by tree planting), and to promote the enjoyment of the area by the public (e.g., by
providing car parks, camping sites or other kinds of accommodation). Government
grants of 75 per cent are available towards certain approved expenditure.
Under the provisions of the 1949 Act, the National Parks Commission was also
given authority to select other, possibly less extensive, areas in England and Wales
for designation as ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’ in order to keep them
unspoiled. By the end of June 1959, seven such areas had been established, and
proposals for a further nine were under consideration.
A Scottish National Parks working party has considered all five areas recom¬
mended as national parks in Scotland—the Trossachs, Glen Affric, the Cairngorms,
Wester Ross (Loch Maree) and Glen Coe—with a view to their possible develop¬
ment under existing statutory powers, and has submitted to the Secretary of State
for Scotland a report on each of these areas.
In addition to the establishment of national parks, the Act provided that a com¬
plete survey should be made of all footpaths and bridle-ways in England and Wales
to be a comprehensive national record of public rights of way, and that long-distance
routes should be created, which by connecting existing footpaths and bridle-ways
would become continuous rights of way. By the end of June 1959, 45 county councils
had prepared draft maps of rights of way for the whole of their areas, based on
individual surveys of footpaths carried out by parish and county district councils.
Responsibility for making proposals for long-distance routes rests with the Nationa
Parks Commission; once the proposals are approved by the Minister of Housing
and Local Government, it falls to the local authorities to give effect to them. By the
end of June 1959, the National Parks Commission’s proposals for the creation of
six routes, covering 929 miles, had been approved; progress had been made by
means of surveys, cairn building and footpath agreements, towards their completion;
and discussions were taking place between the commission and the relevant local
authorities regarding the establishment of several more routes of this kind.
The Act also gives local authorities the task of surveying in their areas the access
enjoyed by the public to open country, i.e. mountain, moor, heath, down, cliff or
foreshore, and empowers them to improve such access, where necessary, by means
of agreements with owners or by access orders. Considerable areas of the Pea
district have been opened to the public by this means.
National Forest Parks
The Forestry Commission has formed, and opened to the public, seven National
Forest Parks in Great Britain: Argyll, Glen Trool, Glen More, and Loch Ard
(renamed the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park to commemorate the Coronation) in
The President of the Royal Society (see p. 202),
Sir Cyril Hinshelwood, at the headquarters of
the Society which in i960 celebrates the tercen¬
tenary of its foundation. The exhibit illustrates
research into virus structure, using new tech¬
niques in electron microscopy, carried out by a
Medical Research Council unit at the Cavendish
Laboratory Cambridge.
The new radiotherapy unit for cancer treatment
at St. Thomas’s Hospital, London, includes a
pressure chamber in which the patient, under an
anaesthetic, breathes oxygen. The presence of
oxygen makes the cells more vulnerable to
radiation.
The S.R.Ni Hovercraft, a revolutionary re¬
search vehicle which has successfully crossed the
English Channel, is supported on a cushion of
air and operates at heights just sufficient to clear
waves and surface irregularities on land. It was
invented by Mr. C. S. Cockerell, and built by
Saunders-Roe with the support of the National
Research Development Corporation. Much
larger commercial versions are planned.
iAutNPvim
St. Paul’s Church, H;|i
Industrial spine road
High blocks of flats
with lower buildings
give variety at Harlow.
Below: Part of HaiM
of England’s 12 ntH
r-rjpn
!„ (if HP III HI
111 ill 111 SH MI
H!P! !!!■!!
r Fir win
A primary school at Crawley.
Houses at Hatfield,
Hempstead,
n shopping centre. Harlow is one
, Scotland has three (see p. 188).
This mobile library of the Nottinghamshire County Library serves children in outlying
villages (see p. 228).
Opera interval at Glyndebourne, Sussex (see p. 237)'
HOUSING AND PLANNING
IQI
Scotland; the Forest of Dean in England; Snowdonia in Wales; and the Border
Forest Park (adjoining the Northumberland National Park to the westward), which
includes forests on the borders of Northumberland and Cumberland in England and
of Roxburghshire in Scotland. The total area of the seven parks is rather less than
half a million acres, including planted areas and unplantable moorland and
mountains. Camping facilities are provided in most of the parks.
Nature Conservation
The responsibility for nature conservation rests with the Nature Conservancy
(see p. 211), which derives the necessary powers for the proper discharge of its
functions from the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949. The
object of conservation, which is to influence soils, water, vegetation and animal life,
either directly or indirectly by means of research, experiment and control, entails
the acquisition and management of a representative series of reserves, as well as the
establishment of laboratories for use in long-term research schemes and the making
of grants-in-aid for specified research.
Seventy-six Nature Reserves, covering 135,094 acres in Great Britain, had been
declared by the end of June 1959. The Cairngorms Reserve, which covers 39,639
acres, is the largest of these; it is also one of the largest in Europe. In addition, three
forest nature reserves have been set up: the Forestry Commission, by agreement
with the Nature Conservancy, has set aside two areas of 200 acres each for ecological
research and timber production; a similar arrangement has been made with the
Crown Estate Commissioners by which a 45-acre area is being managed in the
interests of nature conservation and ecological research.
In addition to national nature reserves and forest nature reserves, there were,
by end-June 1959, seven local nature reserves, established and administered by local
authorities, in consultation with the Nature Conservancy, using their own powers
under the Act.
Apart from the statutory nature reserves, there are also a number of non-
statutory reserves managed by societies such as the Society for the Promotion of
Nature Reserves, County Naturalists’ Trusts and the Royal Society for the Pro¬
tection of Birds. Under bird protection legislation, powers have long existed to
create statutory bird sanctuaries, where interference with birds and their eggs is
penalised.
Preservation of Amenities
Responsibility for the preservation of the historic, scenic and architectural
beauties of Great Britain is vested mainly in the Minister of Housing and Local
Government, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the various statutory planning
authorities and commissions. The Ministry of Works is also concerned, both
because it is the department responsible for the maintenance of royal parks and
palaces and because it is empowered by the provisions of the Historic Buildings
and Ancient Monuments Act, 1953, to assist in the preservation of historic houses
by making grants (after consultation with specially constituted historic buildings
councils) for their upkeep together with their contents and their adjoining land.
By the end of June 1959, grants totalling £2! million towards the cost of urgently
needed structural repairs to 653 historic buildings in England, Scotland and Wales
had been offered and accepted.
Unofficial amenity societies, wholly dependent upon the support of their mem¬
bers, include: the Council for the Preservation of Rural England, founded in 1926
to organise concerted action to secure the protection of rural scenery and of town
and country amenities from disfigurement or injury; the Association for the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
192
Preservation of Rural Scotland, founded in 1927 for the protection of rural scenery
and of the amenities of country districts and towns and villages in Scotland; the
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the Ramblers’ Asso¬
ciation; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Pilgrim Trust;
the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland; and the National Trust for Scotland. The National
Trust for England, Wales and Northern Ireland (which was founded in 1895 and
by 1959 had over 70,000 members) is (apart from the Crown) the largest land-
owner in the United Kingdom. It has acquired, mainly through gifts, oyer a
thousand properties, which it holds for the enjoyment of the public; it administers
more than 250,000 acres of land of great natural beauty; and it owns many fine
gardens. The National Trust for Scotland, an independent body, founded mi93i
to promote the preservation of places of historic or architectural interest or of
natural beauty in Scotland for the benefit of the public, now has about 12,000
members and has under its care some 60 properties, covering in all over 55,000
acres.
Planning in Northern Ireland
The Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, which is the main
source from which power to prepare a planning scheme is derived, provides for the
preparation by local authorities of planning schemes for development or redevelop¬
ment of their areas, with the general object of securing proper sanitary conditions
and amenities in connection with the laying out and use of land. The Interim
Development Act of 1944 enables persons wishing to carry out development to do
so without delay, while ensuring that such development shall conform to the
provisions likely to be included in the planning scheme for the area.
The provisions of the Acts brought all land in Northern Ireland under planning
control and required every local authority to prepare a planning scheme for its area.
Interim control is exercised in accordance with the section of the 1944 Act which
requires that, where application is made to an authority for permission to develop,
the authority may grant the application conditionally or unconditionally or may
refuse it altogether. In the event of a refusal or conditional approval, the applicant
has a right to appeal to the Ministry of Health and Local Government for Northern
Ireland (which is the department primarily responsible for the administration of
the planning Acts) or to an independent person appointed by the ministry.
Since 1944, all local planning authorities in Northern Ireland have made appre¬
ciable progress in the preparation of outline plans which indicate broadly the
proposals for their areas. The outline plans provide a foundation for the preparation
of more detailed plans at a later stage and also facilitate materially the work of
interim development control. Many interim development applications have been
decided by local planning authorities, and appeals lodged with the ministry have
been relatively few.
Northern Ireland Forest Park
In May 1955, Northern Ireland’s first forest park at Tollymore Park, Newcastle,
County Down, was opened to the public. Situated at the foot of the Mountains of
Moume, it covers an area of 1,200 acres. It contains an arboretum comprising a
wide variety of native and exotic trees, and is rich in mountain, river and parkland
scenery. Caravan facilities and a camping site for youth organisations are available.
VI. THE CHURCHES
Every person living in Britain possesses the right of religious freedom as described
in Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: he may change his
religion at will, and may manifest his faith in teaching, worship and observance.
Churches and religious societies of all kinds may own property, conduct schools,
and propagate their beliefs in speech and in writing.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters was achieved gradually from the
seventeenth century onwards; in many cases, relaxation in the administration of
laws discriminating against minority religious groups preceded the repeal of the
legislation concerned. Heresy ceased to be a civil offence with the passing of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act, 1677, and the Toleration Act of 1688 granted
freedom of worship to Protestant dissenters. In 1828, the repeal of the Test and
Corporation Acts freed nonconformists from political disabilities and made it
possible for them to be appointed to public offices; Roman Catholics gained political
emancipation under the Roman Catholic Relief Act, 1829; the Jewish Relief Act,
1858, enabled Jews to become members of Parliament; while religious tests that
had been imposed on prospective students and members of the academic staff of
the universities of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham were successively abolished by
Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871. Nowadays, there is no religious or denominational
bar to the holding of public office, except that the Lord Chancellor may not be a
Roman Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the national
hospitals, and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of England or the
Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and are paid a salary by the
State for this part of their work. Chaplains of the Roman Catholic Church and
ministers of other denominations may also be appointed or specially called in as
required. Voluntary schools (see p. 164) provided by churches of any religious
denomination may be wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
There is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number of
adherents to the various churches in the United Kingdom, since no inquiries are
made about religious beliefs in population censuses or other official returns, and
each church adopts different criteria in counting its members. The membership
figures given in the following sections should therefore be taken as approximate.
Church of England
The Church of England is the Established Church, and claims to be the ancient
catholic church of the land. At the Reformation in the sixteenth century, it
repudiated the supremacy of the Pope, but retained the historic episcopate, and the
creeds and sacraments upon which its doctrines are based; therefore it claims to be
both ‘catholic’ and ‘reformed’. Its form of worship is embodied in the Book of
Common Prayer, which was first compiled in 1549.
Relations with the State
No single Act of Parliament defines the position of the Church of England in the
way that the Treaty of Union, 1707, defines the position of the Church of Scotland.
In England, the relationship of Church and State is one of mutual obligation
privileges accorded to the Church which are balanced by certain duties.
193
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
194
The Church is uniquely related to the Crown, in that the Sovereign, who must be
a member of the Church of England, is called ‘Defender of the Faith’ (a statutory
title as protector of the Church) and promises on his or her accession to uphold it.
The coronation of the Sovereign is performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England; prayers for the Sovereign and other members of the royal
family are said in all the statutory services of the Church; all bishops and deans are
appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; and all clergy take
the oath of allegiance to the Crown.
The Church is further linked with the State through the House of Lords, in
which the two archbishops of Canterbury and York and the twenty-four senior
diocesan bishops have seats. This makes it possible for the views of the Church
leaders to be expressed freely on any moral issue raised in connection with the
corporate conduct of the State as well as on specifically ecclesiastical issues—a
matter of particular significance in view of the fact that clergy of the Church of
England (together with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland
and the Roman Catholic Church) are legally disqualified from sitting in the House
of Commons.
The Church is not free to change its form of worship, as laid down in the Book of
Common Prayer, without the consent of Parliament; canon laws (Church rules)
cannot be made or amended without the consent of the Queen in Council; and the
measures of the Church Assembly (as distinct from their regulations) are not valid
without parliamentary assent.
Church Organisation and Government
The Church is organised by geographical areas, and not by congregations. There
are 43 dioceses in England, each under a bishop, which are grouped into two
provinces, each under an archbishop: Canterbury (29 dioceses) and York (14
dioceses). The dioceses are sub-divided into ecclesiastical parishes, of which there
are just over 14,000. Everyone in England is born in a parish, and the parish church
is expected to play an active part in local life. Many people who do not attend its
services regularly tend to look to it for such personal ministrations as baptism,
marriage and burial. _ . .
Spiritual authority in the Church rests with the bishops. The authoritative bodies
in matters of doctrine, belief and practice are the Convocations of Canterbury and
York, each presided over by its archbishop, and consisting of an upper house of
bishops, and a lower house of representatives of each cathedral chapter, arch¬
deacons’and elected clergy. The Convocations meet not more than three times a year.
The legislative and central administrative body of the Church is the National
Assembly of the Church of England, which is commonly called the Church
Assembly. It was set up by the Crown in 1919 at the request of the two Convoca¬
tions, and was given power to legislate by measure by the Church of England
Assembly (Powers) Act of 1919. It can discuss any matter connected with the
Church of England, but may not make any doctrinal statements, nor infringe upon
the rights of the Convocations. It consists of three houses: bishops, clergy and laity.
The first two houses are composed of the members of the Convocations; the house
of laity consists of men and women elected every five years by the lay members of
diocesan conferences, and the constitution allows for 10 co-opted members.
The Church Assembly usually meets three times a year. Measures, after passing
through various stages in the assembly, are presented to an ecclesiastical committee
of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of 30 members, of whom 15 are appointed
by the Lord Chancellor and 15 by the Speaker of the House of Commons. This
committee lays the measures, together with a report upon them, before both
THE CHURCHES
195
Houses. If both Houses so resolve, the measure is then sent to the Sovereign for
Royal Assent, after which the measure has the same force and effect as an Act of
Parliament. Parliament, though it may reject a measure, has no power to amend it.
The Church Assembly is the centre of an administrative system consisting of
boards and councils dealing with various aspects of the Church’s work, such as
education, training for the ministry, and Church work overseas. The Church
Assembly, through the Schools Council of its Board of Education, is responsible
for 8,000 Church of England schools of all types, for approximately half of which the
Church bears a quarter of the cost of improvements, alterations and repairs (see
also p. 165).
Parochial church councils were set up by a measure in 1921 to associate the laity
with the government of the Church in the parish. The members of these councils
are appointed by the parochial electors, i.e. persons who are baptised, are not
members of any other church, are 17 years of age and over, and have applied
for membership of the electoral roll of the parish where they habitually reside or
worship. The estimated number on the parish electoral rolls in 1957 was just under
three million.
The Church of England has its own ecclesiastical courts. Their jurisdiction, as
it is exercised today, consists almost entirely of faculty cases, with occasional cases
of discipline against clergy, either for moral or ecclesiastical offences. A faculty is
necessary for any specific alteration or addition to the fabric or ornaments of a
church or to a churchyard.
The Church has 26 church training colleges for teachers1 and 25 theological
colleges.
Church Finance
Each parish is responsible for its own finances, and also contributes an annual
fixed quota to diocesan funds, and each diocese similarly contributes to the Church
Assembly. In the diocese, the financial authority is the diocesan board of finance,
which administers the money contributed by the parishes, and acts as trustee on
behalf of the parochial church councils, which have only limited powers of holding
property. The Church Assembly fund and various other central funds (including
that for the training of ordination candidates) are administered by the Central
Board of Finance of the Church of England. The State makes no payment to the
Church except for services rendered (e.g., chaplaincies to the armed forces and in
prisons).
The Church Commissioners, a body created by measure in 1947 to replace the
former Ecclesiastical Commissioners and Queen Anne’s Bounty, administers the
endowment income of the Church. It is largely responsible for the payment of
stipends of the clergy, and it also provides finance for pensions, new churches,
parsonage houses, and church schools. The total income from investments in the
financial year 1957-58 was £12,373,948. The total annual income of the Church is
estimated to be approximately £35 million; no precise figure can be given.
The Anglican Communion
The Anglican Communion comprises 15 constituent churches in the United
Kingdom and overseas, with a total membership of over 40 million.
In the United Kingdom, there are unestablished Anglican Churches in Ireland,
Scotland and Wales: the Church of Ireland (disestablished in 1869) has 14 dioceses
1 A programme of expansion of church training colleges, which included an increase in
the number of students from nearly 5,000 to nearly 8,000 and the building of a new college,
was approved at the 1959 spring session of the Church Assembly.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
196
in Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic, and some 354.000 members; the
Episcopal Church in Scotland, 7 dioceses, 377 churches and some 108,000
members; and the Church in Wales (disestablished in 1920), 6 dioceses and some
200,000 Easter communicants.
Outside the United Kingdom, the Anglican Communion exists wherever English¬
men have gone as settlers, traders and missionaries. The Protestant Episcopal
Church in the United States of America, the Church of India, Pakistan, Burma
and Ceylon, and the Anglican Churches of South Africa, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, the West Indies, China, Japan, West Africa and Central Africa are all
autonomous members of the Anglican Communion. In the Middle East, Jerusalem
now has the status of an archbishopric with jurisdiction over five dioceses in the
region. A constitution has been agreed for a new province of East Africa, to include
five dioceses in Kenya and Tanganyika. In addition, there remain eleven overseas
dioceses under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Terms of limited
inter-communion with the Church of South India, similar to those already existing
between that Church and the Church of India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon, were
laid down in resolutions passed by the Convocation of Canterbury in ipSS-
Since 1867, the Lambeth Conference has met every tenth year (except for the
war years) as an unofficial consultation between all Anglican bishops; it is presided
over by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The last meeting, which was held in London
during July and August 1958, was attended by 310 bishops from all parts of the
Anglican Communion. The conference has no executive authority, but enjoys great
moral prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other com¬
munions, and on the attitude of the Anglican churches to political and social
questions are widely studied.
The Church of Scotland
The established church in Scotland is the Church of Scotland, which in govern¬
ment is presbyterian. It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church
which is established and yet is free’. Its position, defined in the Treaty of Union,
1707, wTas further safeguarded by the Church of Scotland Act, 1921.
Whereas in episcopacy, church government is a hierarchy of persons, in presby-
terianism there is a hierarchy of courts. All ministers are of equal status, and each
of the 2,272 churches is governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the
minister and elected elders (of whom there are over 43,000 in all): above this 18 the
Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General
Assembly, which meets annually and consists of elected ministers and elders pre¬
sided over by an elected Moderator who serves for one year. The Sovereign is
represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The Church
of Scotland has fought with the utmost vigour throughout the years for complete
freedom in all spiritual matters and for the right to appoint its own officers and to
decide all matters of doctrine and discipline. This freedom is recognised by Parlia¬
ment, and the decisions of the Church of Scotland are not subject to parliamentary
debate or modification. . .
The thorough training for the ministry, which lasts at least six years, has given
the church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the standard
of education in Scotland. The membership of the Church of Scotland in 1959 was
estimated at 1,316,000.
The Free Churches
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is now commonly used to describe those churches
in England which were more generally known in the past as ‘non-conformist’
THE CHURCHES
197
churches; all churches in Scotland except the established Church of Scotland;
and all churches in Wales and Northern Ireland, where there is no established
church. The main Free Churches are the Methodist, Baptist and Congregational
Churches, and the unestablished presbyterian churches throughout Britain. In
addition, there are a number of other protestant denominations in the United
Kingdom as well as such religious associations as the Society of Friends and the
Salvation Army, which have certain links with the main Free Churches.
The word ‘nonconformist’ signifies dissent from certain of the formularies and
practices of the established church. The Methodist Church, for example, originated
in the evangelical revival led by John Wesley within the Church of England during
the eighteenth century. More positively, the Free Churches would affirm that the
reason for their existence is a deep conviction about the nature of religious worship.
The Methodist Churches
The largest of the Free Churches is the Methodist Church, formed in 1932 by
the union of the majority of independent Methodist Churches. It has some 740,000
adult full members. The supreme authority is the annual conference, and the system
of government is in many ways presbyterian: the leaders’ meeting corresponding
to the kirk session, with circuit meetings and district synods resembling presbytery
and synod. One of the characteristics of Methodism is its strong emphasis on lay
leadership. There are over 23,000 trainM lay preachers sharing the ministers’ work
and preaching in many local churches.
Methodist Churches which did not join the union in 1932 include: the Indepen¬
dent Methodists, in which ministerial service is on a purely voluntary basis and
women (many of whom are ministers) have full equality with men; and the Wesleyan
Reform Union which, while retaining the essential Methodist doctrine, gives
autonomy to each of its 177 individual churches.
The Congregational and Baptist Churches
The Congregationalists are the oldest community of dissenters in Britain.
In 1831, most of their churches were formed into the Congregational Union.
Local churches have formed county and national unions, whose secretariat and
assemblies have much influence, but no compulsive authority over them, since great
importance is attached to the autonomy of local church meetings. Adult membership
is approximately 214,000.
Like the Congregationalists, the Baptists are for the most part grouped in
associations of churches, and the majority of these belong to the Baptist Union
formed in 1813. Baptists differ from Congregationalists in that they practice the
baptism of believers only; they do not baptise infants. The Baptist churches have a
total of about 324,000 members.
The Unestablished Presbyterian Churches
The largest of the presbyterian churches outside the established Church of
Scotland is the Presbyterian Church in Ireland; in Ireland, there are 30 presbyteries
(some of which are situated in the Irish Republic) and the communicant member¬
ship is about 136,000. The Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of
Wales, which arose from the revivalist movement led by Howell Harris in 1735,
now includes a considerable proportion of the Welsh-speaking population; its
members number some 147,000. The Presbyterian Church of England is organised
in 14 presbyteries and has nearly 71,000 members; its highest court is its general
assembly; women are admitted to the eldership and ministry.
Other presbyterian churches in Britain include: the Free Church of Scotland;
the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland;
I9g BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian
Church of Ireland (which consists of 43 congregations and preaching stations, all
but five of which are in Northern Ireland); and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian
Church of Ireland, comprising three presbyteries (two of which are in Northern
Ireland), with 30 congregations.
Other Denominations
Among other Protestant denominations in the United Kingdom are: the Unitarian
and Free Christian Churches, which number about 300, with a membership ot
some 20,000, and are united by loyalty to the principle of freedom of thought in
religion; the Churches of Christ (known also in the United States or America as
Disciples of Christ) which have been an organised community in Britain since
early in the nineteenth century, and now have 165 churches in the United Kingdom,
and a membership of about 8,500; the British Province of the Moravian Church,
which is an international missionary church, with 40 congregations and preaching
stations in the United Kingdom and some 2,800 communicant members; the bree
Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed m 1844
as a direct result of the Oxford Movement, and now has 50 churches; the Society
of Friends; and the Salvation Army. r. + .
The Society of Friends, or Quakers, was founded in the middle of the seventeenth
century by George Fox. It has no ordair d ministry and does not observe the
sacraments. One of the chief characteristics of the Quakers is their belief in pacifism
and their firm adherence to pacifist methods. Their influence in many parts of t e
world, especially in social reform and in the relief of suffering, is very wi e in
relation to their numbers. There are about 21,600 Quakers in Britain; they have
438 places of worship. r> u, • „
The Salvation Army, founded in 1878 by a Methodist, William Booth is a
religious movement, composed of men and women who seek the spiritual an
social betterment of their fellows, primarily by preaching the gospel to those hitherto
untouched by religious effort. The movement, in which military rather than eccle¬
siastical terminology is used, has branches all over the world and its social work
(particularly that connected with the welfare of members of the British armed forces
serving overseas) is well supported. . , ,
The Christian Scientists, who are in no way connected with any other church,
have 336 branch churches and societies in Britain.
The Roman Catholic Church
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became temporarily
extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish hierarchy
became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in 1878, while the
Irish hierarchy never became completely extinct. The normal government of the
Roman Catholic Church, namely by territorial archbishops and bishops, is once
again the rule in the whole of the United Kingdom. . . . ,
The central territorial unit of the Roman Catholic hierarchical organisation is the
province or archdiocese under the metropolitan, who is always an archbishop l he
chairman of the bench of bishops in England and Wales is the Archbishop of West¬
minster. A province normally comprises several dioceses, each under a bishop aided
by a chapter of canons and others, and by priests in charge of the parishes into
which the diocese is sub-divided. In England and Wales, there are four provinces
and archdioceses (Westminster, Liverpool, Birmingham and Cardiff), 14 dioceses,
and 2,184 parishes; in Scotland, there are two provinces and archdioceses (St.
Andrews and Edinburgh, and Glasgow), six dioceses, and 386 parishes; in Northern
THE CHURCHES
199
Ireland, there are six dioceses (several of which have territory partly in the Irish
Republic and partly in Northern Ireland since there is one hierarchy for the whole
of Ireland) and about 172 parishes. In the whole of the United Kingdom, there
are over four and a half million adherents (including children) to the Roman
Catholic faith.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
Roman Catholic children in their own faith, and requires that the children of
marriages between Roman Catholics and members of any other Church should be
brought up as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children in the
United Kingdom are staffed by members of the great Religious Orders for men
and women, who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and
the conduct of homes for the aged.
Jewry
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were
expelled at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The present
Anglo-Jewish community dates from 1656, the earliest arrivals being the Sephardi
(from Spain and Portugal). At the end of the seventeenth century an Ashkenazi
community (from Germany and East Europe) was established, which increased
rapidly and spread to the principal provincial cities. By 1956, as a result of the
virtual destruction of whole Jewish communities on the Continent during the
second world war, the Anglo-Jewish community of some 400,000 had become
the largest group of Jews in Europe.
The Anglo-Jewish community is divided into two schools of thought, each of
which has its own form of worship and its own services: the Orthodox (the original
groups) and the Reform. The Reform Movement, which attaches less religious
importance to some of the ancient rituals and practices of the Jewish faith, began
in 1840. It was followed in 1901 by the establishment of the Liberal Jewish Move¬
ment which, in addition, lays emphasis on the reinterpretation of traditional
Judaism in the light of modern thought and custom. Of the Jews in Great Britain
who belong to any kind of synagogue, about 80 per cent are Orthodox. The Chief
Rabbi is the head of the largest group (Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry; the
Haham is the head of the Sephardi group.
Synagogues in Britain of all sections of Jewry number approximately 445,,
including 17 Liberal and 15 Reform congregations. There are a few schools which
cater exclusively for Jewish children, but the vast majority attend the ordinary State
or independent schools, and receive extra-curricular instruction in the Jewish faith.
Other Religious Communities
Many immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth countries and foreign
countries have established centres for worship for their own communities in the
United Kingdom, and especially in London. The Christian communities include
the Greek, Russian, Polish and Serb Orthodox, with some Estonian and Latvian
Orthodox, and also the Armenian Church. There are also churches belonging to
the Lutheran Churches of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway and Sweden, and
centres where Estonian, Latvian and Polish Lutherans worship according to their
creed. In addition, the French, Dutch, Swiss, Hungarian and Polish Reformed
Churches are represented in Britain, the first three having their own places of
worship.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain are the Moslems and the
Buddhists. The Moslems are the most widely represented; it is estimated that the
Islamic population of Britain may now number about 100,000. Their principal
o
200
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mosque is the Shah Jehan Mosque at Woking, and there are also mosques in
London, Birmingham, Manchester, Cardiff and Glasgow.
A Buddhist temple was opened in South Kensington, London, in 1954 >
and other premises were opened in 1956 as a meeting place and discussion centre
for the several hundred thousand adherents of Buddhism in Britain.
Co-operation between the Churches
An outstanding feature of recent years has been the growth of co-operation
between the Churches. The British Council of Churches was founded in 1942 and
includes official representatives from almost all the churches of the British Isles,
with the exception of the Roman Catholic Church. The council facilitates common
action between the churches and seeks to further the cause of Christian unity. The
Archbishop of Canterbury is president. In addition, most, though not all, of the Free
Churches in England and Wales are members of the Free Church Federal Council
(formed in 1940 by the amalgamation of the Federal Council of Evangelical Free
Churches with the National Free Church Council), the aims of which are to promote
unity and joint action between the Free Churches, and to provide a channel through
which the Free Churches can communicate and negotiate with central and local
government organs as a united body. Discussions on changes in organisation to
allow of closer relations between the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church of England have
been taking place for the last few years. Conversations on the same subject are also
being held between representatives of the Church of England and the Methodist
Church. t ,
The Archbishop of Canterbury is advised on these matters, both at home and
abroad, by the Church of England Council on Inter-Church Relations.
The Anglican, Presbyterian and Free Churches in the British Isles also participate
in the World Council of Churches, which was constituted at Amsterdam, Nether¬
lands, in 1948, and is to hold its third assembly in 1961 at the University of Ceylon.
The council links together 168 churches in over 50 nations for co-operation in
action and the study of common problems.
Co-operation of other Churches with the Roman Catholic Church takes place on
specific issues, but there is no machinery of continuous co-operation. The Council
of Christians and Jews works for better understanding between members of the
two religions, and deals with problems arising in the social field.
VII. PROMOTION OF THE
SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
THE PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
While the promotion of the sciences in the United Kingdom is largely the
concern of those learned societies and institutions devoted specifically to this end,
only a small part of the research which is vital to science is carried out directly by
them. Most of the ‘pure’ or ‘fundamental’ research is conducted in the universities,
which also play an essential part in promoting the sciences by maintaining a steady
supply of trained scientists. In practice, it has become impossible to distinguish
clearly between science and its extensive applications in everyday life, with the
result that scientific research in the widest sense has become the concern also of
industry and of various departments of Government.
Today it is an acknowledged responsibility of the Government not only to
undertake research directly but also to keep under review the facilities for the
training of scientists, to encourage fundamental research, to finance certain research
projects, and to ensure that adequate research is directed to matters of national
interest. As a result, a system of collaboration has developed between the universi¬
ties, industry, the learned societies and the Government which yet leaves the
greatest possible measure of freedom to individual scientists.
Though scientific research is carried out mainly under three different kinds of
administration—university, industry and Government—there is strong liaison and
close co-operation between them, while the learned societies, whose membership is
derived from all three categories, remain free to play a most important part in the
discussion and publication of the results of research.
Important work is also undertaken by independent organisations—for example,
in medical research, by the British Empire Cancer Campaign, the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund, the Nuffield Foundation (which as a charitable trust also under¬
takes a wide range of other activities, see footnote on p. 142), the Lister Institute
of Preventive Medicine, the Wellcome Foundation and Trust, and by some large
pharmaceutical firms.
THE LEARNED SOCIETIES
The learned societies have had a profound and lasting influence upon the develop¬
ment and organisation of science in Britain; not only have they provided the back¬
ground for the continuity of research from the seventeenth century onwards, but
they have been a meeting ground where scientists can foregather for the exchange
of ideas, and a reliable source from which new ideas for the enrichment of know¬
ledge can flow. Although today the bulk of research operations is conducted under
other auspices, the learned societies have retained their traditional function of
facilitating the spread of scientific knowledge and the application of new discoveries.
At present there are over 200 learned scientific societies in Britain with approxi¬
mately 400 scientific publications. There are also numerous technical institutions
and professional associations, many of which are playing a distinguished part in
promoting their own branches of science and are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. Prominent examples of these are the
201
202 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Medical Association, the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, the Institution of Electrical Engineer, the Institution
of Chemical Engineers, the Institution of Metallurgists, the Royal Institute of
Chemistry, the Institute of Physics, and the Institute of Biology.
The most eminent of the learned societies concerned with science in its broadest
aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised interests and activities)
are noted below.
The Royal Society (or, more fully, the Royal Society of London), founded m
1660 occupies a unique place in the country’s scientific affairs, although for two
centuries scientists were in a minority among its members, whose interests then ay
mainly in history, art, archaeology or exploration. The society has always been
independent of State control but its advice on scientific matters has frequently been
sought by the Government. Today its influence remains as strong as ever and its
Fellows serve on most of the official advisory councils and committees concerned
Fellowship consists of approximately 600 eminent scientists and 60 foreign
members. Admission of the former is restricted to 25 a year, and of the latter to four
a year; a few eminent non-scientists are also elected to Fellowships. The society
maintains a library (145,000 books of a purely scientific nature), iss^es a larSe
number of publications, including the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceed-
ines and convenes conferences which are attended by scientists from all countries.
^In addition, the Royal Society is responsible for the administration of a number
of Government grants and of many research funds and special funds derived from
various sources. These funds and grants are used for the promotion of science
through research, publications, congresses, the award of medals, lectures, and in
many other ways The highest honour bestowed by the Society is the Copley
medal, for which scientists of all nationalities are eligible.
Thl Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement of
Arts Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific, artistic,
technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754, however, one of
the society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress and application to
useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils this purpose chiefly by the
dissemination of new scientific knowledge. The society regularly holds meetings
for the delivery of lectures, and publishes a monthly Journal, thus providing
effective media for the exposition and assessment by leading authorities of
developments which have a public as well as a specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the
introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for teaching
the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the promotion o
chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving arts and manufactures ,
and^ he diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’. Its character however, was
krgely determined by the work of Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday who
established a tradition of research. Today, the Royal Institution has extensive
research laboratories, and lectures are given on recent developments m science an
other branches of knowledge. Its library of some 60,000 books includes many ear y
scientific works and manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to
promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief activities
Is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as by eminent
scientists. Its 14 sections cover the whole range of pure and applied science other
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 203
than medical science, and there is a division for studying the social and international
relations of science. In addition to the annual meeting and in order to extend its
influence, the association plans continuous activities throughout the year, in
particular special lectures, exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young
audiences), the publication of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the
appointment of study groups and liaison with the press and with sound and tele¬
vision broadcasting services. The association has set up area committees and three
lectureships for young scientists—the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lecture¬
ships, dealing respectively with the physical, biological and sociological sciences—
to encourage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. Collabo¬
ration with other scientific organisations has always been an important function of
the British Association, and it has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific
bodies and learned societies. It has also played an important part in the development
of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles to the discovery
and application of scientific knowledge.
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF TECHNOLOGY
According to a survey carried out by the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, the number of qualified scientists and engineers (i.e. holders of degrees or
diplomas, or members of certain professional institutions) in employment in Great
Britain at the beginning of 1956 was 142,000 including some 7,000 engaged in
postgraduate research at universities and on National Service. Starting from these
figures the Committee on Scientific Manpower of the Advisory Council on Scientific
Policy estimated that over the next ten to fifteen years the current annual output
of some 10,000 qualified scientists and engineers would need to be raised to
20,000. The Government has accepted this figure as a reasonable goal and will
support measures to ensure that the universities and technical colleges together will
be able to produce at least this number.
The Universities
The universities carry the main responsibility for the pursuit of fundamental
research and for the training of scientists. During recent years there has also been
a considerable expansion of technological training and research facilities within the
universities. For example, the Imperial College of Science and Technology,
London, the Royal College of Science and Technology, Glasgow, and the
Manchester College of Science and Technology are schools of their respective
universities, providing degree and postgraduate courses. At the new Churchill
College, Cambridge, 70 per cent of the students will be studying scientific and
technological subjects. More than half of the students at universities are now
studying some branch of science or technology.
Eighteen of the 22 universities of the United Kingdom have faculties of
engineering; chemical and aeronautical engineering have been developed in recent
years. Universities in industrial centres have long been renowned for studies relating
to their local industries, such as metallurgy at Birmingham, Sheffield, Swansea and
other centres of the metals and metal-using industries, and naval architecture and
marine engineering at Glasgow, Liverpool, Durham and Southampton. In the
textile areas, Manchester offers courses in textile chemistry and engineering and
Leeds has specialised in courses and research in connection with the wool textile
industry, including colour chemistry and dyeing. Leeds is the only university in
Britain that has a department devoted to the study of leather manufacture, and
Manchester offers courses in paper technology. Sheffield is unique, for its depart-
2Q4 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ment of glass technology—the pioneer among such departments in the world.
Nearly all universities and university colleges in the United Kingdom have
laboratories or research departments. About 70 per cent of the recurrent income of
the universities and a very large proportion of their money for new building comes
from Government sources. There is no direct departmental control and the method
of administering the grant—^through the University Grants Committee (see p. 166)
 is designed to ensure academic freedom. The universities also receive funds for
the furtherance of research from industrial organisations, foundations, and indivi¬
duals as well as from the Government research councils and the autonomous
industrial research associations. Leading firms in such industries as chemicals, oil,
motor vehicles, textiles, electrical equipment, food, and mining provide grants for
specific research projects or endow research fellowships, such as the Imperial
Chemical Industries and Leverhulme Fellowships, or professorships. Among the
foundations which provide similar benefactions are the Nuffield Foundation, the
Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Trust, the Wellcome Trust and Courtaulds
Scientific and Educational Trust Fund. Individuals whose major contributions to
universities have included provision for research facilities are Lord Nuffield with
gifts to the Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford, Lord Austin, who provided new
buildings for the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, members of the Wills family
who financed the Physics Laboratory at Bristol, members of the Boot family at
Nottingham and of the Brotherton family at Leeds.
There are several examples of continuous co-operation between industry and
commerce and the universities. A notable one is the Manchester Joint Research
Council, set up in i944 by the Manchester Chamber of Commerce and the
University of Manchester. This body, on which the university and chamber are
equally represented, organises lectures and discussion meetings and conducts
investigations into the use made of research by industry. Another is the Glass
Delegation of the University of Sheffield, which is responsible for the genera
direction of the work of the Department of Glass Technology and is composed of
members appointed by the Council of the University and representatives of firms
and companies who subscribe funds for the furtherance of training and research.
An example of co-operation between a Government department, an independent
organisation and a university is the world’s largest steerable pencil-beam radio
telescope at Jodrell Bank, Cheshire, financed jointly by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research, the Nuffield Foundation, and Manchester University,
which has been responsible for its development. While the main purpose of the
telescope is the study of stars, very distant nebulae and galaxies detectable on y
from their emission of electromagnetic waves, it is also being used extensively in
the tracking of space rockets and earth satellites, and has sent the first messages
reflected from the moon.
Technical Colleges
The Government’s plans for a large-scale and rapid expansion of education in
advanced technology (outlined in 1956 in a White Paper, Cmd. 9703), include the
increase of advanced work at technical colleges as well as at the universities.
Certain technical colleges in England and Wales, which concentrate entirely on
advanced work, including postgraduate and research work, have been designa e
as ‘colleges of advanced technology’ (see p. 169). In Scotland, advanced instruction
in a wide range of technologies is given at the Central Institutions (see p. 170).
Most postgraduate studentships and fellowships awarded by the Government
Research Councils may be held at colleges of advanced technology and technical
colleges as well as at universities.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
205
RESEARCH IN INDUSTRY
Industrial research in Britain is conducted by individual industrial firms and
organisations independently of Government aid, by co-operative Research Associa¬
tions which are assisted in varying degrees by the Government, by institutes for
sponsored research and by universities and some of the major technical colleges.
The main nationalised industries have their own research establishments (particulars
of which are given in the appropriate sections of Chapter IX, Industry), and also
give financial support to organisations concerned with research into matters of
interest to them. Results of an inquiry into research expenditure are given on p. 220.
Research Associations
A scheme to form industrial research associations, by which the Government
associated itself with groups of firms having similar interests, was started in 1915,
on the recommendation of the then newly formed Advisory Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research. In 1958, there were 49 such research associations with a
combined income of | million, of which about one-quarter was contributed by
the Government through the Industrial Grants Committee of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research. The fiftieth research association was established
in 1959. The amounts of the Government grants are related to the contributions
made by the industries concerned. Among the better-known associations are the
British Cotton Industry Research Association (the Shirley Institute), the British
Iron and Steel Research Association, the Motor Industry Research Association and
the Production Engineering Research Association.
The research associations are autonomous bodies, governed by their own
councils, the large majority of whose members are representatives of industry. The
councils are advised by research committees in the preparation of research pro¬
grammes. The research associations make the results of their work known to their
industries by a variety of methods, among which are bulletins, publications, lectures,
films, training classes, exhibitions and mobile demonstration units. (For an account
of other methods of communicating the results of research see p. 220.)
Institutes for Sponsored Research. A number of institutes for sponsored research
have been established to meet the needs of private firms which are unable to main¬
tain fully equipped research laboratories. In these institutes, research sponsored
independently by private firms can be carried out confidentially so that the results
and any patents which may arise are retained as the property of the sponsoring
body. The principal institutes of this type are the Fulmer Research Institute,
Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire and the Sondes Place Research Institute, Dorking,
Surrey.
National Research Development Corporation. The National Research Develop¬
ment Corporation (NRDC) was set up by the Board of Trade in 1949 under the
Development of Inventions Act, 1948. Its primary function is to develop and
exploit, in the public interest, inventions resulting from research carried out by
Government departments and other public bodies. It may also develop and exploit
an invention from any other source where, in the corporation’s view, the public
interest requires it. Under the Development of Inventions Act, 1954, the NRDC
may promote or assist research to meet specific practical requirements, or may
assist the continuation of research which may lead to inventions of practical
importance. It is an independent body, subject only to general direction by the
Board of Trade, with powers, under the Development of Inventions Act, 1958, to
borrow from Government funds to a total of £10 million up to 1968. Projects
205 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
selected for development include such varied items as electronic digital computers,
Merton diffraction gratings, a lightweight power unit, printed electrical circuits,
towed flexible oil barges, anti-tumour agents, a machine for decorticating and
ribboning jute, an ultrasonic flow meter, a new form of transport, known as the
hovercraft (see photograph facing p. 190), and a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell as a
transportable source of electricity.
GOVERNMENT RESEARCH ORGANISATION
The active participation by the Government in scientific research is for the most
part a development of the twentieth century, though its association with science
dates back to a much earlier period.
Early Examples
In 1675, King Charles II established Britain’s first State-supported research
institution—the Royal Greenwich Observatory (now transferred to Herstmonceux,
Sussex see p. 214)—to correct the tables of the positions of the moon and fixed
stars ‘for the use of his seamen’. The Geological Survey of Great Britain, the first
national institution of its kind in the world, was founded in 1835. In 1842, the
Board of Inland Revenue established a chemical laboratory which eventually
developed into the Laboratory of the Government Chemist, now transferred to
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (see pp. 58 and 208-9); and
in 1854 the Meteorological Office (see pp. 49-50) was established by the Board of
Trade. All these Government departments were using scientific knowledge, but
there was little organised effort towards the application of the discoveries made in
pure science.
Evolution of the Research Organisations
Government scientific organisations, like many British institutions, evolved
gradually in response to changing social and economic circumstances.
The need for research in physics and engineering, and particularly into methods
of precise measurement, led to the establishment in 1900 of the National Physical
Laboratory under the control of the Royal Society, with a small grant from the
Treasury towards equipment and a yearly grant towards upkeep. Government
recognition of the importance of scientific research and its applications was hastened
by the first world war, and the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(DSIR) was established in 1916 as a separate Government department. In 191 ,
the DSIR took over financial responsibility for the National Physical Laboratory
from the Royal Society, but the society appoints a general board and an executive
committee which supervise scientific policy. . . ,
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the researc 1
funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act of 1911. In 1920, the
committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council ( ), see pp.
209-10, established under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-m-aid provided
^Agricultural research, in its early days, was not centrally organised. The first
research institutes were founded and initially maintained by private mdmduals ;
Rothamsted Experimental Station, for example, the oldest of them was founded
in 1843 by Sir John Lawes, who personally financed it until, in 1889, he endowed it
and set up the Lawes Agricultural Trust to administer the endowment As research
became more costly, Government funds were sought and obtained, thoughthe
institute remained independent. The Development Commission, set up under the
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
207
Development and Road Improvement Funds Act, 1909, recommended that
financial aid should be made available from the Development Fund to ‘aid and
develop agriculture and rural industries by promoting scientific research’. In 1911,
the Development Fund was used to promote a scheme which led to the establish¬
ment of many of the present-day agricultural institutions. In 1931, the Agricultural
Research Council (ARC), see p. 210, was established by Royal Charter to be re¬
sponsible for the general organisation and development of agricultural research in
Great Britain. In addition to advising the agricultural departments on the pro¬
grammes of the institutes and, in the early stages, acting as scientific adviser to the
Development Commission, the ARC was given funds to spend at its own discretion.
The ARC gradually took over the responsibilities of the Development Com¬
mission for agricultural research. The Nature Conservancy, which is concerned
with the conservation of flora and fauna, was set up in 1949 (see pp. 191 and 211).
During the second world war, a Scientific Advisory Committee to the War
Cabinet was created to co-ordinate defence research and civil research. This
committee was replaced in 1947 by two bodies: an Advisory Council on Scientific
Policy to advise the Lord President of the Council, who had come to be regarded
as the minister responsible for the formulation and execution of Government
scientific policy; and a Defence Research Policy Committee ‘to advise the Minister
of Defence and Chiefs of Staff on matters connected with the formulation of
scientific policy in the defence field’.
Ministerial Responsibility for Civil Scientific Research
Responsibility for Government scientific organisation is allocated as follows:
1. The Lord President of the Council is responsible for the formulation and
execution of Government scientific policy and is advised by the Advisory
Council on Scientific Policy on general questions which relate to the whole
field of civil science. He is responsible to Parliament for the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, the Medical Research Council, the
Agricultural Research Council, the Overseas Research Council, and the
Nature Conservancy, and is chairman of the five Privy Council Committees
to which they report—the Committees for Scientific and Industrial Re¬
search, Medical Research, Agricultural Research, Overseas Research, and
Nature Conservation.
2. The Prime Minister is the minister responsible to Parliament for general
oversight of the development of atomic energy, and appoints the members
of the Atomic Energy Authority.
3. Other ministers are responsible for the scientific establishments within
their own departments. The research councils are not subject to depart¬
mental control, but their advice is at the disposal of the executive
departments which maintain close liaison with them.
The Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
The 15 members of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy, who are appointed
by the Lord President, include eminent scientists drawn from the universities,
industry and Government service.
In order to give adequate attention to each of the subjects within its wide range
of interest, the Advisory Council has established the following standing committees :
the Committee on Scientific Manpower;
the Scientific Library and Technical Information Committee; and
the Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations.
2o8
Britain: an official handbook
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
The DSIR is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research. It is governed by a Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, known as the Research Council, which, under the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research Act, 1956, replaced the former Advisory Council.
The Research Council consists of as many members as the Lord President of
the Council may determine; in 1959, it had a chairman and 11 members. It is
charged with the organisation, development and encouragement of scientific and
industrial research and with the dissemination of the results of such research. In
particular, it may:
(1) encourage and support scientific research in universities, technical colleges
and other institutions;
(2) establish or develop institutions or departments of institutions for investi¬
gation and research relating to the advancement of trade and industry; and
(3) take steps to further the practical application of the results of scientific and
industrial research.
These functions are discharged through 14 national research organisations under
the Research Council’s own control and direction and financed from its own Vote,
and one, the Joint Fire Research Organisation, which is maintained by the
and the’ Fire Offices’ Committee; and also through the autonomous research
associations. The council also makes grants for these purposes and for post¬
graduate instruction in science and technology to individual workers and to
institutions. . e
Since DSIR was set up, technological changes have necessitated a measure ot
reorganisation. Science-based industries, such as the chemical and electrical
industries, have matured and prospered; entirely new industries, such as electronics,
plastics, synthetic fibres and synthetic rubber industries, have emerged. Industry,
for its own purposes and on behalf of the Government, has become the largest
employer of research workers. Organised teamwork has increasingly replaced
individual effort in scientific research, leading to a demand for trained research
workers who can both specialise and co-operate with colleagues trained in other
subiects, and also for men of outstanding qualities to direct large research depart¬
ments. Research projects, at the same time, have become increasingly expensive
and have to be selected with more care. . _ u a
The Research Council has therefore, since its appointment in November 1956,
kept under review the organisation of DSIR and has announced a number of specific
changes. From January 1958, the Timber Development Association (grant-aided by
DSIR but otherwise financed by timber importers and others) assumed responsi¬
bility for certain work previously undertaken by the Forest Products R'-searc
Laboratory of DSIR, so that the latter might concentrate more on research leading
to new developments. In July 1959, the Agricultural Research Council took over
DSIR’S food laboratories (the Low Temperature Research Station, the Ditton
Laboratory and the Pest Infestation Laboratory) in the interests of a better co¬
ordination of work. re • 11 a r,*
A new laboratory, the Warren Spring Laboratory, was officially opened at
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, in June 1959- In view of the research now done by the
fuel and power industries (see pp. 304 and 312-3), the new research station, in so
far as it continues fuel research, will concentrate on the study of atmospheric
pollution and of the synthesis of oil and chemicals from carbon monoxide and
hydrogen. It will also conduct research on mineral processing and on subjects
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 20Q
(including those requiring pilot-scale investigations) which are not covered by
other DSIR laboratories.
The council has also set up ad hoc committees to review the work of the National
Physical Laboratory, and the recently renamed laboratories, the National Chemical
Laboratory (formerly the Chemical Research Laboratory) and the National Engin¬
eering Laboratory (formerly the Mechanical Engineering Research Laboratory).
Two other committees have been set up: a Human Sciences Committee to study
especially the human aspects of equipment design and problems of training and
human relations in industry; and an Economics Committee to apply economic
criteria in framing DSIR’s scientific research policy, and to study the economic
implications of such research.
In August 1958, the Research Council announced that small steering committees,
the chairmen of which are members of the council, had been set up to take responsi¬
bility for the research programmes of two of its laboratories, the new Warren Spring
Laboratory at Stevenage and the National Chemical Laboratory at Teddington,
Middlesex. Subsequently, two other steering committees were set up to assume
responsibility for the fish research programme of the Torry Research Station,
Aberdeen, and for the work of the National Engineering Laboratory, East Kilbride,
near Glasgow.
In April 1959, responsibility for the Tropical Products Institute was transferred
from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the Lord President of the Council,
and the institute became one of the DSIR research stations. The primary object of
the change was to make the services of the institute available to countries which have
achieved independence and no longer come within the scope of the Colonial Office.
In July 1959, responsibility for the Laboratory of the Government Chemist was
transferred from the Treasury to the Lord President of the Council, and it became
another of the DSIR establishments. The laboratory provides a wide variety of
analytical, investigatory, and advisory services to all Government departments that
request them, and has a statutory function as official analyst and as an adjudicator
in cases of disputed analyses. In addition, it undertakes research in various fields,
including the development of chemical and physical methods of analysis.
The DSIR is expanding its activities under a second five-year plan for the years
1959-64; expenditure—at £61 million—will be nearly double that of £36 million
under the first five-year plan 1954-59. Expansion will continue steadily throughout
the period, and for the year 1963-64 is planned to reach £14 million. The largest
increase will be in scientific research grants to universities. Postgraduate awards to
students will be increased by about 10 per cent each year until, in 1963-64, it is
hoped that some 3,800 students will be receiving DSIR grants for research training.
In the same year, DSIR support for special research in universities should reach
about £1-75 million a year. Expansion of staff in the DSIR’s own laboratories is to
proceed at the rate of about 6 per cent a year. Grants to the 50 research associations
in the DSIR scheme will be increased to over £2 million a year by 1964. The
Research Council will continue its policy of encouraging industry to bear an
increasing proportion of the total cost. The actual expansion of the research
association movement will thus probably be proportionately greater than the
increase in the Government grant. It has also been decided to devote much more
attention and money to ensure that the results of research are known and applied
(see pp. 220-1).
Medical Research Council
The Medical Research Council (MRC), the successor of the Medical Research
Committee, was incorporated under its present title by Royal Charter in 1920.
210
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The MRC is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Medical
Research, of which the Lord President is chairman and the Secretaries of State for
the Home Department, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations, and the Colonies, and
the Ministers of Health and of Labour and National Service are members.
The members of the MRC, appointed by the Committee of the Privy Council for
Medical Research for a period normally of four years, are twelve in number.
Nine members, representing different branches of medical knowledge and the
fundamental sciences on which these are based, are appointed after consultation
with the President of the Royal Society and with the MRC itself: on retirement, these
scientific members are not eligible for immediate reappointment. Of the three lay
members of the council, one must be a member of the House of Lords and one a
member of the House of Commons.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote scientific investigations to obtain new
knowledge likely to be of value in the field of curative and preventive medicine. In
planning and carrying out its research programme, the council is often assisted by
special committees appointed to advise on particular subjects. Its arrangements
for the support of research fall under three main headings:
(1) investigations by members of the council’s scientific staff, mostly working
in the council’s own research establishments;
(2) temporary research grants to independent investigators in universities and
elsewhere; and
(3) research fellowships and scholarships for tenure both at home and abroad.
The National Institute for Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead,
London, is the council’s main research establishment; in addition, there are some
70 smaller establishments, generally known as research units or groups, which
are attached in most cases to universities and hospitals in the United Kingdom.
The council also undertakes work overseas and, with additional support^ from
colonial development and welfare funds, maintains laboratories in the Gambia and
units in Uganda and Jamaica.
The MRC administers the Public Health Laboratory Service (see p. 157) on
behalf of the Ministry of Health.
Agricultural Research Council
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established by Royal Charter in
1931. It is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Agricultural
Research, consisting of the Lord President of the Council, the Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Under the Agricultural Research Act, 1956, the ARC was charged with the
organisation and development of agricultural research, and an Agricultural Research
Fund was established, into which are paid the parliamentary grant-in-aid and other
sums received by the council, and out of which are met all expenses incurred by the
council under the Act or in accordance with the terms of its charter. The accounts
of the fund are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General.
The council consists of not more than 18 nor fewer than 15 members, five of
whom are appointed for their general experience of and interest in agriculture.
Others are appointed by the Committee of the Privy Council, after consultation
with the President of the Royal Society, on account of their qualifications in one or
other of the sciences relating to agriculture. Included in the council’s membership
are the Chief Scientific Adviser (Agriculture) and the Chief Veterinary Officer of
the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, also one member appointed by
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
211
the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and one by the Secretary of State
for Scotland. The council has 23 research stations and units under its direct control
in Great Britain, including three laboratories, concerned with the preservation,
storage and protection of foodstuffs, transferred from the DSIR on 1st July, 1959,
when the ARC assumed responsibility for Government research on food (other
than fish).
It is also responsible for the financing of the independent research institutes (see
p. 287) in England and Wales (but not in Scotland). The programmes of all these
institutes are co-ordinated and approved by the council and are integrated with
those of the independent research institutes in Scotland, which are grant-aided by
the Department of Agriculture for Scotland.
The council makes grants to universities and other recognised research institu¬
tions for special investigations, and awards research fellowships and postgraduate
studentships in agricultural and veterinary science, agricultural and dairy engineer¬
ing and statistics.
Nature Conservancy
The Nature Conservancy was established by Royal Charter in 1949 and is
responsible to the Privy Council Committee for Nature Conservation. Its functions,
as summarised in the charter, are ‘to provide scientific advice on the conservation
and control of the natural flora and fauna of Great Britain; to establish, maintain
and manage nature reserves in Great Britain, including the maintenance of physical
features of scientific interest; and to organise and develop the research and scientific
service related thereto’.
Research stations have been set up by the Nature Conservancy at Merlewood,
Grange-over-Sands, in Lancashire, and Furzebrook, Wareham, in Dorset, and field
stations at Moor House, Westmorland, and at Anancaun, Ross-shire, where long¬
term ecological research is undertaken into such problems as the relation of vege¬
tation to soils and climates, peat growth, effects of grazing and of moor burning,
coastal erosion, roadside spraying and the spread of myxomatosis. Grants are made
for research, and the Nature Conservancy awards annually a number of post¬
graduate studentships.
Atomic Energy
Before 1946 the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was responsible
for atomic energy research and development. From 1946 to the end of 1953 this
responsibility rested with the Minister of Supply. Because of its growing industrial
applications, however, the Government decided to transfer responsibility for atomic
energy from the Minister of Supply to a non-departmental organisation. As a result,
in January 1954, ministerial responsibility (except for weapons production) was
transferred to the Lord President of the Council; and the Atomic Energy Authority
Act, 1954, established the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA)
which, in August 1954, took over responsibility, under the Lord President, for
atomic energy research and development. In April 1957, the Prime Minister
assumed, by Order in Council, general responsibility for atomic energy in place of
the Lord President.
The Prime Minister is assisted by a small department, the Atomic Energy Office,
which is responsible among other things for international aspects of atomic energy
in co-operation with the Foreign Office and Commonwealth Relations Office. The
Minister of Supply is responsible for the development and production of atomic
weapons for the Services in accordance with agreed defence policy; in practice,
however, the Atomic Energy Authority produces the explosive nuclear material and
212
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the assemblies for atomic weapons under contract and carries out weapon research.
The Minister of Power (in Scotland the Secretary of State) has a general responsi¬
bility for the civil nuclear power programme; the power stations are being built and
will be operated by the electricity authorities. The Admiralty is concerned (in close
collaboration with the Atomic Energy Authority) in the development of nuclear
power for naval propulsion, and has a general responsibility for the application of
nuclear propulsion in merchant ships. The Authority collaborates with a number of
other Government departments—the Ministries of Health, Labour and National
Service, Housing and Local Government, Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Trans¬
port and Civil Aviation, the Post Office, and the Home Office—on various aspects
of health and safety in relation to atomic energy.
Expert advice on radiation hazards is provided by the Medical and Agricultural
Research Councils and by the Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee. This
committee advises ministers on the administration of the Radioactive Substances
Act, 1948, which deals with the restrictions necessary on the use of radioactive
substances and apparatus producing radiation.
The Atomic Energy Authority
The Atomic Energy Authority, members of which are appointed by the Prime
Minister, may consist of not fewer than eight and not more than eleven members,
including the chairman.
The authority, like other statutory public corporations, is free from day-to-day
Government control (subject to the power given to the responsible minister to issue
directions to the authority in matters of over-riding national importance), but differs
from them in that the bulk of its revenue is derived from money voted by Parliament
and in that its accounts are certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General.
The organisation is divided into four groups controlling various establishments
and has a London office which is responsible for central financial, administrative
and establishment matters, and for raw material procurement.
The Research Group, centred at Harwell, Berkshire, conducts research into all
aspects of atomic energy. Much of its work is of a fundamental nature without
direct regard to particular applications. Most of the applied research at Harwell is
now devoted to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, although some assistance is given
on specific problems relating to weapons. In addition to numerous research reactors
and accelerating machines, Harwell houses Hermes—the largest isotope separator in
Europe—and Zeta (Zero Energy Thermonuclear Assembly), with which remarkable
progress towards the achievement of controlled thermonuclear reactions (the fusion
process) was made when, in November 1957, temperatures of 5 million degrees
centigrade were registered in the apparatus. Work is in progress on designs for an
advanced version (Zeta IT). It was announced in July I959> that in order to study
the basic scientific principles involved in such reactions, a new apparatus, Icse
(Intermediate Current Stability Experiment), is to be built, which will be capable
of operating at higher pressures and faster rates of increase of electric current.
Such experiments in Britain and elsewhere may lead to the possibility of obtaining
almost unlimited supplies of energy from hydrogen.
Construction is well advanced on a second main research centre at Winfrith
Heath in Dorset, which will be concerned mainly with research into reactor design
and development. It will function as an out-station of Harwell. Among projects to
be built there are two high temperature gas-cooled reactors—Zenith and Dragon—
the latter jointly financed by a number of member countries of the Organisation for
European Economic Co-operation (OEEC), including members of the European
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
213
Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). The United Kingdom will provide the
largest share and retain ownership of the Dragon reactor.
The research group is concerned with preparing and distributing radio-isotopes
and other radioactive substances. Marketing of these materials has now been taken
over by the Radiochemical Centre, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, which has been
enlarged to meet a demand for radioactive products which has more than trebled
since 1955. Harwell also runs an isotope school, started in April 1951, and a reactor
school, started in September i954> which provide training for home and overseas
students.
The Development and Engineering Group is responsible for development, design
and construction of reactors and associated plants (except for some development
work which is undertaken by the research group); for engineering consultant work
for the electricity authorities, overseas organisations and the nuclear power com¬
panies; and for the general engineering design and construction of all major
building projects. The group has its headquarters at Risley, Lancashire, and it
includes the Dounreay Experimental Reactor Establishment, Caithness, Scotland
(housing an experimental fast-breeder reactor, a materials testing reactor and a
prototype submarine reactor), the Culcheth Laboratories, Lancashire, and research
and development organisations at Capenhurst (Cheshire), Windscale (Cumberland)
and Springfields (Lancashire).
The Production Group is responsible for the operation of UKAEA factories
(including the Calder Hall and Chapelcross reactors); research and development
concerned with factory processes; and commercial activities taken over from the
industrial power branch of the former industrial group.
The production group’s headquarters is at Risley, Lancashire, and its plants are
at Capenhurst, Cheshire (for the production of enriched uranium); Springfields,
Lancashire (for uranium metal production and the manufacture of reactor fuel
elements); Windscale, Cumberland (now being expanded as one of the national
centres for the development of advanced gas-cooled reactors as well as for chemical
processing); Calder Hall, Cumberland; and Chapelcross, Dumfriesshire, both of
which produce plutonium and electricity, the former also housing a reactor
operation school, established in 1957.
The Weapons Group, centred at Aldermaston, Berkshire, conducts research on
and development of nuclear weapons, including the explosion of test weapons,
both under Ministry of Supply contract and in its own right. The group also carries
out research work on controlled thermonuclear reactions.
National Institute for Research in Nuclear Science
In February 1957, the Government set up a National Institute for Research in
Nuclear Science, which provides, for common use by universities and others,
facilities and equipment which are beyond the scope of individual universities and
institutions carrying out research in the nuclear field. It does not replace the
research already being done in individual universities with assistance from Govern¬
ment funds; nor does it affect the Government’s participation in the international
scheme for common facilities set up in Geneva under the auspices of the European
Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN). The institute is financed in the main
by grants through the Atomic Energy Authority from the Atomic Energy Vote.
The Rutherford High Energy Laboratory at Harwell, which will house the institute’s
proton synchrotron (particle accelerator), is nearing completion. This 7,000
million electron volt apparatus will be one of the largest such machines in the world.
214
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Government-sponsored Scientific Research
All departments rely on one or other of the Government research councils for
scientific advice. While some use these bodies as their main source of scientific
information, a few have set up supplementary research organisations of their own.
Defence Research with Civil Applications
Research and development undertaken by the Admiralty is primarily directed to
meeting the requirements of the Royal Navy, but a substantial amount of this work
has important civil applications. For instance, the Admiralty is sponsoring research
into nuclear propulsion for ships both for the Royal and Merchant Navies, and
is responsible through the Royal Naval Scientific Service for inter-Service electronic
valve research and development. The research activities of the Royal Greenwich
Observatory, at Herstmonceux, and the National Institute of Oceanography,
which are mainly in the civil field, are also administered by the Admiralty. At the
former, the 98-inch Isaac Newton optical telescope is to be built which will be the
largest in Britain.
The Ministry of Supply carries out research needed to meet the technical require¬
ments of defence and is also responsible for some civil research, e.g., at the Royal
Aircraft Establishment, the National Gas Turbine Establishment at Farnborough,
and the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern. Some fundamental research is also
carried out for the ministry by universities and industrial organisations.
The Air Ministry finances the Meteorological Office which is responsible for
research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly directed to non-military ends.
The Forecasting Research Section has recently been equipped with a large-capacity
electronic computer. Balloon and aircraft soundings and radar techniques are
used to investigate the movement and composition of the atmosphere. The Air
Ministry also makes grants for fundamental meteorological research carried out
under the auspices of the Royal Society or in university departments. The three
main divisions of the Meteorological Office—at present in London, at Harrow
(Middlesex), and at Dunstable (Bedfordshire)—will soon be transferred to a new
building under erection at Bracknell, Berkshire.
Agriculture
Apart from research at the centres controlled or grant-aided by the Agricultural
Research Council and the Department of Agriculture for Scotland, the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food conducts research in its own veterinary labora¬
tories at Weybridge, Surrey, and at Lasswade, Midlothian, Scotland, and also
at its plant pathology laboratory at Harpenden, Hertfordshire; at its infestation
control division at Tolworth, Surrey, it conducts research into problems affecting
the destruction and control of insect pests of stored food, rodent pests and other
animal and bird pests. Limited research in entomology and helminthology is carried
out by the Department of Agriculture for Scotland at its plant pathology laboratory
in Edinburgh. In Northern Ireland, research in all the major agricultural sciences
is carried out in conjunction with the Ministry of Agriculture.
Fisheries
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are: the Ministry of Agricul¬
ture, Fisheries and Food, which maintains four laboratories for marine, shell-fish,
salmon and freshwater fisheries research, and four research vessels; the Scottish
Home Department, which maintains a marine research laboratory, four research
ships at Aberdeen, and a freshwater research laboratory at Pitlochry; and the
Development Commissioners.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
215
The Development Commissioners, through their Advisory Committee on
Fishery Research, co-ordinate all fishery research. From the Development Fund
a number of independent institutions receive grants for marine and freshwater
research.
Food
The Division of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food) of the Ministry of Agricul¬
ture, Fisheries and Food, advises the minister on all scientific and technical aspects
of departmental food policy, identifies problems in food procurement, processing,
utilisation and distribution which require investigation, and arranges for such
investigations to be made at appropriate research centres. It also promotes the
application of the results of research either directly or in co-operation with the
food industries concerned. To help in doing so, it has experimental laboratories
and kitchens in London and an experimental factory at Aberdeen. The division is
grouped into three sections dealing with nutrition, food technology and food in
relation to defence.
Forestry
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to silvicultural
and allied problems. By means of grants, it also aids forest research work under¬
taken by various universities and other institutions, including the Imperial Forestry
Institute, Oxford.
Fuel and Power
The Minister of Power is responsible for research on safety in mines and also
plays an important part in research into the efficient utilisation of fuel. The
nationalised coal, electricity and gas industries are required to submit their research
plans for his concurrence, and there is close collaboration between the Ministry
of Power, the scientific departments of these industries and the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research. Oil companies themselves carry on extensive
research into petroleum products (see p. 306).
Transport
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation is concerned with research into
aspects of marine navigation, marine propulsion, road construction and airport
operations, but most of the basic work is carried out for the ministry by the
Admiralty, the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Ministry
of Supply. Research on radio aids for marine navigation, for instance, is undertaken
by the Admiralty.
Land Use and Planning
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is responsible for policy relating
to the use and development of land in England and Wales. The ministry deals with
technical planning and geographical, geological, economic and sociological research.
Similar arrangements are made for Scotland by the Department of Health for
Scotland. The Ministry of Health and Local Government is responsible for the
general administration of the planning legislation in Northern Ireland.
Building
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research is responsible for reviewing
the whole field of research and technical development of the building industry,
and the Ministry of Works for ensuring that the results of research are made
available to the industry.
P
2l6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Communications
The Post Office undertakes scientific research on a wide range of subjects relating
to telephone, telegraph and radio systems which is carried out by the engineering
department. Examples of such research are the gradual introduction of automatic
dialling for long-distance telephone calls, and the progressive mechanisation of
postal operations. It also undertakes the experimental development of radio
transmitters and receivers for Post Office services and other Government depart¬
ments. Development in the application of electronics for the telephone services is
being planned in conjunction with industry through the Joint Electronic Research
Committee. The Post Office keeps in close touch with the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Television Authority (ITA) in con¬
nection with the development of broadcasting techniques.
Medicine and Health
In addition to the work carried on under the aegis of the Medical Research
Council, the Ministry of Health may conduct and promote research into the cause,
prevention and treatment of illness.
The Department of Health for Scotland has similar responsibilities, in the
discharge of which it is advised by its Advisory Committee on Medical Research;
liaison with the Medical Research Council is also maintained.
In Northern Ireland, the Hospitals Authority (a statutory body set up by the
Minister of Health and Local Government) has power to conduct or assist medical
research. In addition, it has a statutory duty to provide adequate bacteriological
and pathological services.
The General Register Office carries out research in four main fields: (i) analysis
and interpretation of statistics of causes of death; (2) statistical inquiry into the
treatment of cancer and its results; (3) morbidity as revealed in hospital statistics;
and (4) mental health.
Colonial Research
The bulk of the research work relating to colonial development is done in the
colonial territories, but much of it requires close collaboration with research
institutes and laboratories in Britain. A research council co-ordinates the work of
specialist committees and advises on general questions of policy, particularly on the
allocation of the funds made available to help research under the Colonial Develop¬
ment and Welfare Acts. Specialist bodies deal with research into such subjects as
agriculture, animal health, forestry, medicine, social science and colonial products.
Anti-Locust Research
An example of Britain’s research work on behalf of colonial territories is provided
by the Anti-Locust Research Centre in London, which has been internationally
recognised as a world centre for locust research since 1931. This organisation
receives and co-ordinates information on locust movements and breeding from some
40 countries, undertakes scientific research into the life history and habits of the
different species of locust, and investigates and develops methods for their control
and destruction. In co-operation with the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO), it provides an information service on the movements of desert
locusts and provides forecasts of swarm movements which are distributed to the
countries threatened.
Other Research Work
There are a number of scientific institutions administered by Government
departments which undertake research work in addition to their other scientific
activities. These include the Royal Botanic Gardens (Kew), which celebrated its
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 217
bicentenary in June 1959, and the Ordnance Survey Department, both now
administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The three research departments at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, are: the
Herbarium, concerned primarily with the classification and accurate determination
of plants; the Jodrell Laboratory, for the study of plant anatomy and plant physio¬
logy; and the Museum of Economic Botany, dealing with the economic exploitation
of plants. The library, attached to the herbarium, was founded in 1853; it consists of
more than 55,000 botanical books, about 80,000 reprints and separately issued
items and a valuable collection of over 150,000 drawings and paintings of plants.
The Ordnance Survey Department was founded in 1791 to prepare a map of
Great Britain mainly for defence purposes. Its present work is chiefly civil in
character (see p. 49).
Scientific Museums
The British Museum (Natural History)—an independent section of the British
Museum—contains one of the world’s largest collections of natural history material
and is recognised as a leading research institution.
The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied science
in all countries, but chiefly in Great Britain which has always held a leading place
in engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics, and in the development
of industrial machinery and processes, all of which are represented in the museum’s
collections.
The geology of Britain is known in more exact detail than that of any other
country in the world, and the Geological Survey (since 1919 an establishment of
DSIR), responsible for this work, has an outstanding collection of exhibits in its
Geological Museum.
These three museums are in South Kensington, London.
Important collections outside London are the Museum of Science and Industry,
in Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee was founded at the end of 1939 by
members of the House of Commons and replaced the former Parliamentary Science
Committee. It is one of a number of informal, unofficial, all-party parliamentary
groups which have grown up spontaneously and have varying degrees of influence.
Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in both Houses, and
also to nominated representatives of such non-profit-making scientific and tech¬
nological organisations in Britain as may be affiliated under its constitution.
Membership in 1959 comprised 185 members of Parliament and representatives of
105 scientific and technological institutions.
The committee provides, as far as possible, for a regular exchange of information
between members of Parliament and scientists, and endeavours to ensure that action
is taken to correct matters seen to be wrong in the light of such information.
Scientific Liaison Overseas
The history of scientific progress is essentially a story involving many nations;
the organisation of a country’s scientific research would, therefore, be incomplete
without provision for adequate liaison with other countries.
Before the second world war, international scientific collaboration took place
through the exchange of university staffs, the awards of scholarships and fellow¬
ships, the close relations existing between the learned societies in Britain and their
equivalent bodies abroad, and through international conferences and congresses.
2l8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The war and the post-war period saw the emergence of a number of new develop¬
ments in overseas scientific collaboration, including the exchange of scientific
information. Well-known examples are the specialised agencies of the United
Nations Organisation, e.g., the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, the World Health Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organisa¬
tion, and those concerned with nuclear energy, e.g., the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) and
the European Nuclear Energy Agency, in all of which the United Kingdom is
playing a full part. The United Kingdom is also represented on the Governing
Committee for Scientific and Technical Personnel of the Organisation for European
Economic Co-operation (OEEC) and on the Science Committee of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), and collaborates bilaterally with a number
of countries in nuclear energy. Besides agreements between the respective atomic
energy authorities, there are inter-Governmental agreements with six countries,
including the United States, with which collaboration is now particularly close.
There are permanent representatives of the United States Atomic Energy Com¬
mission in London and of the UKAEA in Washington. Controlled thermonuclear
(fusion) reactions and nuclear marine propulsion are two important subjects on
which there are regular discussions and exchanges of experts.
Among the various channels through which scientific liaison is conducted are:
The British Commonwealth Scientific Offices. A feature of the war-time pattern of
scientific collaboration was the establishment of scientific missions, in London by
the United States and the Commonwealth countries, and in Washington by the
United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth countries; the latter subsequently
joined together as the British Commonwealth Scientific Office in Washington.
Since 1948 the scientific offices in London of the Commonwealth countries, set up
after the war, have been located in the same building, and are closely associated
with the Overseas Liaison Division of the DSIR.
The Standing Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations. This is a committee
of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy which was set up after the war to
consider and advise on United Kingdom Government policy on matters of overseas
scientific relations. In view of the Government’s increasing interest in international
organisation for scientific co-operation, the committee was reconstituted in 1958
as a small committee concerned primarily with questions of policy and scientific
co-operation. The chairman of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy acts
as its chairman, and its secretariat is provided jointly by the Office of the Lord
President of the Council and the Overseas Liaison Division of the DSIR.
The Overseas Liaison Division of the DSIR. This division, in addition to its
executive work for the Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations, is also respon¬
sible for the administration of the United Kingdom scientific missions in Washing¬
ton and Bonn, the offices of the scientific attaches in Paris, Stockholm and Moscow
(the latter was appointed in April 1959), and of any further posts which may be
created, and for ensuring that information collected by them is effectively
disseminated in the United Kingdom. Both the missions and attaches and the
overseas liaison division itself have interdepartmental responsibilities, although
the division is placed within the DSIR for convenience of organisation.
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux. Machinery exists in the Commonwealth
Agricultural Bureaux for liaison in the field of agricultural science between coun¬
tries of the Commonwealth. In the United Kingdom there are ten bureaux,
specialising in various branches of agricultural science, and two institutes the
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
219
Commonwealth Mycological Institute and the Commonwealth Institute of Ento¬
mology. A third institute, the Commonwealth Institute of Biological Control, has
its headquarters in Ottawa, Canada. The bureaux collect, collate and disseminate
information resulting from agricultural research.
The British Council. The British Council fosters closer co-operation between
British scientists and scientists of other countries, and promotes a better under¬
standing of Britain among overseas specialists by disseminating a knowledge of
British activities and achievements. Besides arranging lecture or advisory tours
overseas by eminent British scientists, the British Council, among many activities
of a similar nature, brings to the United Kingdom every year a number of senior
overseas specialists, postgraduate students and technologists on visits of varying
duration, for the purpose of study in British universities and other institutions,
or for discussion with British experts. In addition to publishing the British
Medical Bulletin, intended primarily to keep overseas specialists informed of
progress in medical research in Britain, the council maintains an extensive and
much used specialist information service. In some 70 countries in which the British
Council is represented, libraries are maintained and in many instances these have
strong sections of scientific and technological literature.
The British Council maintains at its headquarters specialist departments for
medicine and science (including agriculture and engineering), while in some coun¬
tries scientists are attached to its overseas representatives. The British Council is
advised by eminent scientists who serve on its Science Advisory Committee and
on specialist panels for the different subjects.
Overseas Research Council. The Government established the Overseas Research
Council in July 1959. The council is under the general control of a Committee of
the Privy Council and its principal functions will be to formulate policy in respect
of scientific research for overseas and to co-ordinate advice and assistance on
research matters provided by the United Kingdom research councils. Matters
concerning scientific development in the United Kingdom dependencies, in
Commonwealth countries and in countries outside the Commonwealth can all be
referred to it. The council thus provides a central point to which Commonwealth
Governments and research institutions can refer for advice and information, and
advises generally on United Kingdom co-operation in scientific research overseas.
Contribution to the International Geophysical Year
The United Kingdom took a leading part in the International Geophysical
Year (IGY), in which scientists of some 60 nations participated in an internationally
planned and co-ordinated attempt to extend and intensify observation of the
physical phenomena of the Earth. The observational phase of the IGY ran from
mid-1957 until the end of 1958, and the analysis of observations made will proceed
during the next few years. A number of important posts connected with this
project, including that of president of the special committee controlling all IGY
operations, were held by United Kingdom scientists.
The Royal Society of London planned a co-ordinated research effort by Govern¬
ment departments, universities and other institutions with the aid of Government
grants, totalling about £650,000. Nearly half the United Kingdom contribution
was spent on the IGY Antarctic Expedition, and other work included studies of
the upper atmosphere from stations in the United Kingdom and its dependent
territories. The Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition, financed partly by
the various Commonwealth Governments and partly privately, operated indepen¬
dently of the IGY but contributed to it. On 2nd March, 1958, the expedition
220
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
completed the first crossing of Antarctica by land. British-built instruments were
used all over the world during the IGY; and in Britain itself, the Jodrell Bank radio
telescope, among many other instruments, was used to provide data.
Space Research
In May 1959, the Prime Minister announced that the Government had approved
a programme for the design and construction of instruments to be carried in earth
satellites. The programme is to be under the supervision of the Lord President of
the Council. The Lord President has set up a Steering Group on Space Research
to co-ordinate the Government’s research effort in this field.
The British National Committee on Space Research, appointed by the Royal
Society, is responsible for the scientific programme for instrumentation of rockets
and satellites, and co-operates with the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR),
formed by the International Council of Scientific Unions.
Expenditure on Research and Development
A review of the pattern of the research and development effort in Great Britain,
published in the report of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy for 1956-57,
Cmnd. 278, indicated that in the year 1955-56 Britain spent about £300 million
on research and development (though this figure is subject to a margin of error).
Of the total expenditure, some £185 million, or 62 per cent, was spent by
private industry, mainly on Government account. Nationalised industries were
estimated to have spent £4 million.
The survey also showed that, according to the most reliable estimates available,
about 46,600 professionally qualified scientists and engineers were engaged on
research and development in the United Kingdom, including about 2,200 research
workers in agriculture and medicine. About half of these are employed by private
industry and slightly more than one-tenth by the defence departments.
These estimates, in so far as they concerned industry, were based on the pre¬
liminary results of an inquiry conducted by DSIR, a description of which, with
final results, was published by DSIR in December 1958- The largest expenditure
was by the following industries: aircraft (44 Per cent), electrical engineering (18
per cent); chemicals (13 per cent); and shipbuilding (8 per cent).
Communicating Results of Research
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and to
ultimate users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume of infor¬
mation has grown. It is necessary, therefore, to supplement the methods generally
in use—publication in learned and specialised journals, abstracting services,
exhibitions, conferences, press, radio and television by more extensive measures.
The DSIR devotes approximately a quarter of its resources to information
services. The Information Division at DSIR headquarters in London supplements
the information work done at its research establishments and promotes information
activities of various kinds. The Lending Library Unit in London (LLU), added to
these services since I957> will be the nucleus of a new National Lending Library
for Science and Technology, which is to be set up at Thorp Arch, near Boston Spa,
Yorkshire, in 1961. The new library will cover all subjects in science and technology
other than some branches of medicine; it will also take over responsibility for the
lending service now provided by the Science Museum Library. Another important
activity is an increase in translations of Russian scientific literature. A new LLU
Translations Bulletin, the first issue of which appeared in January 1959, contains
lists of books, journals and other scientific papers which are now available or which
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
221
are to be translated in the near future. The LLU collaborates with the National
Science Foundation of the United States, and it holds microfilm copies of that
organisation’s translations of Russian scientific literature which may be borrowed.
The LLU has also started to collect Chinese scientific literature.
The Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux (ASLIB), see
also p. 229, runs a technical information department and maintains a Common¬
wealth index of translations and a panel of 135 translators. The Commonwealth
Agricultural Bureaux provide abstracts and an information service for agricultural
science. The Agricultural Research Council publishes an Index of Agricultural
Research in Progress, and in its annual reports gives accounts of developments in
current research.
THE PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
The preservation of Britain’s cultural heritage and the promotion of literature
and the arts are the active concern of a number of official and unofficial bodies.
There is no Ministry of Fine Arts or equivalent organisation to formulate or
administer policy in the arts, though bodies such as the Standing Commission on
Museums and Galleries and the Royal Fine Art Commissions for England and for
Scotland act in an advisory capacity. Government interest in the arts is expressed
mainly through the provision of grants to such bodies as the Arts Council, the
British Council (see also footnote on p. 172), the British Film Institute, and the
Council of Industrial Design, and also to the national museums and art galleries.
Government expenditure on the arts (which, in 1938-39, amounted to a little more
than £900,000) is now some £7 million. Of this total, about £3 million is the cost
of the national art collections in museums and art galleries, £1-2 million the amount
of the grant to the Arts Council, and more than £ 1 million is expenditure on pre¬
serving historic houses and their contents. In addition, under the Local Government
Act, 1948, local authorities may use part of the revenue from the rates for the
encouragement of the arts. Local education authorities also make grants to some
schools of art, music and drama. In Northern Ireland, the Council for the Encourage¬
ment of Music and the Arts (CEMA) receives a grant of £25,000 from the Northern
Ireland Government.
Unofficial institutions concerned with the promotion of the arts include many
charitable trusts and foundations, e.g., the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, the
Pilgrim Trust, the United Kingdom branch of the Calouste Gulbenkian Founda¬
tion, and a large number of societies, associations and other organisations concerned
with separate aspects of the arts, some of which are mentioned later in this chapter.
A development since the second world war has been the increasing support the
arts are deriving from business firms. In recent years, such industrial patronage has
amounted to some £50,000 annually. In addition, the Independent Television
programme companies (see Chapter XIV) are spending jointly about £100,000 a
year on the encouragement of the arts. A co-ordinating committee has been set up
to ensure that the donations of the individual companies do not overlap.
The Arts Council of Great Britain was established under a Royal Charter in 1946.
It consists of not more than 16 honorary members appointed by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer in consultation with the Minister of Education and the Secretary of
State for Scotland. Its main duties are to increase the accessibility of the fine arts to
the public, to improve the standard of execution in the fine arts, and to advise and
to co-operate with Government departments, local authorities and other organisa¬
tions on any matter connected directly or indirectly with these aims. The corre¬
sponding body in Northern Ireland is CEMA, the board of which consists of
222
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
members nominated by the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland and the
Senate of Queen’s University, together with members elected by the Association
of CEMA.
The Carnegie United Kingdom Trust was founded in 1913 by the late Andrew
Carnegie. It was incorporated under Royal Charter in 1917. The trust, which was
initially founded for ‘the improvement of the well-being of the masses of the people
of Great Britain and Ireland’, consists of 25 life trustees, 6 trustees nominated by
the Corporation of Dunfermline and 3 trustees nominated by the Fife County
Council. Its cultural policies include the support of adult amateur activities in
music, drama and the visual arts. It also assists non-national museums. Grants
totalling £20,626 were made for these purposes during the year ended 31st
December, 1958.
The Pilgrim Trust was founded in 1930 by the late Edward Stephen Harkness, an
American citizen. The trust, which has an income of about £170,000 a year, is
administered by a body of trustees who are empowered to make grants towards
any legally charitable object within the United Kingdom. In fact, the greater part
of the trust’s income is at present being used to help to preserve the nation’s
heritage of architecture and history, and for the advancement of learning and the
arts. The grants made for these objects during 1958 amounted to £169,770.
The Calouste Gidbenkian Foundation of Lisbon was established under the will of
the late Calouste Gulbenkian who died in 1955. The foundation has a branch in
the United Kingdom, which is responsible for the foundation’s activities in Britain
and in other Commonwealth countries. During 1958) grants totalling £94,000
were made to the arts in the United Kingdom. A small private committee, under
the chairmanship of Lord Bridges, was set up by the foundation to examine the
needs of the arts in Britain and reported to the trustees in June 1959. It recom¬
mended that greater support should be given to the arts, that there should be more
scope for experiment, that the arts should be made more accessible to the public,
particularly in the provinces, and that more should be done to foster appreciation
of the arts among the young.
VISUAL ARTS
There are at present a number of British painters and sculptors of international
repute as well as younger artists of great promise; and public interest in their work
and that of their contemporaries overseas, as well as in that of British and foreign
artists of the past, is increasing. This wider interest in visual art has not stopped
at appreciation. There is evidence of this fact in the large numbers attending
evening art classes, the growth of local art groups and local exhibitions, and
the support given to holiday painting schools.
The fine arts of painting and sculpture in Britain receive State support by grants
to national institutions and, indirectly, through grants made to the Arts Council,
to municipal art galleries and museums, and to local education authorities foi art
schools and other means of promoting education in art.
In the year April 1958 to the end of March 1959 the Arts Council arranged 101
separate art exhibitions in Great Britain; 431 showings of these exhibitions were
given in 217 different centres. In Northern Ireland, 33 exhibitions were arranged
by CEMA. Knowledge of Britain’s fine arts is fostered overseas by the British
Council by means of exhibitions, the dissemination of reproductions and photo¬
graphs, lectures, and the provision of information and advice to inquirers abroad
and to visitors in Britain. In the year ended March i959> 27 fine art exhibitions
organised by the council were shown in 36 countries. The council was also
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
223
responsible for British participation in six international exhibitions. Since 1948,
23 international awards have been won by British artists.
Museums and Art Galleries
There are in all about 900 museums and art galleries open to the public in the
United Kingdom, though many are only small collections or merely a few rooms
set aside in a public building for the display of local treasures.
The national museums and art galleries in London probably contain between
them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic, archaeological,
scientific, historical and general interest ever to exist within one city. The British
Museum, which celebrated its bicentenary in 1953, has unparalleled collections of
archaeological and ethnographical material from every part of the world, in addi¬
tion to housing the national library of printed books, manuscripts, newspapers and
periodicals; its Department of Prints and Drawings also possesses collections of the
widest extent and richness. The Victoria and Albert Museum contains works of
fine and applied art of all countries and periods, arranged mainly according to
material, though since the war primary collections have been arranged to bring
together, by style, period or nationality, masterpieces of all the arts. The National
Gallery presents paintings by almost all the greatest European masters. The Tate
Gallery embodies two collections: the British school from the eighteenth century
onwards, with a few earlier works, and modern foreign schools since 1850. Both
sections include modern sculpture. Frequent loan exhibitions are held in the Tate
Gallery.
Other important collections in London are at the National Portrait Gallery, the
Imperial War Museum, the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich, the Public
Record Office Museum, which contains Domesday Book and other famous historical
documents, the London Museum (reopened in Kensington Palace in 1951), where
the collection illustrates the history of the capital, and Hertford House, where the
Wallace Collection (furniture, armour, objets (Tart and paintings, mainly French
works of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) is housed.
The Ministry of Education is responsible for the administration of the Victoria
and Albert Museum and the Science Museum.1 The other national collections are
financed from Government funds. Besides meeting the administrative costs, this
finance takes the form of annual purchase grants, which have been substantially
increased for the year 1959-60, and of special ad hoc purchase grants. The collec¬
tions also receive certain pre-eminent works of art acquired by the Treasury in
lieu of estate duty. The buildings are maintained by the Ministry of Works.
There are five national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the National Gallery of Scotland, the Royal
Scottish Museum, the National Portrait Gallery of Scotland, and the Scottish
United Services Museum; a sixth, the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art,
will be opened to the public in i960. The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff,
has a branch at St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed. A
Northern Irish Folk Museum is being established in Belfast. The Belfast Museum
and Art Gallery is municipally owned, but serves unofficially as a national institu¬
tion for the whole of Northern Ireland; plans are well advanced, however, for the
establishment of a national museum and art gallery, in addition to a small Belfast
art gallery under the control of CEMA.
The Government is advised on questions relating to the most effective develop¬
ment of the national institutions as a whole, and on their co-operation with
1 For information on the scientific museums, see p. 217.
224
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
provincial institutions, by the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries,
set up in 1931. The Standing Commission publishes a report every five years.
Almost every city and large town has a museum devoted to art, archaeology and
natural history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes by a local
learned society or privately by individuals or trustees to whom some rich collector
in the past has bequeathed his treasures. Both Oxford and Cambridge are rich in
museums—the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, is the oldest in the
country and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge has fine art galleries and a
notable collection of engravings, manuscripts and books bequeathed by its founder
on his death in 1861. Other universities have important collections, primarily for
teaching purposes but also open to the public. Other cities with important museums
and art galleries are Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool,
Manchester, Norwich, Southampton, and York where the Castle Museum, with
its complete reconstruction of an eighteenth-century street of shops, offers a most
interesting historical display. In recent years there has been a notable development
of ‘period-house museums’, in which outstanding examples of the private residences
of former times have been taken over by national and municipal authorities for this
purpose, as at Temple Newsam, Leeds; Aston Hall, Birmingham; and the Royal
Pavilion, Brighton. Private art collections are to be seen in the historic family
mansions (including many in the ownership of the National Trust) which are now
open to the public at certain times.
In 1959, the first regional museum service in Britain was inaugurated for the
south-west. Its objects are to promote closer co-operation between museums and
art galleries in the region, to improve technical facilities, and to provide financial
assistance.
Financial assistance for improving the displays of the smaller museums is among
the functions of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, which has done much to
encourage the growth of the museum movement during the past thirty years, and
at present expends an average of £10,000 a year for this purpose.
The Museums Association, founded in 1889, is an independent organisation to
which museums and art galleries and their staffs throughout the country belong;
there are also many overseas members. The association serves as a central body
for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating to museum
administration, and as a training and examining body for professional qualifications.
It also produces directories, a monthly journal, and other publications.
Temporary exhibitions produced by the Arts Council, the Art Exhibitions
Bureau, and the Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum, are
a regular feature of many museums.
The various national art exhibiting societies include the Royal Academy, which,
in summer, holds exhibitions of works by members and non-members and, in
winter, exhibitions usually devoted to national schools of painting; the Royal
Scottish Academy; the Royal Society of British Artists; the Royal Institute of Oil
Painters; the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours; the Royal Society of
Portrait Painters; the Women’s International Art Club; and the London Group
(all the foregoing are associations of professional painters); and the Institute of
Contemporary Arts. Some of these societies, notably the Royal Academy at
Burlington House, have their own galleries in London. There are, in addition,
many regional societies such as the Royal Ulster Academy of Arts, while an increas¬
ing number of amateur art societies throughout the United Kingdom hold local
exhibitions and encourage local interest in the fine arts in a variety of ways. The
Contemporary Art Society uses its members’ subscriptions to buy modern works
which it presents to the public galleries.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
225
Exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists are held throughout the
year in the galleries of the art dealers of Bond Street and other parts of the West
End of London. The Whitechapel Art Gallery shows a series of important
exhibitions in the East End of London; and the London County Council has
shown an exhibition of modern sculpture in one of its parks every third year since
the second world war. There are also exhibitions of children’s art, including the
National Exhibition of Children’s Art sponsored by the Sunday Pictorial.
Art Education
There are 15 colleges of art in the United Kingdom, each serving a region, all
of which offer courses in most branches of art and a varying range of crafts; and
there are schools of art in nearly all the larger towns. In London, the most notable
of these schools and colleges are the Royal College of Art (a national college) and
the Central School of Arts and Crafts of the London County Council, in both of
which the emphasis is on industrial design, and the Slade School of Fine Arts in
the University of London. At the Royal Academy Schools, founded in 1768, all
instruction is provided free by Royal Academicians.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history of art
are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Department of
Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and the Warburg
Institute (also a part of London University) which provides facilities for research
on the character and history of the classical tradition.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society for
Education through Art, among its other activities, encourages the purchase by
schools of original works of art, by organising an annual Pictures for Schools
exhibition. The Arts Council operates a loan scheme for reproductions of works of
art which is used extensively by schools.
Industrial Design
The Council of Industrial Design was set up in 1944 by the President of the
Board of Trade as a grant-aided body with the purpose of promoting the improve¬
ment of design in the products of British industry. The council has 24 members, a
majority being prominent industrialists, and there is a separate Scottish committee.
The council runs a permanent exhibition, The Design Centre, in the Haymarket,
London. This is a selective, changing display of well-designed British consumer
goods in current production. To supplement this display, an illustrated record of
good design, known as Design Index, is maintained at the centre. In 1957, a design
centre was also opened in Glasgow. In addition, the council organises conferences,
courses and exhibitions in Britain and overseas, and maintains a record of designers
and a photographic and reference library on industrial design. It has an education
section and a retail section and publishes a monthly magazine, Design.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society of Arts
(see p. 202), the Society of Industrial Artists, which is the representative pro¬
fessional body in Great Britain of designers engaged in industry and commerce,
and the Design and Industries Association (DIA), founded in 1915. The DIA is a
voluntary association of industrial companies, designers, and other bodies and
individuals interested in the promotion of good design in industry.
Architecture
The Government’s responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned
with encouraging the best in new building and preserving, by legislation and in
other ways, the best that has been inherited from the past.
226
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government departments chiefly concerned with domestic architecture are
the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Department of Health for
Scotland, and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Health and Local Government,
which are responsible in their respective countries for approving the layout and
design of local authority housing schemes, and which issue reports and circulars
setting standards for local authority housing. The Ministry of Housing and Local
Government also encourages high standards by offering, each year, medals for the
best-designed houses. The education departments are responsible for the super¬
vision of building for the public education service. The Ministry of Works is the
department concerned with the construction and maintenance of Government
buildings and also with the preservation of historic buildings and ancient monu¬
ments in Great Britain. In Northern Ireland, responsibility for the preservation of
ancient buildings is vested in the Ministry of Finance. All these departments have
architects on their staffs, as have also the local authorities concerned with housing
and planning.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions exist to
further the interests of architecture and the preservation of buildings of aesthetic
value or historic interest.
Several State-sponsored organisations are concerned with special aspects of
architecture. The Royal Fine Art Commission (appointed in 1924) and the Royal
Fine Art Commission for Scotland (appointed in 1927), both bodies of experts
established by Royal Warrant, advise Government departments, planning authori¬
ties, and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic importance;
many large-scale modern buildings have had the approval of the commissions.
The National Buildings Record maintains a library (open to the public for consulta¬
tion) of over half a million photographs of English and Welsh architecture and an
index of architectural records in public and private possession. The Scottish National
Buildings Record, a department of the Ministry of Works in Scotland, carries out
functions similar to those of its English counterpart. The Royal Commissions on
Ancient and Historical Monuments for England, for Wales and Monmouthshire,
and for Scotland, record in detail all ancient and historical remains in their countries
and publish a series of surveys, designed ultimately to cover the whole of Great
Britain. The Ancient Monuments Boards for England, Scotland, Wales, and
Northern Ireland, set up under the Ancient Monuments Acts, consider which
monuments should be listed in accordance with those Acts and advise the Minister
of Works on any questions concerning ancient monuments. The Historic Buildings
Councils for England, Scotland, and Wales, which were constituted under the
Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act, 1953, advise the minister on the
provision of grants towards the repair and maintenance of such buildings and their
contents (see p. 191). The Scottish Council also advises the Secretary of State for
Scotland on the exercise of his functions relating to buildings of architectural or
historic interest under the planning Acts. An Historic Buildings Bureau finds new
uses for unoccupied historic buildings of outstanding interest.
The leading professional architectural institution in the United Kingdom is the
Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), which holds meetings at which papers
are read and discussed, publishes a journal, holds exhibitions, promotes and
controls the training of architects through its Board of Architectural Education,
and has one of the largest and most important architectural libraries in the world,
housing over 65,000 books, periodicals and drawings. There are also the Incor¬
porated Association of Architects and Surveyors, the Institute of Registered
Architects, the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland, and the Royal
Society of Ulster Architects. Other societies include the Architectural Association,
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 227
the Architecture Club, and a number of societies interested in particular aspects of
architecture, such as the Modular Society.
The Civic Trust, established in 1957, seeks to promote high standards in archi¬
tecture and civic planning and to encourage a wider interest in the appearance of
towns, villages and the countryside.
Among the preservation societies are the Georgian Group, which is a society
designed to awaken interest in Georgian architecture and to save Georgian buildings
from destruction; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; and the
National Trust in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the National Trust for
Scotland, which together own more than a hundred houses of historic or architectural
interest, many of which contain pictures and other works of art. Most of these
houses, and other ancestral homes, are open to the public at a small charge and
attract large numbers of visitors. The Historic Churches Preservation Trust was
formed in 1952 under the chairmanship of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in order
to raise £4 million to supplement the efforts of parishes to put their churches into
good repair. By the end of 1958, it had made grants totalling £377,779 to 906
churches and chapels of various religious denominations.
Education in architecture is given at 23 schools of architecture recognised for
exemption from the RIBA Intermediate and Final Examinations and 4 schools of
architecture recognised for exemption from the Intermediate Examination only.
There are also 42 schools of art and technical institutions (8 full-time) with facilities
for the instruction of intending architects, which prepare students for taking
externally the examinations of the RIBA. It is against the law for any person to
practise or carry out work under any name, style or title containing the word
‘architect’ unless he or she is registered. The statutory body which regulates
registration is the Architects’ Registration Council of the United Kingdom.
LITERATURE
A knowledge of literature is fostered in the United Kingdom by the schools,
colleges and universities of the country, in all of which English literature is taught
either as part of a general course or as a specialist subject. Interest in the subject is
thereafter maintained by the libraries, by the very large number of private literary
societies (both national and local), by book reviews in the press and on the radio,
and by the numerous periodicals concerned in whole or in part with literature, of
which the best-known critical weekly is The Times Literary Supplement. State
support for literature is given through the Arts Council, which assists poetry—
especially poetry readings—in Great Britain. The British Council is active in
encouraging a knowledge of English literature abroad. Recognition of outstanding
literary merit is given in the form of literary prizes, a number of which are awarded
annually, e.g., the two James Tait Black Memorial prizes for biography and
literature, the John Llewellyn Rhys Memorial prize for young writers of promise,
the Hawthornden prize for imaginative writing, the Library Association Carnegie
Medal for an outstanding book for children, the Kate Greenaway Medal for the
best children’s book illustration and the Somerset Maugham award for young
writers. The Arts Council makes triennial awards for the best books of poetry
published.
Libraries
The largest library in Britain is that of the British Museum in London (more
than 5 million volumes). The National Library of Scotland (over 2 million volumes)
is in Edinburgh, and that of Wales in Aberystwyth (nearly 2 million volumes).
Together with the Bodleian Library in Oxford (2J million volumes) and the
228
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cambridge University Library (about 2|- million volumes) these comprise the
‘copyright’ libraries of the country and are entitled to receive a copy of each new
book published in Britain: the British Museum Library must receive a copy, the
other libraries may claim one.
Other great libraries include1: the University of London Central Library,2 3 the
libraries of the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews, and Queen’s
University Library, Belfast; London Library (the largest public subscription
library) and the John Rylands Library, Manchester; the Science Museum Library,
the Victoria and Albert Museum Art Library and the British Museum (Natural
History) Library; the Patent Office Library, the India Office Library and the Public
Record Office (which contains the non-current records of the superior courts of
law and of most of the Government departments); the libraries of the Royal
Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the Common¬
wealth Institute, the Royal Geographical Society, the British Drama League, the
Royal Institute of British Architects, the Royal College of Music and the Royal
Academy of Music; the Central Music Library; and the National Library for the
Blind. The Arts Council has founded a reference library of modem English poetry,
which is housed with the National Book League. The National Register of Archives,
maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission in the Public Record Office
building, contains particulars of numerous local and private records.
The public libraries of Britain maintain a service throughout the country,
administered by 570 public library authorities (county councils, county borough
councils, municipal borough councils, urban district councils and a few parish
councils). Together these authorities provide more than 32,755 service points; they
hold over 68 million books and make more than 431 million loans a year. A feature
of the service in rural areas is the travelling van, which is an itinerant library.
In addition to lending books, music scores and gramophone records, and pro¬
viding special libraries for, among others, children, patients in hospitals and
prisoners, public libraries engage in many other activities, such as play readings,
lectures, film shows, music circles and co-operation in university extension education.
A committee set up by the Minister of Education to examine the structure of the
public library service in England and Wales reported in I959- Its principal recom¬
mendations, which are now being considered by the minister, were that every public
library authority should have a statutory duty to provide an efficient library service;
that the Minister of Education should have general supervisory responsibilities and
be assisted by an advisory body in England and Wales; that non-county borough
and urban district councils which cannot satisfy the minister that they are providing
an efficient library service may have their public library powers withdrawn; that
greater co-operation between libraries should be encouraged; and that libraries
should be provided with an increased staff of qualified and specialist librarians and,
in many cases, with new or improved premises.
A feature of library services in Britain is the co-operation within the network of
libraries which greatly increases the value of the service. Library co-operation is
organised, in the first instance, through regional library bureaux, and is finally
centralised in the National Central Library with its widespread system of outlier
libraries (public, university and special) giving access to a total stock of some
21 million books and many thousand sets of periodicals. The Scottish Central
1 This list provides only an arbitrary selection of some of the largest libraries. Unless
otherwise stated these libraries are in London, where there are more than 500 libraries;
and see also p. 202. . . TT . . . ,
2 The total holding of all the libraries (college and special) of London University is about
3 million volumes.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 229
Library carries out, in Scotland, functions similar to those of the National Central
Library.
The two principal organisations to which librarians belong are the Library
Association and the Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux
(ASLIB). The Library Association endeavours to unite librarians and governors of
libraries throughout the world and, through its many meetings, conferences,
personal service and publications, including its official journal The Library Associa¬
tion Record, to provide for their general and specialised professional interests.
ASLIB, which is a documentation centre and is financed by the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, operates in a more specialised field. One of its
activities, for example, is the maintenance of an index of translations, especially
from Russian and German, which have been or are being made in Britain.
In addition to the services provided by public libraries, many bookshops maintain
lending libraries for their customers.
Books
New books constitute the large majority of all books published annually in
Britain. In the five-year period 1954-58, for example, British publishers issued an
average total of over 20,000 separate titles each year, of which an annual average of
only some 5,700 were reprints or new editions. In 1958, when 22,143 separate titles
(including 5,971 reprints or new editions) were issued, the figures for new titles
under literary subject headings were: bibliography and literary history, 335;
biography, 496; essays, 90; fiction, 2,421; poetry and drama, 541.
Some books are produced as Government publications by Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office, which is the largest publishing organisation in Britain; the great
majority of books, however, are produced by some 300 of the principal commercial
publishers,1 including the university presses, notably the Cambridge University
Press and the Clarendon Press (Oxford). The Clarendon Press is part of the
Oxford University Press, which also has a publishing department in London.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with book
production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association, the Booksellers’
Association, and the Society of Authors.
Literary and Philological Societies and Institutions
Societies and institutions concerned with the promotion of literature in its various
forms include: the National Book League, which encourages the reading of and an
interest in books, and which holds exhibitions, including annual exhibitions of
book design; the English Association, which aims at upholding the standard of
English writing and speech; and the Royal Society of Literature, which is con¬
cerned with the advancement of literature. The British Academy, which is an
organisation concerned with humanistic studies and has a section dealing with
literature and philology, receives a grant from the Treasury.
Interest in poetry is encouraged by the Poetry Society and by various bodies such
as the Apollo Society and the Company of Nine, which sponsor poetry readings and
recitals. Poetry also plays an important part in various annual festivals, including
the National Eisteddfod—the bardic festival held in Wales, the origins of which
date back to the seventh century—the English Festival of Spoken Poetry and the
Stratford-upon-Avon Festival of Poetry.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the Biblio¬
graphical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several societies
devoted to particular authors, of which the largest is the Dickens Fellowship.
1 For total sales and exports of books in 1958, see p. 353.
230
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are also a number of clubs and societies, such as the Book Society and the
Poetry Book Society, which exist to distribute selected new books to their members.
DRAMA
State patronage of the drama is expressed through the Arts Council (in Great
Britain) and CEMA (in Northern Ireland), which grant subsidies to certain
theatrical managements operating on a non-profit-distributing basis (i.e. using
profits to finance future productions), provided that such managements have given
evidence of serious aims and of consistently high standards of practical competence;
and through the British Council, which is responsible for making the British
theatre better known abroad by organising and sponsoring international tours by
important companies, including the Old Vic Theatre Company and the Shakespeare
Memorial Theatre Company, and by sending overseas exhibitions of theatrical
design and lecturers on drama. The Treasury is empowered, under the National
Theatre Act, 1949, to support the scheme for a national theatre by contributing
£1 million to the cost of building and equipping a theatre, in London, which
would operate under public auspices. In 1957, the entertainment duty on the living
theatre (which raised about £ii million of revenue a year) was abolished.
Professional Theatre
There are about 200 professional theatres in Britain. The centre of the professional
theatre is in London, where there are some 40 principal theatres and a number of
suburban theatres. With the exception of four theatres—Covent Garden, Sadler’s
Wells, the Old Vic and the Royal Court—these theatres are let to some 25 producing
managements on a commercial basis for each production. The provincial theatres
are served by productions touring either before or after London presentation, by
companies specially formed for touring, and by local repertory companies. Since
the second world war, several theatres in London and about a hundred theatres in
the provinces have been closed. In I95^» however, the first full-scale theatre to
be built by a civic authority and the first new public theatre to be built in Great
Britain since 1939 was opened at Coventry. This was followed, in 1959, by the
opening of the Mermaid Theatre, the first theatre to be built in London for 25 years,
and by the re-opening of the Queen’s Theatre, which was destroyed by enemy
action in September 1940. Plans for another new London theatre, to be called the
Prince Charles Theatre, are being considered by the London County Council. A
new civic theatre in Nottingham is to be completed by 1962.
In addition to managements which rent theatres, there are a few companies
which produce plays in theatres of their own. Among the best known of these
organisations are the Old Vic Theatre Company in London and the Shakespeare
Memorial Theatre Company at Stratford-upon-Avon; the latter company celebrated
its centenary in 1959. In 1956, the English Stage Company was established at the
Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square, London, where it presents contemporary
plays. Theatre Workshop, formed in 1945, has, since 1953, performed classical and
contemporary plays at the Theatre Royal, Stratford, London, some of which have
been staged subsequently in West End theatres. Local repertory companies (many
of which are assisted financially and otherwise by the Arts Council or, in Northern
Ireland, by CEMA) may have the use of their own established repertory theatres,
e.g., the Bristol Old Vic Company at the historic Theatre Royal in Bristol, or they
may tour the various towns and villages in the locality, playing from one to several
nights in each place and using any building which can be made suitable for the
purpose. The English Children’s Theatre, a non-profit-making organisation,
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
231
presents children’s plays in London and the provinces, while the Youth Theatre,
consisting mainly of schoolboy actors, presents an annual Shakespearian production.
The Open Air Theatre in Regent’s Park, London, has presented many summer
seasons of repertory, mainly plays of Shakespeare and other poetic drama. The
Ulster Group Theatre in Belfast specialises in Irish drama. Inevitably, the work of
repertory companies varies in quality but, generally speaking, the standard of both
production and acting is high; many of the leading dramatists, producers, actors
and actresses in the United Kingdom started their careers in repertory.
Theatre clubs for regular patrons are run in connection with some of the
company-owned theatres. Where seats are sold only to theatre club members (e.g.,
the Arts Theatre, London), the plays are not subject to the normal requirement that
they must be passed by the Lord Chamberlain1 before presentation.
The Theatres Act, 1843, which deals with the licensing of theatres and plays,
requires all new plays to be approved by the Lord Chamberlain, who may forbid
the presentation of any play ‘for the preservation of good manners, decorum, or of
the public peace’. The number of plays for which a licence is refused amounts to
under one per cent of the total submitted.
Both in London and in the provinces, most managers and artists are members of
one or another of the professional organisations which exist to maintain the stan¬
dards of the professional theatre, to regulate the industry and to promote and safe¬
guard the welfare of those who work in it. Organisations of this kind include the
London Theatre Council, the Provincial Theatre Council, the Society of West
End Managers, the Theatrical Managers’ Association, the Council of Repertory
Theatres, British Actors’ Equity (the actors’ trade union), and the League of
Dramatists. The trade union of theatre staffs is the National Association of
Theatrical and Kine Employees.
The Society for Theatre Research brings together those interested in the history
and technique of the British theatre.
Amateur Theatre
The amateur dramatic movement is widespread throughout the United Kingdom;
there are thousands of amateur dramatic societies, with an active membership of
some half a million. The movement is sponsored and fostered by local education
authorities, by other public bodies, and by five special organisations—the British
Drama League, the Standing Conference of Drama Associations, the Scottish
Community Drama Association, the Ulster Drama League and the Association of
Ulster Drama Festivals.
The British Drama League, which was founded in 1919, operates on a basis of
affiliation and individual membership. Its many services to its members include the
arrangement of courses, lectures and competitions in dramatic work; the provision
of a library, which has the largest collection in Britain of plays and books on the
theatre, and an information bureau; and advice on many matters connected with
the stage, e.g., play-writing, production, stage management and the organisation of
drama festivals. The work of the standing conference is mainly that of co-ordination
between the various bodies concerned in the amateur dramatic movement. Functions
similar to those of the league and the conference in England and Wales are fulfilled
in Scotland by the Scottish Community Drama Association, which receives some
financial assistance from the Scottish Education Department.
1 The Lord Chamberlain, whose office dates from the fourteenth century, is the senior
officer of the royal household. His functions include the licensing of theatres in London
and certain towns, and the licensing of plays for public performance.
Q
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
232
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have famous dramatic societies, and
there are drama clubs and societies in many other universities and colleges.
Dramatic Training
Dramatic training is provided mainly in the dramatic schools and institutions
of all kinds which have been established throughout the United Kingdom. Among
the most important of such institutions are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art
(which was founded in 1904 and is now grant-aided by the Treasury, and which
provides a two-year course in all branches of stage work), the Central School of
Speech Training and Dramatic Art, the Rose Bruford School and the London
Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, all of which are in or near London; and
there is also the Old Vic School in Bristol.
Some form of education in drama is also provided in many schools and youth
clubs in Britain, and a varying degree of recognition is given to the subject in the
universities. Bristol University created a department of drama offering a course
which an arts student may take as part of a general degree course; in July 1959,
Bristol inaugurated the first International Festival of University Theatre to be
held in Britain.
FILMS
The British public possibly visits the cinema more frequently than any other
people in the world. Although cinema attendance has been declining in recent years
(attendances at cinemas in the United Kingdom dropped from 1,101 million in 1956
to 754 million in 1958) and the average number of cinemas in Great Britain
decreased by over 500 between 1954 and 1958, there were, in 1959, about 3,900
cinemas in Great Britain (with a total of 3-7 million seats) and another 145 cinemas
in Northern Ireland. In February 1959, the first new cinema to be built in the
West End of London for 20 years was opened.
Some 20 per cent of British first feature films are produced, and some 40 per cent
distributed, by the two large amalgams, the Rank Organisation and the Associated
British Picture Corporation, which have companies for production, distribution
and exhibition. Most producers who are independent of either group make films in
association with other film distributors. There are numerous companies (many of
them small) which produce short films.
Cinematograph films were first shown to the public in Britain in 1896, and
within ten years Britain was in the forefront of film production. This early
ascendancy did not survive the impact of the first world war and, since 1914,
British films have had to contend at home as well as abroad with keen American
competition.
During the second world war the British cinema re-emerged with new vitality
and began again to exert an important influence on film development by the
production of many notable feature films depicting Britain’s ordeals and achieve¬
ments. These films were based on the documentary technique which had been
developed in Britain from the early 1930s. British feature films in the post-war
years were influenced by this trend, and realistic treatment became a characteristic
of British feature production, both in dramatic films and in the light-hearted
satirical comedies that won international acclaim. In recent years, this talent for
realism has been successfully employed in feature films reflecting current social
problems and in those based on war experiences.
The documentary film tradition in short film production in Britain goes back to
1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive and
imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial organisa-
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
233
tions. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then, British
documentary technicians have continued to produce high quality factual films
which have won a number of Hollywood ‘Oscars’ and Grand Prix awards at the
major international film festivals. An interesting recent development has been the
attempt to re-interpret the documentary tradition in contemporary terms by a
group of young technicians—the Free Cinema movement—and by the television
film units of the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Independent Television
Authority contractors.
The Government has continued to sponsor a wide range of informational films.
These films are produced through the Films Division of the Central Office of
Information (COI), which commissions their production by the private companies
belonging to the Association of Specialised Film Producers (a national body) and to
the newsreel and television organisations. They include documentary films produced
to inform audiences overseas about life in Britain and social and cultural progress.
These, and other films acquired from private industry and public bodies, are
distributed throughout the world by British Information Services, in English and
in as many as 15 other language versions.
The films produced by the COI for Government departments have included
many specialised films on science, agriculture, health and industry. Films for
industry, produced by the Government, the British Productivity Council and
private firms, have helped to increase productivity; to the same end, many hundreds
of industrial films from other countries have been evaluated, and the best of them
made available to industrial audiences through the COI’s Central Film Library1 and
other agencies. In 1958 and 1959, the Films in the Service of Industry festivals,
held at Harrogate in Yorkshire, have provided a valuable meeting place for special¬
ists in the production and use of films.
The Films of Scotland Committee, set up in 1936 and revived in 1954 by the
Scottish Council (Development and Industry) in consultation with the Secretary
of State for Scotland, promotes the production of Scottish films covering the
industries and cultural traditions of Scotland.
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film Institute,
founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer grant and is responsible
to the Privy Council. The institute encourages the making and showing of good
films and helps the public to appreciate good films. It administers the National
Film Theatre in London and the National Film Archive, runs an annual summer
school, and maintains a film distribution library from which films may be hired,
a library of books on the film and an information service. The institute also makes
grants to the Scottish Film Council, the Scientific Film Association, the University
Film Council and the Society of Film Teachers, and administers a fund for the
production of experimental films.
The National Film Archive contains over 17,000 films, of which at least 7,000
are feature films, besides scripts, art designs, posters and 130,000 photographic
stills, selected to illustrate the history and the art of the film and as significant social
and historical records.
The National Film Theatre shows films of outstanding historical, artistic or
technical interest; it holds a unique position as a cinema offering regular pro¬
grammes which are unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or
nationality of the films shown. Its present building, erected on the south bank of the
Thames, in London, in 1957, is the first permanent national film theatre in the world.
1 The Central Film Library also makes available films on many specialised subjects, on
hire, to schools, colleges and other institutions.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
234
The Society of Film and Television Arts, formed in December 1958, has as its
aim to improve the standard of film and television production and to stimulate
public appreciation of the arts. It was formed by the amalgamation of the British
Film Academy (founded in 1947 as a private organisation, representative of senior
film-makers, to foster the making of creative films) and the Guild of Television
Producers and Directors, with which the British Film Academy’s aims and
activities were closely linked.
Assistance to British Film Producers
The art of film production is a costly one which depends upon a commercially
prosperous industry for its development and well-being, and needs adequate finan¬
cial backing combined with freedom for the film-maker to experiment and to express
his own ideas. There is no State-owned film production unit in Britain, but the
National Film Finance Corporation, a statutory body set up in 1949, is empowered
to lend money for film production. Its members—a chairman, a managing director,
and three to five others—are appointed by the Board of Trade. Its funds (limited
by statute to £8 million) are provided, up to £6 million, by advances from the
Board of Trade; the remaining £2 million may be borrowed from non-Govern-
mental sources. The corporation is financially concerned with about half the first
feature films being made in British studios.
There is a levy on cinema admissions to provide a film production fund. This
levy is quite separate from the entertainments duty which is a tax charged on
cinema admissions (the rate of entertainments duty was reduced in 1957, 1958
and 1959). The money raised by the levy is paid out as a percentage of a film’s
takings, so that the more successful a film is at the box office, the more it receives
from the fund. The fund was started in September 1950 on a non-statutory basis as
the British Film Production Fund, known as the Eady Fund. It was based on a
renewable agreement between the various trade associations, subject to Board of
Trade approval. When this agreement lapsed in October 1957, the voluntary scheme
was replaced by a statutory scheme with the same purpose. The Cinematograph
Films Act, 1957, gave the President of the Board of Trade powers to make regula¬
tions governing the collection, by the Customs and Excise Department, of a levy
from exhibitors, and the distribution of the proceeds for the benefit of British film
production. The British Film Fund Agency undertakes the distribution.
To help British films meet the keen American competition, legislation passed in
1927 introduced the quota system (continued by subsequent legislation), under
which a certain proportion of British films must be shown in British cinemas each
year. The proportion is fixed by the Board of Trade annually after consultation
with the Cinematograph Films Council, any change being effected by statutory
instrument approved by both Houses of Parliament. For first feature films it has
stood at 30 per cent since 1950.
Cinema Licensing and Film Censorship
The State takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but, by virtue of
their power to grant licences, the local licensing authorities act as the final arbiters
of films proposed for showing in their areas. There are over 7®0 licensing
authorities; they are local authorities or, in some areas, magistrates. 1 he Cinemato¬
graph Act of 1909 required, for reasons of safety, that inflammable films should
be shown only on premises licensed for the purpose ; it was subsequently established
that licensing authorities had the right to supervise the character of the films
exhibited. In judging the suitability of films for public showing, licensing authorities
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
235
rely on the judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors,
to which are submitted all films (other than newsreels) intended for public
showing.
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative of the
cinema industry, which wished to ensure that a proper standard was maintained
in the films offered to the public. It consists of a president, a secretary, and six
examiners; the latter, who include three women, are appointed by the president.
The president is elected by a trade committee and is usually a man prominent in
public life.
The board, which does not use any written code of censorship, may require cuts
to be made before it will grant a certificate to a film; more rarely, it will refuse a
certificate. Films passed by the board are placed in one of three categories: ‘U’
(suitable for universal showing); ‘A’ (more suitable for adults than children) and
‘X’ (suitable only for adults). A child or young person under 16 years of
age may be admitted to a cinema showing an ‘A’ film only if accompanied by
a responsible adult, and may not be admitted on any condition if an ‘X’ film is
being shown.
Children and the Cinema
The Cinematograph Act, 1952, which came into force in January 1956, extended
the scope of the 1909 Act and provided for the making of regulations by the Home
Secretary to protect the health and welfare of children in relation to their attendance
at film shows. Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from
the licensing authority and the authority is able to impose special conditions on
such cinemas. The British Board of Film Censors publishes at intervals a list of
films particularly suitable for children and for exhibition at children’s matinees.
One of the women examiners is appointed for her special knowledge of children’s
needs.
Children’s cinema clubs, providing special children’s programmes on Saturday
mornings, are widely organised by the cinema groups and have become very popu¬
lar. An important contribution to these programmes is made by the Children’s
Film Foundation, which produces and distributes entertainment films specially
designed for children. The foundation is a non-profit-making body set up by the
British film industry in 1951 and provision is made in the Cinematograph Films Act,
I957> for the foundation to receive grants from the British Film Fund Agency.
MUSIC, OPERA AND BALLET
In Britain today, music in all its forms is drawing large audiences; and orchestral
concerts, choral singing, music festivals, opera and ballet are important features of
British cultural life.
The British Council has done much to make British music and ballet companies
more widely known throughout the world. Tours of British orchestras, soloists and
opera and ballet companies are arranged, recordings of works by British composers
are sponsored, and libraries of British music (recorded and in printed score) are
maintained in 68 countries overseas. At the British Council’s headquarters in
London, a central music reference library of music literature, scores and recorded
music is maintained for the use of visitors. Distinguished musicians from overseas
are invited to Britain as guests of the council to gain some first-hand experience of
British music and musicians, and extensive arrangements are made to cover each
individual interest.
236
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Music
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in all the large towns and
cities of Britain, some of which have well-known concert halls. In London, the
principal concert halls are the Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames,
which was opened in 1951 in connection with the Festival of Britain; the Royal
Albert Hall, Kensington, where the annual summer season of Promenade Concerts
is given; and the Wigmore Hall, which is the principal recital centre.
Among the leading British orchestras are the London Symphony, the BBC
Symphony, the London Philharmonic, the Royal Philharmonic, the Philharmonia,
the Halle (Manchester), the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the City of Birmingham
Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony, the BBC Northern, the Scottish National
and the BBC Scottish. There are also the specialised string and chamber
orchestras such as the Boyd Neel Orchestra, the Jacques Orchestra and the London
Mozart Players; and a number of new orchestras which have been formed during
the past few years. Many of these receive financial aid from the Arts Council and
local authorities to help with the cost of maintaining ensembles, of presenting new
or unfamiliar works, and of improving standards generally. The City of Belfast
Orchestra is financed jointly by the Belfast Corporation and the Council for the
Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA).
The principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral, the BBC Choral,
the Huddersfield Choral, the Halle Choir, the Liverpool Philharmonic Choir, the
London Philharmonic Choir, the Bach Choir, and, in Northern Ireland, the Belfast
Philharmonic Society. These and many other choral societies are associated with
famous orchestras in major choral works; most of them, together with hundreds of
similar choral and orchestral societies and music clubs, are affiliated to the National
Federation of Music Societies, through which they are supported with funds
provided by the Arts Council. Membership of the National Federation has risen
to some 780 societies.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held
annually in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in existence
for over 200 years. The festival idea has developed considerably in recent years, and
festivals of music and other arts are now held annually in many cities and towns
throughout the United Kingdom. They range from the famous Edinburgh Inter¬
national Festival of Music and Drama, which lasts three weeks and attracts many
thousands of visitors, to those, such as the Aldeburgh Festival, lasting a week or
less. Among the better known are the Llangollen International Eisteddfod; the
National Eisteddfod of Wales, which in 1958 formed part of the first Festival of
Wales; the National Gaelic Mod, held at a different place in Scotland each year;
the Cheltenham Festival, devoted to contemporary British music; the York Mystery
Plays and Festival; and the Leeds and Norwich Festivals of choral music, which
are held on a triennial basis. An annual international festival of folk song and
dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is increasing. It is encouraged by the work of
County Music Committees,1 which are aided by the Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music. The Rural
Music Schools Association is concerned with music-making by amateurs in country
districts; it brings together professional musicians, teachers, administrators and
amateurs.
1 Some of these are voluntary committees and some are local education authority
sub-committees.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 237
Professional organisations, which look after the interests of music and musicians,
include the Musicians’ Union, the Incorporated Society of Musicians, the Com¬
posers’ Guild, and the Songwriters’ Guild.
Specialised education in music is given at colleges of music, of which the most
prominent are the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music in
London, the Royal Manchester College, and the Royal Scottish Academy in
Glasgow, all of which receive grants-in-aid. There are also the Trinity College of
Music, and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, both in London, and the
School of Music in Birmingham. Youth orchestras are strongly encouraged, and
children’s concerts, given by symphony orchestras directed by prominent con¬
ductors, are a regular feature of the country’s musical activities and have helped to
develop among the youth of the community an appreciation of the world’s greatest
music. The National Youth Orchestra and the National Youth Orchestra of Wales,
made up of the most promising members of school orchestras, are noted for their
high standard of performance, as is the Students’ Orchestra of Great Britain,
formed in July 1958, which consists of music students.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and nearly
120,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the examinations of
the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, the largest proportion (some
82,000) choosing the piano as their instrument.
The increase in musical appreciation among the general public during recent
years is shown not only by the size of the audiences for concerts and for broadcast
music, but also by the fact that, of the 60 to 70 million gramophone records sold
each year, the proportion of classical music, now over a quarter, is rising steadily.
The National Federation of Gramophone Societies has some 350 affiliated societies.
Opera and Ballet
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London, which is leased by the Government1 to the Covent Garden Opera
Trust, which was formed in 1944 to make the famous opera house the home of a
national opera and ballet, and which receives a Government grant through the Arts
Council, amounting to 43 per cent of its expenditure, subject to a maximum of
£500,000 in any one year. The Royal Opera House has its own resident opera
company and ballet company which give performances both in London and else¬
where. The opera company, which numbers about 200 and has a permanent
orchestra, makes an annual tour of provincial centres. The ballet company, which
in January 1957 was incorporated with the Sadler’s Wells Theatre Ballet and the
Sadler’s Wells School to form the Royal Ballet, has a high international reputation
gained in many overseas tours arranged by the British Council since 1945.
Seasons of opera and ballet are also given at the Sadler’s Wells Theatre in
London; a second Sadler’s Wells opera company has been formed to tour opera
in the provinces. At Glyndebourne in Sussex, an opera season, for which a company
is specially assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies include the
English Opera Group, formed in 1947, and noted for its performances of operas by
Benjamin Britten; the New Opera Company, formed in 1957 by members of the
Cambridge Opera Group to produce new operas in London and give opportunities
to promising amateurs and young professionals; the Handel Opera Company;
Intimate Opera, which performs eighteenth and twentieth century works for small
casts in any hall available; and the Welsh National Opera Company. Opera in
1 The Ministry of Works acquired a 42-year lease from Covent Garden Properties
Limited in 1949.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
238
Northern Ireland is promoted by the Grand Opera Society of Northern Ireland.
The Arts Council manages a small operatic group (Opera for All) which specialises
in introducing opera to audiences who hitherto have been unfamiliar with it.
There are also a number of amateur opera clubs in London and the provinces and
in Northern Ireland. Among the ballet companies are the Ballet Rambert, Britain’s
oldest ballet company, which has discovered many distinguished dancers and
choreographers, and the Festival Ballet. The work of the Irish Ballet in Northern
Ireland combines traditional dancing and mime.
The Royal (formerly Sadler’s Wells), the Arts Educational, and the Rambert
Ballet Training Schools and the Royal Academy of Dancing are among the teaching
institutions which have played an important part in raising British ballet to its
present high standard.
VIII. THE NATIONAL
ECONOMY
BACKGROUND
The United Kingdom ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world,
with about 0-18 per cent of the world’s land area. In population, with about 2 per
cent of the world’s inhabitants, it ranks ninth. In density of population it is fourth:
of the major countries, only Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands are more crowded;
and there are eleven times as many people to the square mile in the United King¬
dom as in the United States. In world trade, it ranks second, accounting for about
one-tenth of the total. It takes about a fifth of the world’s exports of primary
products, and provides slightly less than one-fifth of the world’s exports of manu¬
factured goods.
The United Kingdom, from its own soil, provides only half of the food it needs;
and—apart from coal and some low-grade iron ore—it has few natural resources;
thus it is the world’s largest importer of such products as wheat, meat, butter,
fodder grains, citrus fruits, tea, tobacco, wool, and hard timber. In return, it
is one of the world’s largest exporters of ships, aircraft, locomotives, motor vehicles,
electrical equipment, chemicals, textiles and most types of machinery. Few countries
in the world have such a high proportion of the population living in towns (80 per
cent) or such a small proportion of the working population engaged in agriculture
(only slightly more than 4 per cent).
The United Kingdom is also the central banker of the sterling area, an area with
a quarter of the world’s population. Many countries outside the sterling area use
sterling in their international transactions, and it is the currency in which about
two-fifths of the world’s trade is conducted.
The Economy before 1939
During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world
manufacturer, merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and so was able to support
a rapidly increasing population at a rising standard of living. It was Britain’s
commerce in cotton goods, above all, which gave it the leading position in world
trade; cotton cloth provided 40 per cent of its exports in 1851. It was in this
period also that the country became so largely dependent on imports: it has been
estimated1 that retained imports, which were only 12 per cent of net national
income at factor cost (i.e. cost after discounting the effect of indirect taxes and sub¬
sidies) in 1820, rose to 28 per cent in 1870. (The 1958 figure was 23 per cent.)
The period from 1870 to 1890 marked the peak of British industrial expansion
as compared with that of other countries. Between 1890 and 19x4 growing
industrial competition from Europe and North America began to make itself
felt, but its effects on Britain’s staple export industries, particularly cotton textiles
and coal, were offset by the general rise in world trade, by the continued demand
for British textiles from India and other eastern countries, and by the continued
high level of overseas investment.
1 Prof. E. A. G. Robinson, Economic Journal, September 1954, p. 458.
239
240
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The new problems confronting British industry and trade in the twentieth
century became apparent after the first world war. Textiles from India and Japan,
where labour costs were lowrer, established themselves firmly in the large eastern
markets, to a great extent replacing the higher-priced and often higher quality
British product. The extension of the world demand for coal was slowed down by
the increasing use of oil, while coal from the newer European mines competed
severely with British coal.
In the old-established branches of the vehicles and engineering group of indus¬
tries (e.g., locomotives, ships and textile machinery) world demand fell away after
a brief post-war boom, and Britain failed at first to gain a compensating share of
the expanding world trade in the new types of engineering products (e.g., cars and
electrical goods). Most countries were tending towards self-sufficiency, and some
sought deliberately to protect nascent and even established industries by sheltering
them behind tariffs and (later) quotas and exchange restrictions.
Income from overseas investments and a substantial improvement in the terms of
trade (the price of exports relative to the price of imports) cushioned the effect of a
fall in the volume of exports, and imports remained high. The loss of export
markets led, however, to a contraction of Britain’s staple industries—coal, cotton,
iron and steel, and the older branches of engineering. The result was heavy
unemployment, the general rate of which averaged 14 per cent in the years 1921-39,
reaching a peak of 22 per cent in 1932, when the slump in world trade was at its
w7orst. In districts relying mainly on one or other of the staple industries, the rate
was much higher.
After 1932, an improvement in the levels of production and employment took
place, stimulated by an increase in home investment, by some revival in world
trade and, after 1935, by the armament programme.
Effects of the Second World War
The second world war is estimated to have run down British domestic capital by
about £3,000 million, through shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of
industrial maintenance and replacements. It also resulted in a considerable altera¬
tion in Britain’s financial and trading position, which may be summarised thus:
x. Loss of overseas assets. Over £1,000 million worth of overseas investments—
including £428 million in North America—were sold to pay for war supplies.
The income from these assets had paid for a substantial part of pre-war
imports into the United Kingdom.
2. New overseas debts. New external debts, totalling £3,000 million, were
accumulated.
3. Terms of trade. The price of imported raw materials rose sharply after the
war, and by 1948 about one-fifth more goods had to be exported than in
1938 to bring in the same quantity of imports.
4. Reduced exports. By 1944, exports, curtailed as part of the war effort, had
fallen to less than one-third of their 1938 volume.
5. Smaller reserves. The real value of the gold and dollar reserves was reduced
to about half the pre-war level.
6. World dollar shortage. The physical destruction of the war led to an increased
dependence on the part of Britain, the rest of the sterling area and many
other countries on supplies of all kinds from North America. Dollar
earnings by non-dollar countries were inadequate to pay for these supplies.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
241
Post-war Developments
Since the war, the United Kingdom has experienced, with few interruptions, a
steady growth in output of goods and services and a high level of employment.
Invention and technological advance have combined with adaptation to shifts in
world demand to produce some radical changes in the British industrial scene.
Industries in which new techniques have predominated, notably the electrical
engineering, aircraft, motor and chemicals industries, and new branches of
machinery construction, are now contributing a significantly larger share of the
total output—itself much expanded—and providing wider employment opportuni¬
ties for an increasingly skilled labour force and a growing contribution to exports.
At the same time, the United Kingdom has had to deal with some persistent
economic problems; in particular, to fulfil its overseas obligations and to maintain
its traditional role in world commerce and finance it has needed to achieve and
maintain a substantial balance of payments surplus, and to halt the almost
continuous rise in internal prices. In the initial post-war years Marshall Aid and
loans from the United States and Canada helped to overcome the serious deficit
in the balance of payments pending the full recovery of exports. The strong
expansion in exports in later years resulted in a substantial surplus in the balance
of payments, but it was not until 1958 that the surplus reached a level fully
commensurate with Britain’s external obligations.
A persistent rise in prices has been a feature of the past decade. It has stemmed
primarily from an excessive pressure of demand on the nation’s resources
—exports, investment both at home and abroad, defence, and personal con¬
sumption—so that money incomes have risen faster than production. Stability of
prices is a main aim of Government economic policy, and measures to remove
excess demand were introduced in 1957. During 1958, retail prices were relatively
stable—in part because of lower prices for imports—and this near-stability
continued throughout the first half of 1959. Output and productivity showed an
upward trend in the first half of 1959, giving scope for reductions in labour costs
for each unit of output.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of the national income
and expenditure of the United Kingdom in recent years, with particular reference
to two problems—the balance of payments and the prevention of inflation. The
sources of Tables 8 to 12 are National Income and Expenditure, 1958, and Economic
Survey, 1959, Cmnd. 708.
National Income and Employment
Between 1948 and 1958, the United Kingdom gross national product (the measure
of total goods and services produced at home and net income from abroad) is
estimated to have risen by 93 per cent, from £10,397 million to £20,114 million.
In real terms, that is after allowing for price changes, the increase has amounted to
about 30 per cent over the same period; this is equivalent to an average annual
advance of about 2! per cent. Since 1955, the need to restrain demand in order to
check rising prices and safeguard the balance of payments has reduced the rate of
increase. In comparison with other countries, the United Kingdom’s national income
per head is appreciably below that of the United States and Canada and ranks
slightly below that of Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland.
242 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 8 shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services, at current
prices, in 1935 and 1958, by use, divided between consumers, public authorities,
investment and exports; while the diagram below shows the increase in expenditure
on the gross domestic product in 1958 compared with 1954 at current market prices.
TABLE 8
Distribution of Total Supplies of Goods and Services
(At current prices)
Percentages
1948
1954
1957
1958
Consumers’ expenditure
Public authorities’ current expenditure
Gross fixed capital formation . .
Investment in stocks
Exports of goods and services . .
Total Final Expenditure
61-2
12-7
10-4
1-3
14-4
56-1
14-7
12-1
0-2
16-9
54-2
13-8
13-1
1-4
17-5
100-0
100-0
100-0
55-9
14-1
13-2
0-3
16-5
100-0
INCREASE IN EXPENDITURE ON GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
1958 compared with 1954 at current market prices
£ million
Manufacturing industry contributes nearly 40 per cent to the total output of
goods and services, and together with mining and quarrying, building and con¬
tracting and public utilities (gas, electricity and water) makes up over half the total;
agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for less than 5 per cent, transport and
communications, together with the distributive trades, for slightly more than 20 per
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
243
cent. The composition of the supply of goods and services in 1935 and 1957, by
source, is shown in the diagram below.
SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES IN I93S AND 1957
Percentage composition at current factor cost
Agriculture and Fishing 3
Agriculture and Fishing 4
Output in the economy as a whole has increased by nearly a third since 1948.
Industrial production—accounting for about half of total output—has risen by
two-fifths over the eleven years. There has been an appreciable improvement in
living standards, the proportion of the national resources devoted to investment
has been raised progressively to record levels, and a large expansion in exports has
been achieved. Defence expenditure has been heavy, and in peak years absorbed
over 9 per cent of the gross national product. In real terms, between 1948 and 1958,
gross fixed capital formation rose by about 58 per cent, consumption by 23 per
cent, and public authorities’ current expenditure by 22 per cent. The upper diagram
on p. 245 shows production and national income trends from 1900 to 1958.
The total working population has risen relatively slowly; in the eleven years to the
middle of 1959 it increased by about ii million (or some 6 per cent). The expansion
of the national income over the same period has, therefore, been mainly the result
of higher productivity. During this period unemployment remained very low, on
average less than 2 per cent of the working population being out of work as
compared with 14 per cent between the two world wars. When resources were
stretched to the utmost, as for example, in 1951 and again in 1955, the number of
unfilled vacancies was double that of registered unemployed. In 1958, output and
employment fell slightly and, at the end of the year, unemployment exceeded
500,000 for the first time since 1947. Heavy unemployment was confined to a few
regions, and special measures were taken to steer development towards these
regions. There was a strong recovery of activity in the first half of 1959 and, by the
middle of July, unemployment had fallen to 395,000.
Investment
Since the end of the war gross fixed investment has risen markedly, particularly
since 1953. In 1938, fixed investment in the United Kingdom was about laj per
cent of the gross national product; in 1948, 14 per cent; in 1958, over 17 per cent.
Up to 1953, investment in oil refineries, chemicals, and iron and steel, and in the
housing programmes of local authorities increased particularly rapidly. Since 1954,
industrial investment as a whole, and especially in manufacturing, transport and
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
244
communications, and distribution, has risen to record levels, while investment in
housing has declined. In 1958, the volume of fixed capital formation by manufactur¬
ing industry was 69 per cent higher than in 1948, and accounted for more than a
quarter of the total.
More than 40 per cent of the total fixed investment is carried out by the central
Government, the local authorities and the public corporations, the last accounting
for slightly more than two-fifths of public investment, and the central Government
for about one-sixth. Increases in public investment were approved in the second
half of 1958, and it is estimated that total expenditure under this head in 1959-60
will amount to £1,600 million, compared with £1,418 million in 1957“5^- The
lower diagram on p. 245 shows the division between public and private fixed
investment and the pattern of investment according to type of asset in 1954 and
1958. Table 9 shows the division into industry or type of asset of gross fixed
investment in the same years.
TABLE 9
Gross Fixed Investment
(At 1954 prices)
Industry or Type of Asset
Dwellings
Manufacturing industry
Gas, electricity and water . .
Transport and communications . .
Distribution and other services (a)
Other (including roads)
Totals
£ million
1954
644
610
303
274
304
449
2,584
1958
(Prelimi¬
nary)
509
772
332
390
439
531
2,973
Index Numbers
of Volume
(1954 = 100)
1958
79
127
110
142
144
118
115
{a) Includes road goods transport.
Savings and the Financing of Investment
The marked growth of investment since 1954 has been made possible by a
substantial expansion of personal savings (see Table 10). During the early post-war
years, personal savings were very small, partly because people were making good the
war-time arrears of expenditure on necessities such as clothing and household goods;
most of the saving, therefore, was carried out by the Government through its
Budget surpluses and by companies. But the next few years brought a remarkable
growth in private savings, and in 1958 these totalled nearly £1,5°° million, more
than double the 1954 level and equivalent to just under 40 per cent of total savings.
In the period 1948-51, on average only about 2 per cent of disposable personal
income was saved, but by 1958 the proportion had risen to about 9 per cent.
The rise in personal savings has taken various forms. A substantial volume has
come from life assurance premiums and other forms of contractual savings.
The National Savings movement and building societies (the trend towards house
purchase by means of mortgages reflecting the growth of private house ownership)
have also been significant sources of savings.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
245
INDEX OF
PRODUCTION
PRODUCTION AND
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT 1954 AND 1958
(£ million at 1954 prices)
0 1,000 2,000
246
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 10
Savings in the United Kingdom (a)
£ million
1954-56
(Average)
1957
1958
(Preliminary)
Persons
Companies ..
Public corporations..
Central Government and local
authorities
Totals
1,002
1,712
190
452
1,484
1,876
173
688
1,471
1,742
148
716
Totals 3,356 4,221 4,077
{a) Gross saving, i.e. before providing for depreciation and stock appreciation and for
tax, dividend and interest reserves.
Public Authorities
Expenditure by the central Government, local authorities and the National
Insurance funds has expanded appreciably in comparison with pre-war years.
The main factors in this trend have been the growth of the social services, the
housing programmes of the local authorities, and, since i95°> a high level of
defence expenditure. The latter, however, has been held at around £1,550 million
in recent years; it accounted for 20 per cent of the current expenditure of the public
authorities in 1958 as against 27 per cent in 1953. Government expenditure
(excluding National Insurance funds) as a percentage of the gross national product
has dropped from 32 per cent in 1948 to 27 per cent in 1958.
Table 11 shows how the public authorities collected and spent their revenue,
including national insurance and health contributions, in 1958.
TABLE 11
Combined Revenue Accounts of Public Authorities in 1958
Revenue
£
million
Per
cent
Expenditure
£
million
Per
cent
Taxes on income and capital
Taxes on outlay—alcohol,
petrol, purchase tax, etc.
National Insurance con¬
tributions
Rates
Rent, dividends, interest,
etc.
Gross trading income
Totals
2,902
2,386
858
646
679
152
38
31
11
9
9
2
7,623
100
Defence. .
Grants to persons—pen¬
sions, subsidies, Na¬
tional Insurance, etc.
Local authorities’current
expenditure on goods
and services . .
Interest on national and
local debt
Central Government
Health services
Other expenditure
Surplus
Totals
1,554
1,885
1,143
1,041
623
569
808
7,623
20
25
15
14
8
7
11
100
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
247
Personal Incomes and Consumer Expenditure
There has been a marked change since 1938 in the distribution of personal
income by source. Incomes from employment in 1958 totalled £13,440 million
(as compared with £9,105 million in 1952), and accounted for about 71 per cent
of total personal incomes as against 60 per cent in 1938; for rent, dividends and
interest the corresponding percentages are 2z\ and n|. Nearly two-fifths of all
incomes after tax are in the £250 to £499 a year range, and a further one-third in
the next range, £500 to £749. Incomes of £2,000 and more a year accounted for
less than 4 per cent of aggregate personal income after tax.
Consumer expenditure has risen steadily in real terms, i.e. after discounting the
effect of price changes. By 1948, it had reached approximately the same total
volume as in 1938. In 1958, consumer expenditure was 23 per cent higher than in
1948; and 9 per cent higher than in 1954 (as shown in Table 12). The principal
long-term trend is the marked rise in outlays on motor vehicles and, to a lesser
extent, on other durable goods. In 1958, these two groups accounted for nearly
9 per cent of consumer expenditure. The proportion spent on food, where the trend
is towards greater consumption of both higher quality and pre-packaged foodstuffs,
is fairly constant at slightly under one-third of the total.
TABLE 12
Consumer Expenditure in the United Kingdom
(At 1954 Market Prices)
Category
Expenditure
£ million
1954
1958
Increase
£ million
1954-58
Per cent
1954-58
Food
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing, fuel and light
Clothing and footwear
Cars and motor cycles
Other durable goods . .
Other goods
Other services
3,778
818
855
1,539
1,174
221
623
1,223
1,792
4,093
891
930
1,618
1,318
334
705
1,457
1,750
315
73
75
79
144
113
82
234
- 42
Totals
12,023
13,096
1,073
8
9
9
5
12
51
12
19
- 2
Incomes and Prices
Between 1945 and the middle of 1958, the cost of living in the United Kingdom
rose almost without interruption, though at varying rates of increase. The most
rapid rise in retail prices, roughly 10 per cent, was between 1950 and 1951; the
lowest, about 2 per cent, between 1953 and 1954; in mid-1959, however, the retail
price index was at the same level as twelve months earlier. Over the period 1948 to
1958, the rise in prices was between 50 and 60 per cent. Wage rates over the same
period rose by 87 per cent and average weekly industrial earnings by 85 per cent.
R
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
248
In the six years after the war, the general upward movement of costs and prices
was in part the result of the rapid increase in import prices, no less than 50 per cent
between 1948 and 1951. This upward trend continued, however, after 1951, although
import prices fell. Over the whole period since the war, it is clear that the main
immediate cause of the rise in prices has been the tendency of money incomes to
rise faster than production.
Steps have been taken by the United Kingdom Government throughout the period
to counter this gradual inflation. The main weapons used in recent years have been
the prevention of excessive demand by fiscal and monetary measures and appeals for
voluntary restraint in increases in wages and profits. Nevertheless, the rapid growth
of money incomes continued until 1957 and has contributed, at times, to lack of
confidence in, and occasional speculation against, sterling. Wages and salaries
rose less in 1958 than in previous years, although the rise was still greater than the
increase in the output of goods and services.
Speculation was a factor in the heavy loss of gold and dollar reserves in the third
quarter of 1957. Counter measures were taken to stop the upward drift in costs
and prices, including a ceiling on public investment, a ceiling on bank advances
and a sharp increase in the Bank Rate. Restoration of confidence in sterling and a
strong recovery in the gold and dollar reserves followed quickly and price levels
remained steady.
It was possible, therefore, for the emphasis in economic policy to be changed to
expansion. The Bank Rate was reduced by stages to the lowest level since 1955,
restrictions on all types of domestic investment and borrowing were lifted, and
greater resources made available for investment overseas. By 1959, the economy
was undoubtedly much stronger than in previous years and was able to look
forward to a greater measure of price stability while expanding more quickly and
maintaining a stronger external position.
Overseas Trade and Payments
The overseas trade of the United Kingdom has undergone a radical transforma¬
tion since 1945. Exports have expanded rapidly: the pre-war volume was almost
regained in 1946; since then it has doubled. At the same time both the commodity
composition of exports and their geographical distribution has changed. The
engineering and vehicles industries, in w'hich there has been a rapid development
of new processes and products, in 1958 provided 44 per cent of total exports as
compared with an average of 20 per cent in 1935-38- The dollar area now receives
nearly 18 per cent of exports as compared with 11 per cent in 1938.
Between 1954 and 1958, the volume of imports rose by 14 per cent and that of
exports by 12 per cent, while the terms of trade (the relation of export prices to
import prices), became more favourable, without, however, restoring the 1938
relationship. Invisible earnings from shipping, commerce, the tourist trade,
investment income and other sources have also improved greatly, and the net
surplus on current account in 1958 exceeded £45° million, which included a surplus
of £120 million on visible trade, as against a deficit of £58 million in the preceding
year; it was the first surplus on visible trade since the war, and probably for many
years before 1939.
The United Kingdom needs a substantial surplus on external current account,
sufficient not only to meet all its overseas commitments and obligations (including
the repayment of the North American post-war loans), but also to maintain and
increase long-term investment overseas, particularly in the Commonwealth.
Traditionally, Britain has been a heavy exporter of capital and, since i94S> despite
severe burdens on resources strained by war, the outflow has been maintained at a
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 249
high level. In the years 1954-58, net long-term overseas investment has averaged
more than £200 million a year, or over 1 per cent of the national income.
It is also necessary to improve the external monetary position, that is to say, the
ratio of gold and foreign currency reserves to external liabilities. In 1958, rapid
progress was made in building up the gold reserves, and by the end of the year
(despite resumption of payments on the North American loans) they had reached
their highest level since the end of the war, apart from a brief period in 1951 when
commodity prices were at their peak as a result of the war in Korea. In the first half
of 1959, £71 million worth of dollars was repaid to the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and £58 million in gold was paid in respect of the increase in the
United Kingdom’s subscription to the IMF in May 1959, but the upward trend of
the reserves continued and they rose by £37 million to a total of £1,333 million by
the end of June (see also p. 464).
The renewed strength of sterling was underlined by the introduction, at the end
of 1958, of convertibility for current account sterling held by non-residents and
by an increase in the sterling balances held in London by non-sterling countries.
IX. INDUSTRY
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised. Eleven people work in mining, manufacturing and building for every
one in agriculture. The United Kingdom is one of the world’s largest exporters of
manufactured goods per head of population and the range of its industrial manufac¬
tures reflects its position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
Location
The factors that have influenced the location of industry in Britain are many and
various. During the rapid industrialisation of the nineteenth century, one of the
most important influences was the proximity of coal, the major source of power,
particularly when it was associated with ease of access to other raw materials
such as iron ore in the West Midlands and salt (for chemicals) in Cheshire, and to
the coast which in turn offered easy access to imported raw materials and a quick
outlet for exports. In the course of the past hundred years, the pull exercised by
coal has been progressively weakened as improved means of communication and
an alternative source of power in electricity have been developed and have enabled
advantage to be taken of other sites—e.g., those near to big consumer markets and
plentiful supplies of labour. During the inter-war period there was a tendency for
the ‘new’ industries such as those manufacturing motor vehicles, electrical goods
and rubber products to develop rapidly in the south (especially in and around
Greater London) and in the Midlands. On the other hand, this period was one of
acute depression and mass unemployment for the older industrial areas which
specialised in the great staple industries—coalmining, steel, shipbuilding, marine
engineering and cotton manufacture. These conditions prompted official action
(which has been intensified since the second world war) aimed at encouraging new
industrial development and diversification in the areas concerned (known as
Development Areas, see pp. 253-4) where labour and other resources are to be
found, and discouraging further industrialisation in congested areas such as
Greater London and Greater Birmingham. A considerable expansion and diversifi¬
cation of industry has, in fact, taken place in the development areas as a result of
these policies, allied to the war-time dispersal of industry and the widespread
demand for new factory premises over the past decade.
The main areas of industrial concentration are still, with one exception (London),
the areas which saw the beginning of Britain’s industrial greatness and which, with
two exceptions (London and Belfast), are on or near coalfields, but, particularly
since the first world war, many smaller and more widely dispersed centres of
industry have grown up, notably in southern England. A brief description of the
location of British industry, grouped according to broad geographical areas, is
given below.
Greater London. London is the main centre in Britain of the clothing and food
and drink industries, of printing, of film production, and of the manufacture of
furniture, materials for the arts, precision instruments and many other specialised
goods. Small firms predominate in all these industries, and the average size of
250
INDUSTRY
251
manufacturing firms in London is well below the national average. London is also
an important centre for light engineering and chemicals, and has some heavy
engineering plants. Indeed, London is so large and its industries so diverse that
it is a main centre for many of the broad groups of manufacturing industries, with
the notable exception of textiles and metal manufacture.
South-east England. A substantial proportion of Britain’s output of motor vehicles
comes from Dagenham (Essex), Luton and Dunstable (Bedfordshire). Among the
more important of the various industries in the area are oil-refining, light engin¬
eering, printing, brewing, electronics, aircraft construction, food processing and
furniture.
West and south-west England. The largest city, Bristol, is both a leading port and
industrial centre with aircraft, tobacco, food processing and other industries.
Gloucester has also aircraft and engineering plants. Swindon, in Wiltshire, has
railway and engineering works. The port of Southampton is served by the largest
passenger liners and has ship repair yards, oil refineries and other industries.
Plymouth has an important naval dockyard and several light industries. The west
of England is also noted for its wool cloths.
East Anglia and Lincolnshire. Besides being one of the most productive agricultural
regions, the eastern counties possess some sizeable towns. Ipswich and Grantham
are renowned for agricultural machinery and implements, and Norwich for
footwear and food manufacture. Food canning and freezing, based mainly on locally
grown produce, have developed rapidly. Scunthorpe, in Lincolnshire, is an important
steel-making centre, and the ports of Grimsby and Yarmouth have extensive fish
processing plants.
Midlands. The main industrial area of the Midlands consists of the great
conurbation centred on Birmingham and Wolverhampton (which includes portions
of Staffordshire, Worcestershire and Warwickshire) where there is a wide variety
of industry, including notably the manufacture of metals, electrical and engineering
products, and also jewellery, rubber products and domestic metalware. The smaller
conurbation of North Staffordshire, centred on Stoke-on-Trent, is devoted chiefly
to the manufacture of pottery and china and to coalmining. The largest concentra¬
tion of motor vehicle manufacture in the United Kingdom is situated in the
Midlands at Coventry and Birmingham and, further to the south, near Oxford.
Industrial cities and towns lying outside the main industrial area include
Leicester (hosiery, clothing, footwear and footwear machinery), Derby (general
engineering, locomotives, aero engines), Nottingham (light engineering, lace,
drugs, tobacco), Rugby (electrical engineering), Northampton (footwear, engin¬
eering) and Kidderminster (carpets). Corby, in Northamptonshire, has an expanding
steel industry based on local deposits of iron ore, and at Peterborough there are
several large engineering works. The richest coalfield in Britain lies in the north¬
west of the area and continues into Yorkshire.
Lancashire. Besides being the commercial hub of the cotton textile industry,
Manchester is one of the chief centres of electrical and heavy engineering, machine
tools and dyestuffs in Britain. Most of the cotton yarn is spun in Bolton, Oldham,
and Rochdale, and at Stockport (in Cheshire); further to the north lie the weaving
towns of Burnley, Nelson, Blackburn, Colne, Accrington and Darwen; Preston
and Bury have both spinning and weaving plants. Engineering industries, notably
the manufacture of printing, textile and electrical machinery and commercial
vehicles, are, however, as important to the area today as cotton. The Lancashire
coalfield also lies in the Manchester-Wigan area.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
252
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of overseas
trade, links Manchester with Merseyside. It passes through important industrial
towns such as Warrington with its metal industries, Widnes with its chemicals,
and Ellesmere Port with its oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey
estuary. St. Helens, to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufacture.
Liverpool is the second port of Britain and a great commercial centre and, after
London, the greatest centre for food processing, especially flour milling and sugar
refining. Among its older industries is ship repairing; shipbuilding is a major industry
across the river at Birkenhead. Many new industries, including electrical engineer¬
ing and the manufacture of other heavy industrial equipment have been established
in the Liverpool area, particularly on industrial estates (see p. 253). Barrow, in the
north-west of the county is a well-known shipbuilding area.
Yorkshire. Most of the county’s industry is located in the West Riding, where
about 90 per cent of the United Kingdom’s worsted industry and the greater
proportion of its woollen industry are found. Bradford is the main city for worsteds
and also the commercial centre of the whole wool trade; Morley and Leeds specialise
in cheaper cloths, and Batley, Dewsbury and Cleckheaton in heavy cloth.
Huddersfield has a reputation for fine woollens and Halifax for carpets. Leeds, the
commercial capital of the area, has a large ready-made clothing industry and
manufactures a range of engineering products. Further south is the heavy
engineering centre of Sheffield, famous for its high quality steels, cutlery and
tools. The area’s extensive coalfields provide about one-fifth of Britain s coal.
York, noted for chocolates and confectionery manufacture and with important
railway shops, and Hull, one of the world s largest fishing ports and with many
manufacturing industries, including engineering, vegetable oil processing, paints
and sawmilling, are other important industrial towns in Yorkshire.
North-east England. The coal industry is of great importance in Northumberland
and Durham. Tyneside and Wearside together are second only to Clydeside for
shipbuilding and ship repairing, and ships are also built at the Hartlepools and
on Tees-side. Iron and steel plants are situated at Consett, in county Durham, and
in the Middlesbrough area, which also has some of the largest chemical plants in
Britain. Tyneside is particularly noted for the manufacture of heavy electrical
equipment. Other industries of the area, whose manufacturing structure has been
greatly diversified since 1937, are mining and other machinery, machine tools,
ropes, glass and scientific instruments.
Wales. Although coalmining, including the extraction of special coals such as
steam coal and anthracite, remains the chief industry of South Wales, the area
today produces many categories of capital and consumer goods. Its steel industry,
with some of the most modern plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain s
output of tinplate and a large proportion of steel sheet and similar products. New
manufacturing industries, most of which have been established in the past twenty-
five years and are located on industrial estates (see p. 253)) include plastics,
synthetic fibres, clothing, electronics' and light engineering. The largest cities are
Cardiff and Swansea. Slate quarrying is an important source of employment in
North Wales, but the seaside resorts and other towns, particularly Wrexham, have
light industries.
Scotland. The thickly populated, industrial area of Clydeside, whose capital is
Glasgow, is Britain’s largest shipbuilding and marine engineering centre. The
steel industry, specialising in plate and heavier products, is mainly in the
Motherwell area. A variety of engineering products, such as earth-moving
INDUSTRY
253
equipment, locomotives, air-conditioning plant, industrial valves, food-processing
machinery and commercial vehicles, are manufactured on Clydeside. The Scottish
coalfields of the Lothians, Fife, Ayr, and Lanark produce about one-tenth of
Britain’s coal, but the seams in the last named field are gradually becoming exhausted.
Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland and its second largest city, has printing,
brewing and engineering industries. The United Kingdom jute industry is
concentrated in Dundee, which also provides many other products, such as office
machinery, clocks and watches, refrigerators, and food manufactures. Aberdeen,
the third city of Scotland and a famous fishing port, has several light industries.
Kirkcaldy, in Fife, is the centre for the manufacture of linoleum. The border towns
in the south are especially renowned for high quality woollens. The north of
Scotland possesses Britain’s only significant resources of hydro-electric power.
Northern Ireland. One of the largest shipyards in the United Kingdom is located
at Belfast, where there is also a large aircraft construction establishment. In addition
to marine engineering, Northern Ireland has a range of other engineering activities,
and traditional industries of the area include linen, shirt-making, ropes, and tobacco.
Distribution of Industry Policy
Government policy is particularly concerned with the distribution of industry.
The Government cannot direct a firm to go to any particular area or site, but the
Board of Trade has statutory powers under the Town and Country Planning Acts,
1947, to ensure that new industrial development throughout Great Britain is carried
out consistently with the proper distribution of industry. A certificate to this effect
from the Board of Trade is necessary before consent may be given by a local
planning authority for the erection of a new industrial building or extension with an
area exceeding 5,000 square feet. One use of these powers has been to discourage the
expansion of industry in congested areas such as Greater London or Birmingham.
Moreover, areas in Great Britain where there is likely to be a special danger of
unemployment have been scheduled by the Board of Trade as Development Areas
under the Distribution of Industry Act, 1945. The purpose of this Act, and of the
Distribution of Industry Act, 1950, is to promote the growth of new industry and
the expansion of existing industry in the development areas. The main advantages
which these Acts give to development areas are that the Board of Trade may build
factories for letting to suitable industries and the Treasury may help by making
loans or grants to undertakings which are unable to secure finance through normal
channels. The Board of Trade factories are built and managed by Industrial Estate
Companies. The directors of these companies are unpaid and are appointed by the
Board of Trade, and their capital is provided from Government sources. The
companies include North-Western Industrial Estates Ltd., North-Eastern Trading
Estates Ltd., Scottish Industrial Estates Ltd., Wales and Monmouthshire Industrial
Estates Ltd., and the West Cumberland Industrial Development Company Ltd.
There are development areas in the following parts of England and Wales: the
mining and coastal areas of Northumberland and Durham; West Cumberland;
South Wales and Monmouthshire; Wrexham; South Lancashire; Merseyside;
and North-East Lancashire. In Scotland, the industrial area in and around the
Clyde Valley, the Dundee area, and part of the Highlands have been scheduled as
the Scottish Development Area.
New industrial buildings and extensions to existing buildings, both of over
5,000 square feet, completed in Great Britain between the beginning of 1945 and
the end of 1958 totalled over 400 million square feet. Of this total, about 27 per
cent was in the development areas, which have, by contrast, almost 18 per cent of
the country’s insured workers in manufacturing industry.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
254
Government assistance has not been limited to development areas; the Board of
Trade has given attention to the needs of other areas of persistent unemployment
and has tried to steer suitable new industry to them. In some of these places and
in new towns or expanded towns, intended to receive population and industry
moving from congested centres, factories have been built by local authorities. In
rural and fishing areas, which need the addition of some manufacturing industry,
the Development Commission has financed the building of several factories for
industrial firms prepared to go there. While the employment situation in the
development areas as a whole has improved, relatively high unemployment has
persisted in certain places both in the development areas and outside them,
particularly in Scotland, West and North Wales and certain coastal areas of
England. This localised unemployment, some of it in non-industrial areas, became
more serious during 1958 and the Government acquired new powers, under the
Distribution of Industry (Industrial Finance) Act, 1958, to enable financial
assistance to be given, on the recommendation of the Development Areas Treasury
Advisory Committee, to undertakings which will provide employment in places
where unemployment is relatively high and persistent (see also p. 397).
The Distribution of Industry Acts do not apply to Northern Ireland because,
under the Northern Ireland constitution, the matters they deal with are the con¬
cern of the Northern Ireland Parliament, which has passed its own legislation to
encourage industrial expansion and diversification. The Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment builds factories for renting or purchasing on favourable terms and provides
grants and loans for new industrial undertakings, and the Board of Trade gives
Northern Ireland priority as if it were a development area for the purposes of
encouraging and guiding new or expanding industrial development. As a result,
since 1945, 137 firms have started production for the first time in Northern Ireland
and 92 schemes of expansion have been put into effect. These new firms and
expansion schemes are already providing employment for 36,000 people. The
United Kingdom Government also gives manufacturers in Northern Ireland, as
in development areas in Great Britain, some preference in placing Government
contracts.
Development Councils
In Scotland, the Scottish Council {Development and Industry), with a wide mem¬
bership including local authorities, trade associations, trade unions, chambers of
commerce, co-operative societies and banks, is concerned with the economic
development of Scotland. It assists the expansion of existing industry, fosters the
growth of new industries especially in areas requiring development, encourages
exports, organises exhibitions and publicises Scottish trade and industry (see also
p. 233). ... • •
In Wales, a body corresponding to the Scottish Council in aims and constitution
is the National Industrial Development Council of Wales and Monmouthshire.
The Northern Ireland Development Council was established in 1955 to promote the
creation of new industries and to reduce unemployment. The council makes more
widely known in Great Britain, the United States and elsewhere, the facilities
offered by Northern Ireland to new undertakings. It also advises the Northern
Ireland Government on matters connected with industrial development.
The Structure of Industry
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal, cor¬
porate, co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different forms,
INDUSTRY
255
and all are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary from the many
small workshops to vast organisations such as the National Coal Board, a public
corporation with over 675,000 employees; Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., a
limited liability company which, with its subsidiaries, employs over 115,000
persons in the United Kingdom; and the Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd., a
co-operative society with some 50,000 employees.
Role of Public Enterprise
Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, the growth of the social
services, especially health, education and housing, led to the progressively greater
influence of the public sector of the economy. There was also an increase in
the State’s direct participation in productive economic activities, particularly in
the decade 1940-50. Since 1951, however, most of the steel industry and the road
haulage services of the British Transport Commission have been returned from
public to private ownership. State participation is effected mainly through special
statutory bodies set up to deal with a particular activity. Such bodies, though not
part of a Government department, are under a considerable but varying degree
of public control (see pp. 260-1). The most important of these statutory bodies
are the public corporations which operate major industries and services in the
public interest.
The public corporation in its twentieth-century form is, generally speaking, a
public body having a clearly defined and specific task. Its board of directors and
its staff are chosen for their experience and competence in a particular field; they
are not civil servants, and although they are accountable to Parliament for their
actions in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring
departments who are responsible for the management of the corporations. Certain
of the corporations are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer grants to help
them in carrying out the duties with which they have been charged.
Before the second world war, a number of public corporations were established1
in those industries and services where it was considered that the national interest
required co-ordination or control by a public authority. Their constitutions had no
standard pattern and their governing bodies differed in the method of appointment
and in composition.
Immediately after the second world war, the nationalisation Acts set up public
corporations to run certain major industries and services, including coalmining,
inland transport, gas supply, electricity generation and supply, and civil air
transport. These post-war corporations are less varied in the structure of their
governing bodies, which are appointed by the responsible minister, who has full
powers of dismissal.
1 The principal corporations appointed before the second world war were: (1) the
Central Electricity Board, established by the Electricity Supply Act, 1926, to rationalise
electricity generation and build and operate a main transmission system; (2) the British
Broadcasting Corporation, established in 1927 by Royal Charter to provide a national
broadcasting service; (3) the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland, established by the
Electricity (Supply) Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, to develop electricity supplies in
Northern Ireland outside the two county boroughs, Belfast and Londonderry; (4) the
London Passenger Transport Board, established by Act of Parliament in 1933, to operate
the public transport system of the London metropolitan area; (5) the Northern Ireland
Road Transport Board, established by the Road and Rail Transport Act (Northern Ireland),
1935, to acquire public road transport services in Northern Ireland outside the county
boroughs; (6) the British Overseas Airways Corporation, established by the British Over¬
seas Airways Act, 1939, to take over the operation of the two main existing air transport
companies—Imperial Airways and British Airways.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
256
The following corporations, the organisation and functions of which are described
in later chapters, are now operating or controlling industries or services:
The Bank of England.
The British Broadcasting Corporation.
Cable & Wireless Limited.
The British Transport Commission.
The Ulster Transport Authority.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation.
British European Airways.
The National Coal Board.
The Gas Council and Area Gas Boards.
The Electricity Council and the Central Electricity Generating Board.
The Electricity Board for Northern Ireland.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board.
The South of Scotland Electricity Board.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
The Independent Television Authority.
Mining and Quarrying
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining. The
coalmining industry of Great Britain is operated as a single co-ordinated enterprise
under the direction of the National Coal Board. For an account of the coal industry
see pp. 300-305.
All other mining and quarrying (e.g., iron ore, sand, gravel, chalk, limestone,
salt, tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is undertaken by private enterprise, usually
owned and operated by limited liability companies. About 150,000 workers are
employed in mining and quarrying, excluding coalmining.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Some exceptions are
locomotives and rolling-stock for use on British Railways, built in workshops
owned and operated by the British Transport Commission, a considerable quantity
of arms and military equipment made in Royal Ordnance factories and other
factories operated by the Ministry of Supply, and some fighting ships built in naval
dockyards operated by the Admiralty. Printing and bookbinding is undertaken by
staffs of the Stationery Office, while the repair, and to a limited extent the con¬
struction, of post office equipment is carried on in factories run by the Post Office.
Surveys of the size of all manufacturing establishments employing more than
10 persons are made periodically by the Ministry of Labour and National Service;
the results of the most recent of these surveys, based on returns rendered by
employers in December 1955, show that about a third of all employees in manu¬
facturing industries are in establishments employing from 100 to 500 persons. A
high proportion of the biggest establishments are in the heavy industries, while the
average size of establishments in industries making consumer goods is smaller than
in manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results obtained in
earlier surveys on similar lines suggest that there is a slow but significant trend
towards an increase in the average size of manufacturing establishments: in 1955,
establishments with 1,000 or more employees were found to employ 2,640,000
persons, over ten per cent more than two years previously and more than twice as
many as in 1935.
INDUSTRY
257
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of manufacturing
firms, as a single firm may own several establishments. There are no general surveys
of the size of manufacturing firms comparable with the survey of establishments.
It is known, however, that in a few industries a small number of big companies
are responsible for most of the total production. Examples are oil-refining, steel
making, the manufacture of motor vehicles and components, heavy electrical
equipment, bicycles, cement, basic chemicals and aero engines. Shares in these
companies are usually distributed among a great number of holders and it is rare
for a few large holders to have a controlling interest.
The way in which the work of production is divided within and between different
firms varies from industry to industry. In the cotton industry, for example, it is
usual for different firms to undertake the various main processes of production
(spinning, weaving, finishing), while in the woollen section of the wool textile
industry all these processes are commonly undertaken within the same firm. Some
of the leading establishments in the vehicles group of industries are primarily
engaged on the assembly of parts, many of which have been built for them under
contract by specialist firms.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on
pp. 324-353-
Building and Civil Engineering
In building and civil engineering, large-scale work is usually carried out by private
contractors. Since the end of the second world war, most new houses have been
built by firms under contract to local authorities, but an increasing number are
now built under contract to persons or companies, or for sale.
Building firms may be divided into those undertaking general building and civil
engineering work and those concerned with highly specialised work, many of
which operate outside as well as inside the building industry. Building is an industry
of small firms; more than half of the firms employ fewer than twenty employees.
For a fuller account of the building and civil engineering industries see pp. 321-4.
Industrial Association
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings have
increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different purposes.
Some of the more important of these purposes may be classified as follows:
1. The provision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison
with the Government, and representation of their members’ point of view.
2. The regulation of trading practices.
3. Negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of work.
Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with varying com¬
pleteness, most of British industry but there are wide sectors of industry where
there is no collective agreement to regulate trading practices. Associations which
deal with labour matters usually consist of firms engaged in the same type of
operation or manufacturing process. Organisations mainly concerned with repre¬
sentations to the Government, provision of common services or the regulation of
prices are built up round a product or an allied group of products. In an industrial
sector concerned wholly with an allied group of products, a single association may
undertake all the required functions.
There are about 270 national federations and probably about 1,600 other em¬
ployers’ organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or branches of the
national federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages and conditions of
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
258
work. Most of the national federations are in turn affiliated to the British Employers'
Confederation, the national body representing employers on labour questions
affecting industry generally (see p. 405).
The number of manufacturers’ associations concerned with providing common
services and regulating prices and trading methods is not known precisely, but
according to a survey carried out by Political and Economic Planning between
1953 and 1956, some 1,300 are in existence, varying greatly in importance, structure
and activities. Membership of the Federation of British Industries (FBI), the national
body recognised as the spokesman for British industry on economic, commercial
and production (as distinct from labour) matters, consists of some 7,500 individual
firms and nearly 300 national trade organisations, with a total affiliated membership
of some 40,000 to 45,000 firms. The FBI has offices in the main industrial centres
in the United Kingdom and is widely represented abroad. It has a wholly owned
subsidiary company, British Overseas Fairs Limited, which is responsible for
organising British trade fairs overseas.
A number of the organisations affiliated to the FBI also deal with labour matters
and are affiliated to the British Employers’ Confederation. The two organisations
work closely together on matters of common interest.
Other important national associations of employers are the National Union of
Manufacturers (NUM) and the Association of British Chambers of Commerce. The
members of NUM are over 5,000 manufacturing firms, mainly small or medium
sized, and some 66 trade associations are affiliated to it. Like the FBI it has regional
branches. The Association of British Chambers of Commerce is the central organi¬
sation to which 98 local chambers of commerce (together with 15 British
Chambers of Commerce operating in foreign countries) are affiliated. In Scotland,
there is also a central organisation, the Council of Scottish Chambers of Commerce.
These bodies are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist for promoting
the interests of local industry and commerce. The FBI, the NUM and the chambers
of commerce often act jointly in matters of common concern.
Relations with Government
The Government is able to influence industry in a number of ways—through
fiscal and monetary policy, by means of physical controls and inducements, as well
as by providing information and advice.
A system has grown up whereby a particular Government department acts as
the main point of contact, or ‘production department’, for each major industry.
The department through which the Government’s relations with trade and
industry are chiefly conducted is the Board of Trade, and its responsibilities
cover a wide range of industries and materials. Certain industries and services,
however, are the responsibility of other departments, as production departments:
Ministry of Supply .. . . . . Aircraft, radio and light metal indus¬
tries and explosives. (The primary
task of the ministry is to supply the
armed forces.)
Admiralty
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food
Ministry of Power
Shipbuilding and ship repairing.
Farming, horticulture, agricultural
machinery, fisheries, and food pro¬
cessing.
Coal, oil, gas, electricity (including
nuclear power), iron and steel.
INDUSTRY
259
Ministry of Transport and Civil
Aviation
Ministry of Works
Ministry of Housing and Local
Government
Ministry of Health
Transport services (including civil
aviation), roadmaking, and certain
sections of the quarrying industry.
Building, civil engineering and build¬
ing materials.
Housebuilding.
Medical and surgical goods.
The Treasury is responsible for economic policy, and specifically for fiscal and
monetary policy through which it is able to influence the level of economic activity
and the utilisation of the nation’s resources. The Ministry of Labour and National
Service is the channel through which manpower policy is conducted.
There are separate departments of the Northern Ireland Government for matters
within the competence of the Northern Ireland Parliament. The Ministry of
Commerce deals with industry, including the encouragement of industrial
development.
During and after the second world war, many operations of industry and
commerce were subject to Government control. Very few of these now remain;
of those in force probably the most important is the power of the Board of Trade
to influence the location of industry. The Ministry of Housing and Local
Government, acting through local planning authorities, has powers to control the
use of land, as described on pp. 186-9. The export and import of certain products
still require Board of Trade approval.
The Central Statistical Office, which is attached to the Cabinet Office, was
established in 1940 to provide a comprehensive statistical service to assist the
authorities in framing economic and financial policy.
Although departments themselves compile statistics relating to their particular
responsibilities, and may publish them in their own standard publications, the
comprehensive statistical publications are prepared by the Central Statistical
Office, which collects the main departmental statistics and compiles its own series
from departmental and other information. Its regular publications are: the Monthly
Digest of Statistics, Economic Trends (monthly), the Annual Abstract of Statistics,
the Preliminary Estimates of National Income and Expenditure (published annually
before the Budget) and the fuller National Income and Expenditure Blue Book
issued later in the year. The Digest of Scottish Statistics is published half-yearly
by the Scottish Statistical Office, a Digest of Northern Ireland Statistics at half-yearly
or yearly intervals by the Ministry of Finance of the Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment, and an annual Digest of Welsh Statistics by the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government. In recent years, statistical information about the United
Kingdom has been made fuller and more quickly available in accordance with a
plan announced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in August 1956. Estimates of
national income and expenditure are now published quarterly as well as annually;
balance of payments statistics have been improved, especially in regard to capital
transactions; up-to-date information on the trends of profits and of personal
income and expenditure is being obtained by means of sample surveys; additional
information on recent and possible future trends in investment is being obtained,
both by sample surveys and returns from building and civil engineering firms
about new contracts; and quarterly estimates of the value of stocks in manufacturing
industry and in the wholesale trade have been introduced.
To ensure that industry is fully aware of Government policy and also that policy
is framed with a full knowledge of industry’s needs and difficulties, a number of
z6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
consultative bodies were set up representing Government, employers’ associations
and trade unions. Among the most important of these are the National Production
Advisory Council on Industry (NPACI) and the National Joint Advisory Council
(NJAC). The NPACI, which covers the wider problems of industrial production,
is under the chairmanship of the Chancellor of the Exchequer and includes
representatives of the Regional Boards for Industry (see below) and of certain
Government departments as well as of employers and workers. Northern Ireland
sends two representatives to meetings of the NPACI as observers. The NJAC
consists of representatives of private employers, the nationalised industries and
trade unions, under the chairmanship of the Minister of Labour and National
Service, and is concerned with matters affecting the relations between employers
and workers.
An important body, which is purely advisory to the Government rather than a
channel of communication with industry, is the Economic Planning Board. It was
established in 1947 to advise on economic policy; its proceedings are confidential.
The chairman of the board is one of the two Permanent Secretaries to the Treasury,
and its membership includes representatives of the Treasury, the Board of Trade,
the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and
nominees of the Trades Union Congress, the Federation of British Industries and
the British Employers’ Confederation.
These consultative bodies approach the study of problems from a broad national
point of view. There are, in addition, consultative bodies concerned with the special
problems of Scotland and Wales and of the English regions. The most important
of these are the nine Regional Boards for Industry and the corresponding Scottish and
Welsh Boards for Industry, whose main functions are to keep the Government
informed on industrial conditions in the English regions and in Wales and Scotland,
and to provide a link between central Government and local industry. The regional
boards have set up district advisory committees wherever they considered that the
geographical grouping of industry justified such a step.
Government and the Nationalised Industries
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working of
the boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies from
industry to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them. First, the
minister appoints the chairman and members of each board, and secondly, he has
power to give general directions as to how the industry should be run, but does not
interfere in day-to-day management. It is usually also laid down that the board
shall give to the minister any information, statistics and financial accounts which
he may require. In practice, as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and
major policy decisions are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom
occasion for him to issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual financial
arrangement is that the board is required to conduct its business so that receipts
at least balance outgoings over a period of years. The responsible minister is
usually empowered (subject to Treasury approval) to say what shall be done with
any surplus should the boards make a profit. As regards finance of capital expendi¬
ture, the present system is that such finance is provided, in the form of interest¬
earning loans, by the minister from the Exchequer; bank advances being used only
for normal requirements of short-term capital after outstanding loans have been
repaid.
The minister responsible for each nationalised industry must take steps to see
that the interests of the industry’s customers are protected. This is usually done
INDUSTRY
261
by the establishment of representative consumers’ councils to consider complaints
and suggestions made to them, and to advise the board or the minister on the
changes they think desirable. It is recognised that these arrangements are still to
a great extent experimental.
Government policy towards these industries is subject to the approval of
Parliament. Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are afforded by debates,
including debates on their annual reports and accounts, and by answers to
parliamentary questions, which, in principle, are admissible only if concerned with
policy rather than details of administration.
In order to ensure that parliamentary discussion of the nationalised industries is
informed and effective, a Plouse of Commons Select Committee on the Nationalised
Industries was established in March 1957. The terms of reference of the
committee are to examine the reports and accounts of the nationalised industries
established by statute, whose controlling boards are appointed by Ministers of the
Crown and whose annual receipts are not wholly or mainly derived from money
provided by Parliament or advanced by the Exchequer. The first report of the
select committee, published in October 1957, dealt with the two Scottish electricity
boards and also discussed ministerial control of the nationalised industries. The
second report, published in May 1958, related to the coalmining industry, and in
July 1959 the committee’s report on the airways corporations was issued. These
reports are debated in the House of Commons.
In most other respects these industries under public ownership have the same
relations with the Government departments responsible for them as do the private
industries.
Production and Productivity
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, building and
contracting, and gas, electricity and water) which, in 1957, was more than 50 per
cent greater than before the war, increased rapidly in the immediate post-war years
as industry was turned over from war production and manpower was released from
the armed forces. It had regained the pre-war level by 1946 and was 15 per cent
greater by 1948. The course of production and employment from 1948 to 1957 is
shown in Table 13.
TABLE 13
Production and Employment in Industry, 1948-57
(1948 = 100)
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
Industrial
Production
100
106
114
117
114
121
130
137
136
138
Employment in
Industry
100
102
103
106
105
106
108
111
112
112
Source: Economic Survey, 1958.
262
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
From 1948 to 1957, industrial production rose by 38 per cent. The numbers
employed in industry rose by only 12 per cent, giving an increase in output
per man of 24 per cent. This rise in productivity was the result of greater efficiency
through the introduction of improved methods and processes. Production showed
only a small change in 1955-58, mainly because of measures taken to check
inflationary tendencies. Figures for 1958 are not available on quite the same basis
as those from 1948 to 1957 given in Table 13. Compared with 1957, however, there
were slight falls in 1958 in industrial production and employment which together
indicated a slight increase in output per man-year.
Since the war, the greatest increases in production have been in the engineering,
shipbuilding and electrical goods group, the vehicles group, the chemicals group,
the paper and printing group, and the gas, electricity and water group, with
increases between 1948 and 1957 of approximately 55 per cent, 65 per cent, 92 per
cent, 69 per cent and 63 per cent respectively. Consumption of electric power by
factories and other industrial establishments doubled between 1948 and 1958.
The promotion of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter for industry
itself. Employers’ associations and trade unions are engaged in activities to raise
industrial productivity. The former often provide technical assistance and conduct
market surveys. The National Union of Manufacturers (NUM) has established an
advisory service to enable small firms to obtain advice on production problems. The
trade unions in many industries organise special schemes for training young people,
and also a variety of courses designed to give trade unionists an understanding of
modern management techniques. Private consultants specialising in management
and work study are available to give advice to firms on measures to increase their
productive efficiency; there are also many specialist institutions, both public and
private, concerned with various aspects of productivity.
The British Productivity Council (BPC) has been established by both sides of
industry to stimulate interest in methods of raising productivity. The BPC was
set up in November 1952 to continue and develop the work of the Anglo-American
Productivity Council which, between 1948 and 1952, sent productivity teams,
made up of representatives of management, technicians and operatives, from many
British industries to study progress and techniques in the United States. It is an
independent body on which are represented the British Employers Confederation,
the Federation of British Industries, the Trades Union Congress, the Association
of British Chambers of Commerce, the National Union of Manufacturers and the
nationalised industries; its work is financed by contributions from these bodies
and by a Government grant-in-aid. Advisory committees have been set up to pro¬
mote productivity in the building trades, in agriculture and in retailing. Much of
the BPC’s work is done through over 100 local productivity committees and
associations throughout the country. These local organisations arrange meetings,
inter-factory visits, courses, conferences, film shows and exhibitions. To assist
them, and the many other national and industrial bodies with which it co-operates,
the BPC produces booklets, pamphlets, case studies, films and a monthly bulletin,
and arranges work study demonstrations.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), is a voluntary non-profit-making body
incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards in respect
of, inter alia, quality, performance, dimensions, testing methods and codes of
practice. Voluntary acceptance of such standards by manufacturers, buyers and
sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies the specification of requirements,
thus promoting industrial efficiency. The BSI is governed by a council consisting
of representatives of the main organisations of employers and workers, professional
institutions and the larger Government departments.
INDUSTRY
263
The Board of Trade is the department responsible for general aspects of the
promotion of productivity and it administers the Government grants to the BPC,
the BSI, and the Council of Industrial Design (see p. 225).
A number of other departments have responsibilities which bear on productivity.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service has a Personnel Management Advisory
Service, which advises industrial concerns on questions of personnel management.
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, whose chief purpose is to
promote the researches which are the main basis of the long-term growth of
efficiency, is also concerned directly with research into such factors as productivity
measurement techniques, production engineering and operator fatigue which
immediately affect productivity; it also provides technical advisory services. The
Ministry of Education is responsible for the technical colleges, at which courses
are available in such subjects as work study and industrial engineering. The
Ministry of Works provides a Technical Information Service for the building
industry; and the Ministry of Power and the British Productivity Council sponsor
the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service. The Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food provides a number of advisory services which aim to encourage
the efficiency of the British farming industry; these include the National Agricultural
Advisory Service, the Agricultural Land Service and the Veterinary Service.
Management
A factor contributing to the growth of productivity in British industry has been
the development of new methods of management. During the present century, and
particularly during and since the second world war, there has emerged in the
United Kingdom, as elsewhere, a growing awareness of the importance of manage¬
ment as a subject requiring special skills and knowledge. This has been stimulated
by the increasing pace of technical, organisational and social change, and by the
need to compete successfully in world markets in the face of rising production
costs. In addition, increased attention is being paid to human relations in industry,
and to the importance of communication between management and labour.
Many organisations are contributing to the growing knowledge and appreciation
of the wider functions of management. They include institutes and societies con¬
cerned with specialist subjects of interest to managers, such as industrial psychology
and industrial welfare; associations of those who work in particular fields of
management, such as sales managers; and professional bodies whose members
may be managers or those who work closely with them, such as accountants or
engineers. The professional engineering institutions, for example, include industrial
administration in the syllabus of their qualifying examinations.
The British Institute of Management (BIM) was founded in 1947, with
Government support, to study and promote improved standards of management
throughout industry, commerce, and public administration. It is now almost
entirely financed from industrial and professional subscriptions. The main objects
of the BIM, which combined in 1957 with the Institute of Industrial Administration,
are to provide information on, and undertake research into, management practices
and techniques, and to encourage the development of education and training for
management on a national scale.
Facilities for management training at all levels have been much extended.
Education for management is developing mainly in four ways:
(1) a national scheme, for the syllabus of which the BIM and the Ministry of
Education are jointly responsible, operated through technical and com¬
mercial colleges, under which intermediate certificates and final diplomas
are granted on the basis of examinations;
s
264
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(2) independent courses organised by universities, other educational establish¬
ments, professional organisations, industrial consultants, and certain
centres specialising in management training (e.g., the Administrative
Staff College at Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College in Hertford¬
shire) ;
(3) training courses organised by employers’ associations, trade unions and
various voluntary bodies; and
(4) formal courses and informal training within individual firms, some of which
operate their own residential centres.
There are probably between 400,000 and 500,000 persons who hold managerial
posts in industry and commerce in the United Kingdom, and only a minority of
them are as yet members of any management body or have received systematic
training in the principles of management.
Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
Competition may be limited either by agreements (formal or informal) between
suppliers, or by monopolies which dominate the market; legislation in force in the
United Kingdom for dealing with these problems is described below.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1956, provides for the examination and
control of restrictive agreements. It requires the entry on a public register of the
particulars of a wide range of restrictive agreements (including those relating to
common prices, approved lists of dealers and the limitation of production) which
affect the supply or processing of goods for the United Kingdom market. The
Registrar of Restrictive Trading Agreements is responsible for keeping the register
and for bringing the agreements before the Restrictive Practices Court set up under
the Act. The court includes laymen but is presided over by a High Court Judge.
It is responsible for deciding whether or not an agreement is in the public
interest. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy the court that their restrictions
confer on the public one or more of the benefits set out in the Act, that these
benefits outweigh the disadvantages of the restrictions and that the degree of
restriction is not unreasonable, the agreement is declared void. The court can make
orders preventing the parties from operating their agreement, or from making new
arrangements having the same effect. The first full hearing before the court took
place in October 1958.
Agreements relating exclusively to exports are not subject to this procedure but
have to be notified to the Board of Trade.
Monopolies and other arrangements which are not within the scope of the
Restrictive Practices Court may be referred by the Board of Trade to the Monopolies
Commission for investigation and report. Production departments take appropriate
action on the basis of these reports, subject to the approval of Parliament. The
commission was originally set up by the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
(Inquiry and Control) Act, 1948, under the title of the Monopolies and Restrictive
Practices Commission. Prior to the passing of the 1956 Act it had investigated a
number of industries, several of which modified their practices in accordance
with its recommendations. The 1956 Act excluded from the scope of the com¬
mission’s work agreements which had to be registered under the new legislation.
It is now mainly concerned with the investigation of monopolies.
One form of restrictive practice, the collective enforcement of resale price
maintenance by the use of stoplists or boycotts, is prohibited by the 1956 Act. On
the other hand, the Act strengthens the powers of individual suppliers to enforce
their resale prices through the civil courts.
INDUSTRY
265
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on imports
for half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest and most important
industries. It occupies nearly one million people, or over 4 per cent of those in
civil employment, provides about 4 per cent of the gross national product, and
uses 48 million of the 60 million acres of land.
THE LAND AND ITS USES
The land in general is highly fertile, and current agricultural practices, founded
upon an age-old tradition of good husbandry improved by the application of modern
scientific methods, result in some of the world’s finest pedigree livestock and most
successful varieties of seeds. Thus, Britain is the largest exporter of pedigree
animals for breeding purposes; of some twenty breeds of cattle, sheep, pigs and farm
horses of world-wide reputation, all but five or six originated in Britain.
The agricultural industry in Britain is less subject to serious dislocation caused
by extreme climatic conditions than it is in some other countries; crops and live¬
stock are seldom subjected to the dangers of drought, or floods, or severe cold.
Nevertheless, abnormal weather does sometimes occur—for example, the severe
winter of 1946-47 and the East Coast floods of 1953. In 1957 and 1958, production
was adversely affected by unusually wet summers, while in 1959 exceptionally
favourable weather was experienced.
Farms: Numbers and Ownership
There are about 506,000 agricultural holdings (excluding holdings consisting
entirely of rough grazings) in the United Kingdom: 308,000 in England; 53,000 in
Wales; 66,000 in Scotland; and 73,000 in Northern Ireland. About three-fifths of
the total holdings are under 50 acres in size (crops and grass, excluding any area of
rough grazings), but 96,000 (19 per cent) are over 100 acres and 16,000 (3 per cent)
over 300 acres. Of nearly a million people employed in agriculture, about one-third
are farmers, the rest being paid employees or members of the farmers’ families.
Many farmers own their own land freehold, but the more usual arrangement is
for a tenant farmer (who has a measure of security of tenure) to operate the farm
and own the stock, crops and movable equipment, while the landlord owns the
land, buildings, and fixed equipment, and is responsible for their maintenance and
improvement. Returns made in 1950, for the purpose of the United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organisation’s World Census, showed that about 36 per cent of
holdings in England and Wales were wholly owned by the occupier; 49 per cent
were wholly rented and 15 per cent were part-owned and part-rented. The propor¬
tion of owner-occupiers was substantially higher in the case of holdings of under
five acres, but did not vary appreciably from size group to size group in the case
of the larger holdings. In Scotland, about 36 per cent of all holdings are wholly
owner-occupied, 60 per cent are wholly rented and 4 per cent are part-owned and
part-rented. In Northern Ireland, all farmers either own their holdings or are in
the process of becoming owners. In general, farms in Britain are run as businesses,
each by a single manager, usually the farmer himself. Most farmers belong to one
or more of the various organisations, such as the National Farmers’ Unions, which
exist to represent their collective interests, and also to agricultural co-operative
societies (see p. 278), which provide them with bulk-purchase and bulk-selling
facilities.
266
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Types of Farming
Types of farming vary with differences of soil and climate. Most of the better
farming land is in the lowland areas of Britain.
In England and Wales, out of a total of 29-6 million acres of agricultural land,
24-5 million acres are under crops and grass, the remainder being rough grazings.
Most farms are mixed farms, but in general the eastern half of England is devoted
predominantly to arable, and the western half of England, together with Wales,
to dairy farming. Dairy farming accounts for 37 per cent of agricultural land,
arable for 22 per cent and mixed farming for 29 per cent, the remainder being
unclassifiable or of little agricultural value. The chief crops, apart from grass, are
wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, sugar beet and fodder crops. Market gardens are
usually found near towns, but much of the vegetable production is now on arable
and mixed farms. Fattening of animals for food is widespread but is carried on
particularly in the south-eastern and eastern counties and the Midlands; stock¬
rearing is important in Wales and in the south-west and north of England.
In Scotland, out of a total of about 15 million acres of agricultural land, 4 J million
acres are under crops and grass, the rest being rough hill grazings. The chief crop
is oats; next come root crops for stock-feeding; potatoes, especially seed potatoes,
and barley are also important crops. The area under wheat is small. In the south¬
west, dairying is the chief branch of the industry, while cropping and fattening
cattle are carried on mainly in the east. The rearing of stock (especially sheep) is
of importance in the hill areas.
In Northern Ireland, the total of 2-87 million acres of agricultural land in 1958
included 2-12 million acres under crops and pasture. The land is intensively
farmed, the chief crops being oats, potatoes, barley and ryegrass for seed. Between
80 and 85 per cent of Northern Ireland’s agricultural income is derived from live¬
stock and livestock products.
The use of agricultural land for the various crops and the numbers of livestock
on farms in the United Kingdom since 1939 are shown in Tables 14 and 15
respectively. The map on p. 268 is intended to convey a general idea of the distribu¬
tion of agricultural production. The actual pattern is neither as definite nor as
static as might be inferred from it.
Horticulture
In June 1958, apart from private gardens and allotments, horticultural crops
(excluding potatoes) were grown in the open on 746,000 acres in the United King¬
dom, 296,000 acres being devoted to fruit, 420,000 acres to vegetables and 30,000
acres to flowers and nursery stock. The area of crops growing in glasshouses was
5,000 acres. The value of output in the crop year 1957-58 was estimated at £141-1
million, or about one-tenth of the value of the total agricultural output of the
United Kingdom.
Although horticultural produce of one kind or another is grown on some 70,000
holdings, included in this number are many farms in the western counties of
England on which cider apples are the only horticultural crop, while many arable
farms in the eastern and south-eastern counties grow one or more vegetable crops
as part of the rotation. The number of holdings on which horticulture is the main
interest is therefore very much less than 70,000.
Most of the principal growing areas are within easy reach of the large industrial
towns, the main centres of market gardening being in the Vale of Evesham (in
Worcestershire), Bedfordshire, Kent, Essex and Lancashire. Farm production of
peas and the coarser types of vegetables, such as carrots and winter cabbages, is
mainly in the eastern counties from Yorkshire to Essex. Glasshouse production is
INDUSTRY
267
TABLE 14
Use of Agricultural Land in the United Kingdom 1939-58
Million acres
1939 1944 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958
Wheat
Barley
Oats
Mixed com
Rye. .
All cereals . .
Potatoes
Sugar beet. .
Fodder crops
Fruit
Vegetables . .
Other crops
Bare fallow
Total tillage
Temporary grass(a)
Total arable land . .
Permanent grass ..
1-8
1-0
2-4
0-09
0-02
3-2
2-0
3-7
0-4
0-1
2-5
2-1
2-6
0-6
0-04
1- 9
2- 3
2-6
0-5
0-02
2-3
2-3
2-6
0-4
0-03
2-1
2-6
2-4
0-3
0-03
0-4
9.4
1- 4
0-4
2- 0
0-3
0-5
0-4
0-2
7-8
0-9
0-4
1-5
0-3
0-4
0-3
0-3
7-3
0*9
0-4
1-4
0-3
0-5
0-2
0-3
7-6
0-9
0-4
1-4
0-3
0-5
0-2
0-2
7-4
0-8
0-4
1-3
0-3
0-4
0-3
0-3
8-8
4-1
14-6
4-7
11-9
6-0
11-3
6-2
11-5
6-1
11-2
6-3
12-9
18-8
19-3
11-7
17-9
13-2
17-5
13-5
17-6
13-5
17-5
13-5
2-2
2-8
2-2
0-3
0-02
7-5
0-8
0-4
1-2
0-3
0-4
0-3
0-3
11-2
6-3
17-5
13-5
Totals: Crops and Grass
Rough Grazings
31-7
16-5
31-0
17-0
31-1
16-9
31-0
16-9
31-1
16-8
31-0
16-8
31-0
16-9
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
(a) Includes lucerne, except in 1939 when it was included in ‘other crops’.
TABLE 15
Livestock in the United Kingdom 1939-58 (a)
Millions
1939 1944 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958
Dairy cattle
Other cattle
Sheep
Pigs. .
Poultry
3-9
5-0
26-9
4.4
74-4
4.4
5-1
20-1
1-9
55-1
4-6
6-2
22-9
6-3
83-6
4- 5
6-2
22-9
5- 8
86-9
4- 7
6-2
23-6
5- 5
92-5
4-7
6-2
24-8
6-0
94.9
4-6
6-3
26-1
6-5
99-7
{a) At the annual June census.
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
widespread, but the main centres are in the Lea Valley (north of London), in Sussex,
in Lancashire and in the Channel Islands. Kent is the chief county for fruit,
particularly cherries and apples. Devon and Hereford are renowned for cider
apples and Worcestershire for plums. For soft fruits, important growing areas
268
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture
MAINLY ARABLE FARMING
Market Gardening and Cash Crops
Arable Farming
MIXED FARMING
MAINLY PASTORAL FARMING
Predominantly Dairying [|
Stock Raising, Grazing and
Hill Sheep Farming til'
UNCULTIVATED
Rough Grazing, Forest and Land |
of Small Agricultural Value | 1
MAIN URBAN AREAS (
INDUSTRY 269
include East Anglia (blackcurrants), Cambridgeshire and Norfolk (strawberries),
and eastern Scotland (raspberries).
Early vegetables come from Cornwall and the Channel Islands, and early flowers
(grown in the open) from the Isles of Scilly.
Smallholdings and Allotments
There are some 17,000 smallholdings in England and Wales provided by county
councils and county borough councils and by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food. Of these, about 9,500 are capable of providing a full-time occupation
for the tenant. These smallholdings are let only to people with practical experience
in agriculture, preferably agricultural workers, with the object of affording them
an opportunity to become farmers on their own account. Loans may be made to
the tenants of up to 75 per cent of the working capital they require.
Of the smallholdings provided by the ministry, approximately 1,000 situated
on 18 different estates are managed by the Land Settlement Association Limited,
which was originally formed in 1934 to develop smallholdings for unemployed
men from industrial areas. The association provides centrally on each estate
various services for the tenants’ use, including the supply of agricultural stores
and requisites, the operation of a machinery pool, and the packing and marketing
of produce.
The Welsh Land Settlement Society, which was also formed to assist in the
settlement on the land of unemployed industrial workers, created a number of
profit-sharing farms, which are still in operation.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central Govern¬
ment, which now owns and maintains some 432,000 acres of Land Settlement
Estates with over 4,000 holdings.
There are also nearly one million allotments in the United Kingdom; most of
these are allotment gardens1 and about half are permanent statutory allotments
provided by local authorities who, under the Allotments Acts, have the duty to
provide allotments, if practicable, wherever there is a need.
The growing of vegetables and fruit and the keeping of small livestock such as
poultry, rabbits, bees, pigs and goats by gardeners and allotment-holders is wide¬
spread in Britain. Voluntary organisations exist to provide advice, guidance and
trading facilities and generally to assist those interested in such activities. The
National Council for Domestic Food Production, formed in 1951 by the Minister of
Agriculture, co-ordinates the work of these organisations and encourages the
development of domestic food production as a form of self-help, which also provides
social and recreational benefits.
Changes since 1870
In the middle of the nineteenth century Britain was largely self-sufficient in
agricultural production. Then, wool, grain and, later, meat—all produced cheaply
from virgin lands overseas—were increasingly imported and, as a result, the
farming industry had to adapt itself to the changing conditions by concentrating
much more on milk, eggs, pigs and horticultural produce. These changes in pro¬
duction and types of farming, in successive attempts to meet changes of fortune,
resulted in a continuous trend away from an agricultural industry based mainly
on grain to one based more on livestock and livestock products and, among crops,
with an increasing emphasis on vegetables.
1 An allotment garden is a piece of land not bigger than a quarter of an acre which is
wholly or mainly cultivated by the occupier for the production of vegetable or fruit crops
for consumption in his own home.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
270
The arable area in Britain declined continuously from 1872 until i939> except
during the first world war; the meat, dairy and poultry industries becoming in¬
creasingly dependent on imported feedingstuffs. The outbreak of the second world
war was, however, followed by an immediate reversal of farming practice, for
shortage of shipping space for imports demanded a greatly increased home produc¬
tion of crops for direct human consumption, such as wheat and potatoes, largely at
the expense of livestock and livestock products other than milk. The post-war world
food shortage and Britain’s balance of payments problems made it necessary for
Britain to maintain increased grain production but, since 1947, an expansion of
output of livestock, livestock products and animal feedingstuffs has been encouraged
concurrently with the maintenance of a high level of production of grain and other
crops.
PRODUCTION
Before the second world war, Britain produced about 31 per cent of its food
supply (in terms of calories for human consumption). By 1958 this had risen to
nearly 40 per cent, and in terms of value represented about one-half compared
with a little over one-third before the war. The percentages by weight of total
supplies of certain foods provided by home production in post-war years compared
with the pre-war average are shown in Table 16. Imports of food and feedingstuffs
(including oils and oilseeds) accounted for 45 per cent of total imports pre-war
and 40 per cent in 1958. The United Kingdom is the world s largest importer of
agricultural produce. Its level of tariffs is in general very low, and quota restrictions
are few.
TABLE 16
Percentage of Total U.K. Food Supplies Provided by
Home Agriculture
Food Product
Wheat and flour for human con¬
sumption (as wheat equivalent)
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent)
Sugar (refined value)
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham (excluding canned)
Butter
Cheese
Condensed milk
Dried milk (whole and skimmed).
Shell eggs . .
Milk for human consumption (as
liquid)
Potatoes for human consumption
Pre-war
average
12
16
18
51
32
9
24
70
59
71
100
94
1945
32
7
32
50
38
8
10
59
49
87
100
100
1951
24
10
23
65
49
4
18
63
43
86
100
97
1957
21
16
19
63
42
11
48
99
57
99
100
95
1958
(prov.)
19
18
18
65
42
8
45
98
51
99
100
84
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Production trends since the war for some of the main agricultural products are
shown in Table 17. An increase in agricultural production of over 60 per cent since
the years immediately before the second world war has been achieved in spite of a
slow decline in the agricultural labour force since the war. There has, in fact, been
a very large increase in productivity, due to improved crop and livestock varieties,
more intensive use of fertilisers, pesticides and fungicides, and greatly increased
INDUSTRY
271
mechanisation, which has made it possible to work much larger acreages of arable
land. Higher agricultural production and productivity has been a major objective of
Government policy, and has been fostered by assurances, inducements, advisory
services, controls and other measures.
In the United Kingdom, the estimated average yields per acre in the three years
tQSh—57 to 1958—59 were 24-9 cwt. for wheat and 23-2 cwt. for barley compared
with 21-7 cwt. and 20-1 cwt. in the three years 1949-50 to 1951-52.
The estimated average yield of milk per cow was 638 gallons in the three years
i955~56 to 1957-58 compared with 586 gallons in the three years 1949-50 to
J951-52- In the same periods, the estimated average yield of eggs for each laying
fowl was 171 and 136 respectively.
The output per acre of horticultural produce is also considerably higher than it
was before the second world war. About 80 per cent of total supplies of vegetables
and 45 per cent of fruit are home grown. In 1958, output was estimated at 2,564,000
tons of vegetables and 950,000 tons of fruit.
TABLE 17
Agricultural Production in the United Kingdom
{Years beginning \st June)
Product
Crop Production:
Wheat
Rye
Barley
Oats
Mixed corn
Potatoes . .
Sugar beet
Livestock Products:
Milk
Eggs (a) ..
Beef and veal
Mutton and lamb
Pigmeat (a)
Wool (clip)
Index of net agricul¬
tural output
Agricultural
holdings(6)
Total (a)
Unit
’000 tons
mill. gals.
’000 tons
Pre-war
average
1936-38
1,651
10
765
1,940
76
4,873
2,741
1,556
385
578
195
435
34
100
100
1955-56
2,599
19
2,936
2,709
510
6,278
4,556
2,206
581
687
191
659
31
155
156
1956-57
2,845
25
2,800
2,486
407
7,533
5,169
2,359
636
849
197
641
31
160
161
1957-58
2,683
24
2,957
2,145
325
5,691
4,539
2,392
660
887
208
690
35
160(c)
162(c)
1958-59
forecast
2,711
21
3,170
2,138
275
5,556
5,742
2,252
695
783
200
726
36
159
161
Source: Cmnd. 696, and Agricultural Departments.
{a) Includes estimated production from units under one acre.
(6) In Great Britain holdings of over one acre only; in Northern Ireland one acre and
over from 1955-56, for earlier years £ acre and over.
(c) Provisional.
272
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Farm Incomes and Expenditure
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and of the net incomes of farmers are
prepared annually by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in connection
with its annual review of the industry (see pp. 279“8o)- The calculations for
1958-59 forecast a total gross agricultural revenue of £i,574 million. Farm expenses
are forecast at £1,247 million, giving an aggregate net income of £327 million, or
£360-5 million if adjusted for normal weather conditions.
~ The largest item in farm expenses is feedingstuffs (in 1958-59, £348-5 million),
followed by labour (£314-5 million) and machinery costs (£220-5 million). Rising
expenditure on feedingstuffs has accompanied the increase in gross earnings from
fatstock (£443-5 million in 1958-59 compared with £337 million in 1952-53) and
eggs and poultry (£215-5 million against £163 million in 1952-53)- Income from
farm crops (£284-5 million) and milk and milk products (£339'5 million) has
undergone much smaller changes.
Mechanisation
The estimated number of tractors (excluding small market-garden types) in the
United Kingdom in 1925 was about 21,000, in 1939 about 55,°°°> and in ^SS about
460,000. Britain has one of the greatest tractor densities in the world, one tractor to
about 38 acres of arable land. The increase in some of the newer types of agricultural
machines has been even more notable; thus it is estimated that about 43,°°°
combined harvester-threshers were in use in the 1958 harvest; in 1939 there were
only 150. In a climate such as Britain’s, the widespread use of these combines has
given rise to extensive installation of drying and storage facilities for gram.
Great progress has been made in the development of a wide range of equipment
to assist the production of grass in the various forms silage, hay and dried grass -
upon which British farm livestock very largely depends for winter fodder.
Electrical equipment, such as milking machines, has gained rapidly in popularity
in recent years and considerable use is made of mechanical handling equipment
for milk. In 1958, 76 per cent of farmers in England and Wales, and 73 per cent in
Scotland were supplied with electricity. In Northern Ireland the percentage was 26.
THE ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT
The Government has wide functions in relation to agriculture, most of them
exercised by the agricultural ministers, i.e. the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food in England and Wales, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and, in
Northern Ireland, the Home Secretary, who is the minister responsible for United
Kingdom aspects of Northern Ireland agriculture, local aspects being the responsi¬
bility of the Northern Ireland Minister of Agriculture.
The severe agricultural depression which followed the fall in the general price
level after 1920 resulted in the introduction during the 1930s of forms of protection
and financial assistance for agriculture. Commodity commissions were set up for
sugar beet, wheat and livestock, with the responsibility of administering Govern¬
ment subsidies or other forms of direct financial assistance for the production of those
commodities. In addition, producer-controlled marketing boards were established
with powers to regulate the marketing of milk, pigs and bacon, hops and potatoes
and, in 1937, the Government assumed powers to pay acreage subsidies to assist
producers of barley and oats. • 1 1
During the second world war and the immediate post-war years, agricultural
production and marketing were closely controlled by the State, and County War
Agricultural Executive Committees, composed of local representatives of agncul-
INDUSTRY
273
tural interests, acted as the Government’s local agents, as did similar committees
during the first world war. As a result of Government control, the functions of
marketing boards and commodity commissions were largely suspended. Most of
these organisations have now had their powers restored to them or their functions
have been superseded by other arrangements.
The main objective of United Kingdom agricultural policy continues to be that
set out in Section I of the Agriculture Act, 1947, namely—‘a stable and efficient
agricultural industry capable of producing such part of the nation’s food and other
agricultural produce as in the national interest it is desirable to produce in the
United Kingdom, and of producing it at minimum prices consistent with proper
remuneration and living conditions for farmers and workers in agriculture and an
adequate return on capital invested in the industry’. To this end, the Government
is empowered to provide guaranteed prices, determined in the light of annual
reviews (see pp. 279-82), for the main agricultural products and to afford a measure
of security of tenure to tenant farmers. In return, farmers and landowners are
expected to maintain efficiency in husbandry and estate management. The agri¬
cultural ministers had powers, exercised through the Agricultural Executive
Committees (see below), but repealed in 1958, to enforce minimum standards of
efficiency by supervision and direction and eventually by dispossession. The
Government promotes efficiency by providing technical advisory services, and also
various grants to farmers and landowners in respect of certain operations and
requisites designed to improve productivity.
The Agriculture Act, 1947, was introduced at a time of food shortage and was
administered at first in conjunction with a system of State purchase of food, far-
reaching controls over agricultural production and marketing, and food rationing.
Agricultural policy was aimed primarily at increasing output, which in fact by
1952 was 50 per cent above the pre-war level. As world supplies of food and Britain’s
own agricultural production and trading position improved, the Government
gradually restored to private business both the import of food and all domestic
trading in food. All consumer rationing of food in Britain ended on 3rd July, 1954.
With the ending of the period of scarcity, policy objectives have undergone a
change of emphasis. In recent years, stress has been laid on the need for more
economic production adapted to market requirements, increased technical efficiency,
and economies in the use of imported feedingstuffs, rather than on an indiscriminate
expansion of production.
In 1959, after its annual review of the industry, the Government’s view was that
development should proceed in the following directions:
(1) the maintenance of the arable acreage at roughly its present size, but with
less emphasis on wheat and rye than on barley and on other feed crops;
(2) greater reliance on home-grown feed for livestock;
(3) production of more beef of the quality wanted by the market;
(4) reduction in costs of producing lamb and pigmeat; and
(5) less production of milk and eggs.
The Government’s long-term objective is to achieve a steady improvement in
the competitive position of the industry.
County Agricultural Executive Committees
In England and Wales, County Agricultural Executive Committees (CAECs),
which superseded the County War Agricultural Executive Committees, were set
up under the provision of the Agriculture Act, 1947. In Scotland, 11 similar bodies,
known as Agricultural Executive Committees, were set up; while in Northern
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
274
Ireland each county has a Committee of Agriculture which acts mainly in an
advisory capacity to the Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture. An agricultural
executive officer, working directly under the Northern Ireland Ministry of Agri¬
culture, is responsible for carrying out the Government’s agricultural policy in each
county.
Each county agricultural executive committee in England and Wales consists
of 12 members. Five are appointed directly by the minister, and seven from panels
nominated by the interests concerned, three being farmers, two landowners and
two agricultural workers. The committees, most of which are represented locally
by district committees, are charged with promoting agricultural development and
efficiency. In the past, they were partly concerned with the administration of
controls, partly with the administration of trading services, subsidies and routine
executive work, and partly with technical advice to farmers. Some of these functions
have now lapsed, and the administration of trading services, subsidies and routine
executive work is left to officials. Their main tasks are now to assist the technical
services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in promoting technical
development; to give advice and assistance on local agricultural problems; and to
advise on the administration of certain grant and subsidy schemes and on the
development and local application of policy. They also retain certain statutory and
executive functions, the chief of which are the registration and licensing of milk
producers, and the control of land and bird pests.
The Crofters Commission
In the seven Scottish counties known as crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness,
Inverness, Orkney, Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland and Shetland—much of the
land is farmed by crofters, tenant farmers whose holdings are either rented at a cost
of not more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding 50 acres.
In these counties there are about 20,000 crofts, which produce about one-quarter
of the total agricultural output of the area. The special problems of the crofting
counties, which had for some time been suffering from a declining population and
falling agricultural production, led to the setting up, under the Crofters (Scotland)
Act, 1955, of a Crofters Commission whose functions are to reorganise, develop
and regulate crofting in the crofting counties, to promote the interests of crofters
and to keep under review matters relating to crofting. When a croft becomes vacant,
the landlord must advise the Crofters Commission of his proposals for letting the
croft; the commission has power to approve or veto these proposals, to require
that a vacant croft be let as an enlargement to another croft, and generally to ensure
that all vacant crofts are let in the best interest of the crofting communities. For
the same purpose the commission has power to dispossess absentee tenants who
are, however, able to retain their croft houses in certain circumstances. It may
authorise the granting of feus (pieces of land held on a perpetual lease at a fixed
rent) to aged and infirm crofters who wish to give up their land but to retain their
houses. The commission has power to carry out reorganisation schemes in derelict
or decaying ‘townships’, if a majority of the resident crofters agree, by reallocating
the land in a way which, in the commission’s opinion, would lead to the proper
and efficient use of the land and the general benefit of the township. The com¬
mission has powers to ensure that crofters work their crofts according to the rules
of good husbandry, and it is responsible for approving regulations governing the
use of common grazings. It acts as agent for the Secretary of State for Scotland in
the administration of schemes of loans and grants for the development of agri¬
cultural production on crofts, and collaborates with other bodies in carrying out
measures for economic development and social improvement in crofting areas.
INDUSTRY
275
As part of a development plan for the Highlands of Scotland, announced in June
1959) the annual payment for improvement grants for crofters is to be increased by
£100,000 to £500,000, to enable the Crofters Commission to meet applications.
The Agricultural Land Commission
The Agricultural Land Commission was set up under the Agriculture Act, 1947,
to manage lands vested in the then Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, or land
for which he has become responsible, and to advise and assist the minister in matters
relating to the management of agricultural land. The commission’s functions in
Wales are delegated to the Welsh Agricultural Land Sub-Commission. Early in
1954 the minister decided, after consultation with the commission, to sell land
managed by it wherever that could suitably be done. At 31st March, 1959, 163,409
acres were under the control of the commission and almost all of this land was let to
private farmers. A little over half of the land was agricultural land intermixed with
other land used by the Forestry Commission. About one-eighth consisted of
disused airfields and other land formerly held by various Government depart¬
ments ; almost a quarter comprised an estate accepted by the Government in lieu of
death duties; and the remainder was mostly land acquired by the minister to
ensure its full and efficient use for agriculture.
In Scotland, the management of lands vested in the Secretary of State and the
duty of advising him on management matters are carried out by the Department
of Agriculture.
Security of Tenure
Successful farming is a long-term business, and adequate security of tenure
helps the good farmer to plan ahead. The effect of the legislation passed after the
war was to give the farming tenant a considerable measure of security.
In England and Wales, the Agricultural Holdings Act, 1923, had required that
normally at least twelve months’ notice should be given to quit an agricultural
holding and gave the tenant a right to claim compensation for disturbance, but
not to contest the notice to quit. The Agricultural Holdings Act, 1948, gave the
tenant the right in most cases to contest a notice to quit, which could then be
enforced only with the consent of a county agricultural executive committee
(acting for the minister); there was a right of appeal by either party to an Agri¬
cultural Land Tribunal (an independent judicial body appointed by the Lord
Chancellor and composed of a chairman and two members representing landowners
and farmers respectively). The parallel Scottish Act applied similar provisions to
Scotland, with a right of appeal to the Scottish Land Court. The Agriculture Act,
1958, transferred the adjudicatory functions of the County Agricultural Executive
Committees to the Agricultural Land Tribunals and the Scottish Land Court, and
made amendments to the law on notice to quit, designed to make it less difficult
for the landlord to obtain possession of a holding from an indifferent tenant, while
continuing to give security to the good farmer. At the same time the Act gave
tenants, in England and Wales, an important new right by enabling them in most
cases to apply to the appropriate agricultural land tribunal for a direction to the
landlord to provide equipment necessary to enable the tenant to comply with
statutory requirements such as the safety, health and welfare regulations. A
further change under the Act was the transfer to the Lord Chancellor of the functions
in respect of agricultural land tribunals which formerly devolved on the minister.
Rents are normally fixed by agreement between the landlord and tenant; where
agreement cannot be reached, the minister has power, on the application of either
party, to appoint an arbitrator, who is required to fix a sum in accordance with the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
276
rent at which the holding might reasonably be expected to be let by a willing
landlord in the open market to a willing tenant. The arbitrator must, however,
ignore any improvements or dilapidations caused by the tenant and any landlord s
improvements in so far as grants have been made from public funds.
IMPROVEMENT OF CROPS AND LIVESTOCK
Crops and Grass
Improved varieties, the use of new insecticides, fungicides and herbicides,
together with advances in methods of husbandry have led to a steady improvement
in the yield of cereals.
New varieties of crops and seeds are tested at the National Institute of Agri¬
cultural Botany, Cambridge, maintained by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food.
Research at the Grassland Research Institute (Hurley, Berkshire) and elsewhere
has directly influenced agricultural practice in the production and use of grass.
Improved management of both permanent grass and temporary grass leys and the
more effective utilisation of grass by means of ensilage or drying, together with the
extended use of fodder crops, such as kale, help to economise in the use of purchased
feedingstuffs.
Cattle and Sheep
Britain is noted for its exports of pedigree livestock and since the end of the
second world war there has been a marked recovery of the export trade in livestock
of high quality.
It is mainly the beef breeds of cattle (particularly Shorthorns, Herefords and
Aberdeen Angus) which have made a reputation overseas, but interest in British
dairy stock (e.g., Guernsey, Jersey and Ayrshire) is increasing. At home, the rise
in milk consumption since 1940 resulted for a time in concentration on dairy breeds,
but many breeds have maintained the dual-purpose type of qualifications. A recent
development has been the increased mating of bulls of beef breeds with commercial
dairy cows for producing calves of better quality for the beef market. In Scotland,
while milk production has expanded, an even greater increase in numbers of beef
cattle has taken place. In areas where small farms predominate, grants are provided
for approved sires, and there are special schemes in the Highlands and Islands for
the loan or hire of bulls and rams to communities of smallholders. Grants for
approved bulls are also given in England and Wales. The rearing of cattle for beef
in the United Kingdom is encouraged by subsidies on calves suitable for beef
production and on hill cows in regular breeding herds. If the economic position of
hill sheep farming justifies it, a subsidy is also paid on ewes in hill flocks.
J11 order to ensure sound breeding, bulls have to be licensed. Artificial Insemina¬
tion (AI) Centres, which are also licensed, cover the whole of England and Wales;
the majority are operated by the Milk Marketing Board (see p. 280), others by
local breeders’ associations and two by the Ministry of Agriculture. One calf in
every two born in England and Wales is the result of AI. Licensed centres also
operate in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, AI is carried out at centres under the
control of the Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture.
Premiums are paid to producers of tuberculin tested (TT) milk and for attested
herds.
Development of the Pig Industry
In September 1957, a Pig Industry Development Authority was set up in Great
Britain under the Agriculture Act, 1957, to promote improvements in the pro-
INDUSTRY
277
duction, processing and distribution of pigs and of pigmeat. The authority consists
of 17 members appointed by the agricultural ministers, of whom three (including
the chairman) are independent, and the remainder are appointed to represent
various interests in the industry. The authority is empowered to promote schemes
to improve pig production, including the development of an artificial insemination
service for pigs; to sponsor research and development work, including market
intelligence; and to encourage the adoption of grading standards for pigs and pig
products. To finance its activities, which are expected to cost rather less than
£500,000 annually in the early years, the authority has, with the approval of
Parliament, introduced a scheme imposing a levy on the industry. In Northern
Ireland, the Ministry of Agriculture (Northern Ireland) in consultation with the
Pig Advisory Committee—a statutory body—is responsible for functions similar to
those of the authority in Great Britain.
Poultry Breeding
To raise the standard of poultry stock there is a Poultry Stock Improvement Plan
in England and Wales under which breeding stations and hatcheries are accredited.
There are three official poultry progeny testing stations in England and Wales, and
one in Scotland, which has its own accreditation scheme for breeders and hatcheries.
A similar scheme is operated in Northern Ireland.
Bloodstock
The United Kingdom remains, despite increasing international competition, the
world’s greatest exporter of bloodstock. The Government operates the National
Stud at bloodstock breeding establishments at Gillingham in Dorset and at West
Grinstead in Sussex. Exports of horses and ponies (including horses exported
temporarily for racing, breeding and other purposes, and re-exports) were valued
at £6-5 million in 1958 compared with £5-6 million in 1957.
Control of Animal Diseases
Under a plan introduced in October 1950 for the eradication of bovine tubercu¬
losis on an area basis, rpany areas have already been cleared. It was expected that by
the end of 1959 Scotland and Wales would have become fully attested. The whole
of Great Britain should be an attested area by 1961, if not earlier; and Northern
Ireland, which has had an Attested Herds Scheme in operation since 1949, hopes
to achieve this position at about the same time.
The Diseases of Animals Act, 1950, gives the Government wide powers for the
control of diseases. This control may take the form of regulation of internal move¬
ments of stock, or of compulsory slaughter of animals and poultry affected by
certain notifiable diseases (e.g., foot-and-mouth disease and fowl pest). Compensa¬
tion is generally payable for stock slaughtered, although there are exceptions. The
Act, and orders made under it, also restrict the import of certain types of livestock,
animal products and veterinary therapeutic substances. Research into animal
diseases is carried on at several centres, including one at Pirbright, Surrey, which
has been made the world reference laboratory for foot-and-mouth disease.
MARKETING
During the second world war and for some years after, marketing of nearly all
farm crops was closely controlled by the Government. Most of the direct controls
over marketing were progressively removed and the majority of agricultural
products are now disposed of through the normal channels of trade, for example,
through corn merchants, livestock auctions and markets, and bacon factories.
2y8 BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
For certain commodities, however, statutory marketing arrangements, such as the
setting up of marketing boards, have been made, while for all the main agricultural
products (but not for horticultural produce) the Government operates a system of
price guarantees (see pp. 279-82).
Marketing Boards
Marketing boards set up under the Agricultural Marketing Act, 1958 (which
consolidated earlier legislation), are producers’ organisations with powers to regulate
the marketing of particular agricultural products. The schemes under which they
are constituted and operated must be approved by Parliament and confirmed by a
poll of the producers concerned. For the most part, a marketing board consists of
members elected by producers, but not fewer than two members and not more than
one-fifth of the total number must be appointed by the minister or ministers
concerned.
Marketing boards fall into two categories according to the kind of powers con¬
ferred on them by the schemes. There are full trading boards which have the power
to become the first selling agency of producers’ produce, and there are regulatory
boards which exercise control over marketing by producers themselves. The
boards for eggs, hops, milk and wool are full trading boards and those for potatoes,
and tomatoes and cucumbers are regulatory boards.
The pre-war pigs and bacon marketing schemes, which had been suspended since
1939, were revoked in December 1957 after the Pig Industry Development
Authority had been set up.
In general, the Government has declared that it will consider sympathetically
proposals for producer marketing boards, although each commodity has to be
considered on its merits. In appropriate cases the Government is also prepared
to allow price guarantees to be operated through marketing boards, and such
arrangements are operated by the boards for eggs, milk, potatoes and wool (see
pp. 280-1). < J u v
Statutory consumers’ committees represent consumers’ interests affected by the
operation of marketing schemes, and committees of investigation consider reports
of consumers’ committees and complaints from persons other than consumers
affected by the operation of the schemes. The ministers have powers to amend or
revoke schemes, or to serve directions on a board, when this is recommended by a
committee of investigation. The ministers also have powers to issue directives if it
is considered that the public interest is affected adversely by a board’s restrictive
use of certain of its main marketing powers.
Agricultural Co-operatives
The main types of agricultural co-operatives are those supplying members’
requirements (e.g., fertilisers and feedingstuffs), those marketing members’ produce
(e.g., wool and eggs) and those providing services to members (e.g., grain drying
and cattle breeding). Horticultural co-operatives have been set up in some areas
to market produce either by auction or through existing wholesale channels. Many
of these societies also sell farm requisites. There are some 244 societies in England
and 85 in Wales with a total turnover of some £129 million and £14 million
respectively. There are also co-operative machinery syndicates, woodlands societies, j
and many rabbit clearance societies.
The Agricultural Central Co-operative Association Ltd. is the body which,
with the support of the National Farmers’ Union, co-ordinates and represents
agricultural co-operatives in England. In Wales, similar functions are performed
by the Welsh Agricultural Organisation Society Ltd. These associations, together
INDUSTRY
279
with the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society and the Ulster Agricultural
Organisation Society, are members of the Federation of Agricultural Co-operatives
in Great Britain and Ireland. Another member of the federation, the Horace
Plunkett Foundation, founded in 1919, is also concerned with the furthering of
agricultural co-operation.
Regulation of Milk Distribution
Milk distributors in Great Britain must be registered, and regulations lay down
conditions under which milk is produced, handled, treated, stored and distributed.
Subject to licence, milk may be sold under special designations—‘Pasteurised’,
‘Sterilised’, ‘Tuberculin Tested’ (TT) and also, in Scotland only, ‘Certified’.
In areas specified by statutory orders it is obligatory to retail only specially
designated milk; milk which is not sold as tuberculin tested (or, in Scotland, as
certified) must be heat-treated. In Great Britain, 90 per cent of the population now
drink tuberculin tested, pasteurised or sterilised milk. The whole of Northern
Ireland is now a ‘safe milk’ area. Retail prices of milk and distributors’ profit
margins throughout the United Kingdom are controlled by the Government.
Horticulture
In July 1958, the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food appointed an interim
Horticultural Marketing Advisory Council for England and Wales to advise him on
the work of his department on horticultural marketing, to consider plans for a
permanent Horticultural Marketing Council representing all sections of the
horticultural industry, and to report annually. The establishment of such a council
had been recommended in the report of the Committee on Horticultural Marketing
(the Runciman Committee), published in January 1957.
Livestock
Although no statutory scheme has been adopted for fatstock marketing, a
Fatstock Marketing Corporation was set up in 1954, under the sponsorship of
the farmers’ unions, as an alternative to the auction system. The corporation pays
prices to farmers which include the guarantee and collects the guarantee payment
from the Government. Besides its London organisation, it has nine area organisa¬
tions and more than 100 sales centres throughout Britain. Members of its main
board are elected from persons nominated by the farmers’ unions and from its
own members.
PRICE GUARANTEES
Guaranteed prices in various forms are provided for cereals, fatstock, milk, eggs,
potatoes, wool and sugar beet. There are no price guarantees for horticultural
products, for which tariffs and import quotas are the usual form of protection. The
guaranteed prices are determined at annual reviews of the economic conditions and
prospects of the agricultural industry, which are held, in accordance with Part I of
the Agriculture Act, 1947, by the agricultural ministers in consultation with
farmers’ representatives. The Act also provides for a special review to be held at
any time if the ministers concerned consider that it is warranted by a sudden change
in the economic conditions of the industry, such as a substantial alteration in produc¬
tion costs. In addition, long-term assurances for agriculture were provided by the
Agriculture Act, 1957, following recognition by the Government at the 1956
Annual Review that price guarantees based on annual reviews were too short-term
to afford an adequate basis for the forward planning necessary for efficiency.
T
280
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The annual reviews are normally held in February and March, and the resulting
guaranteed prices apply to livestock and livestock products for the ensuing twelve
months and (since 1957) to crops to be harvested in the current year. The
Government’s conclusions from each annual review and its decisions on changes
in guaranteed prices and production grants are published as a White Paper.
The long-term assurances provided for in the 1957 Act require that the total
value of the guaranteed prices and relevant production grants in any year shall be
maintained at not less than 97-5 per cent of their value in the preceding year, after
allowing for changes that have occurred in the cost of review commodities since
the last annual review. In addition, the guaranteed price (adjusted for any change
in the basis of the guarantee) for each review commodity must be maintained at not
less than 96 per cent of that of the previous year, with a provision, in the case of
livestock and livestock products, that, in any period of three years, reductions in the
guaranteed price for a particular commodity will not total more than 9 per cent.
The general policy of the Government is to avoid direct intervention in the market
and therefore to use methods of agricultural support that leave the ordinary
channels of trade to operate freely. The form of price guarantee most generally
used is the deficiency payments system, under which the Government makes
payments to producers, equal to the differences between the average market price
realised and the guaranteed price, for output eligible for the guarantee.
Arrangements for Individual Commodities
The detailed arrangements vary for different commodities.
Cereals and Fatstock. Deficiency payments schemes, administered directly by the
agricultural departments, are in operation for cereals and fatstock. Under the
cereals scheme, the payments are made on the quantity of millable wheat or rye
sold and delivered by individual growers to authorised merchants; the guaranteed
price for wheat varies seasonally. For barley and oats, any deficiency between the
guaranteed price and the average market price is converted to a rate per acre and
payments are made according to individual growers acreages. Under the fatstock
guarantee scheme, the guaranteed prices apply to fat cattle (steers and heifers),
fat sheep (including hoggets, i.e. yearling sheep, and lambs) and fat pigs. The
guaranteed price for cattle and sheep varies according to a seasonal scale of standard
prices. Guarantee payments are made each week on stock which has been certified
as eligible under the scheme.
Milk. The price guarantee for milk is implemented through five Milk Marketing
Boards in the United Kingdom—one for England and Wales, three for Scotland
and one for Northern Ireland. Those in England and Wales and in Scotland were
set up under pre-war schemes, and marketing powers suspended during the
war were restored to them in I954- The Milk Marketing Board for Northern
Ireland was set up in 1955- The Government pays each board any deficit between
its net commercial returns and its entitlement under the guarantee, subject to a
profit and loss sharing arrangement designed to encourage efficient marketing.
The retail price of milk for liquid consumption is controlled by the Government,
but for any surplus milk sold for manufacturing purposes (e.g., for butter, cheese
and dried milk) the Milk Marketing Boards are free to secure the best return j
possible. The price for milk guaranteed to each board applies only to a specified
quantity; sales in excess of this quantity reduce the average cash return received by
producers.
Eggs. For eggs, the price guarantee is implemented by means of a flat rate
subsidy payable to the British Egg Marketing Board for eggs sold to the board
INDUSTRY
28l
through packing stations. Only eggs sold to the board qualify for the guarantee.
The rates of subsidy are calculated by subtracting from the guaranteed price
(determined in the light of the annual review) the average price which it is estimated
that the board will receive from its sales of fresh eggs in the ensuing year. There is a
profit and loss sharing arrangement designed to encourage efficient marketing.
The marketing scheme for eggs came into force on 31st December, 1956, and
applies to the whole of the United Kingdom, covering all producers with more than
50 head of live poultry over the age of six months. In general, registered producers
must sell their eggs to the British Egg Marketing Board through packing stations
where the eggs are graded, tested and stamped, but those who wish to sell eggs
direct to consumers or retailers are entitled to a licence authorising them to do so,
subject to certain conditions which the board may impose.
Wool. The wool guarantee is operated through the British Wool Marketing
Board, which is responsible for the marketing of all fleece wool (wool shorn from
live sheep) produced in the United Kingdom, except in Shetland where, since the
wool from Shetland sheep is of a special kind, producers have to make their own
private marketing arrangements. A guaranteed price to the board for each pound of
wool it handles enables it to fix producers’ prices in advance, after making an
allowance for its marketing costs. Receipts in excess of the guarantee are paid into a
price stabilisation fund. Any deficiency between the guaranteed price and the
board’s receipts from the sale of the wool is met in the first instance from the
stabilisation fund; when this limit is exceeded, any deficiency is met by the
Exchequer.
Potatoes. A new system of price guarantees for potatoes came into operation in
July 1959 (see below). Under the previous price support system (a revised version of
a pre-war scheme) which had come into force in May 1955, the Potato Marketing
Board in Great Britain (acting for the Government) and the Ministry of Agriculture
for Northern Ireland were prepared to buy at the appropriate guaranteed price any
potatoes offered to them by producers. Potatoes so bought were resold at a loss
(which was borne by the Government, except for a small proportion which, in
Great Britain, fell on the Potato Marketing Board) for processing or feeding to
livestock.
Beginning with the 1959 crop, a revised scheme was introduced. Under the new
arrangements, the Government guarantees to the industry as a whole an average
minimum return per ton related to the quantity of potatoes to be used for human
consumption only. Each year, the average price per ton received by the producer
from sales is assessed and compared with the guaranteed price. The total payment
from Exchequer funds equals the difference between the two prices (the market
price and the guaranteed price) multiplied by the quantity of home-produced
potatoes actually sold for human consumption. One part of the payment goes to
the Potato Marketing Board for the benefit of producers in Great Britain, the other
to the Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland (where there is no board) for
the benefit of producers there.
Sugar Beet. Under the Sugar Act, 1956, and the Agriculture Act, 1957, the British
Sugar Corporation contracts to buy the whole of the sugar beet crop (normally
some 4 to 5 million tons) produced from a specified acreage (at present 414,600 acres)
at a scale of fixed prices, determined as a result of the annual review and related to
sugar content.
Any deficit arising from the corporation’s transactions is made good by the Sugar
Board; any surplus accrues to the board. The main functions of the Sugar Board,
set up under the Sugar Act, 1956, are to buy Commonwealth sugar under the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
282
Commonwealth Sugar Agreement and sell it commercially, and to control imports
under the International Sugar Agreement.
Cost of Agricultural Support
In addition to providing financial stability by means of price guarantees to farmers,
the State promotes efficiency by various other subsidies and grants for specific
operations and farm requisites. The estimated total cost of subsidies and grants
for agriculture in 1957-58 and 1958-59 is given in Table 18.
PRODUCTION GRANTS
The following are the principal schemes in operation under which farmers are
eligible for the grants and subsidies listed in Table 18.
Fertilisers and Lime
Schemes under the Agriculture (Fertilisers) Act, 1952, provide grants to assist
farmers in the purchase of nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilisers. Farmers can also
obtain a refund of more than half their costs of liming the land to improve soil
fertility.
Crops and Grass
Ploughing grants are available for land that has been continuously under grass
for three years, to encourage the maintenance of a high tillage area and the regular
ploughing up and extended use of leys.
Farm Drainage and Water Supply Schemes
The State makes substantial contributions towards the cost of land drainage and
water supply. In England and Wales, for example, under various Acts, grants for
farm drainage may be up to 50 per cent of the approved cost. Farm water supply
grants are at the rate of 25 per cent of the approved cost where the connection is to a
public main, and 40 per cent where a private source is utilised. Separate legislation
provides grants for these services in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Improvement of Livestock Rearing Land in Upland Areas
The Hill Farming and Livestock Rearing Acts provide for grants for owners and
occupiers of livestock rearing land in upland areas who wish to put their farms into
sound working order. The Acts also apply to some areas, e.g., Orkney and Caithness,
which are not much above sea level. The object is to encourage the breeding and
rearing of store cattle and store sheep (i.e. cattle and sheep for further fattening,
not for immediate slaughter). Grants are at the rate of 50 per cent of the cost of
work done; the amount available in the United Kingdom is £25 million, which can
be increased by £2 million if necessary.
Silo Grants
Grants amounting to about half the cost of approved projects, up to a maximum
of £250 a farm, are available under the Agriculture (Silo Subsidies) Act, 1956, for
constructing and improving silos.
Grants for Crofters
Special schemes of assistance for developing agricultural production on crofts
were announced in July 1956. These are the Crofters Agricultural Grants (Scotland)
Scheme, 1956, and the Crofters Livestock Purchase Loans (Scotland) Scheme,
INDUSTRY
283
TABLE 18
Exchequer Expenditures on Agricultural Support
I.—Farming Grants and Subsidies
General fertilisers subsidy
Lime subsidy ..
Grants for ploughing up grassland . .
Field drainage and water supply grants
Grants for improvement of livestock rearing
land ..
Marginal production assistance grants
Bonus payments under the Tuberculosis
(Attested Herds) Scheme . .
Livestock: improvement of breeding
Calf subsidy
Hill sheep and hill cattle
Silo subsidy
Grants for farm improvements
Total I
II.—Implementation of Agricultural Price Guarantees
Cereals:
Wheat and rye
Barley
Oats and mixed corn
Home produced eggs . .
Fatstock:
Cattle..
Sheep..
Pigs 
Milk (excluding school and welfare milk)
Wool 
Potatoes. .
Total II
Total Cash (I and II)
Administrative overheads (applicable to I and II
above)
Total Subsidy I and II
III. —Trading Subsidies in Implementation of Agri¬
cultural Guarantees
Home produced eggs . .
Potatoes . .
Total III
IV. —Other Services
Payment to the Exchequer of Northern Ireland
Total Cost of Agricultural Support
£ million
1957-58
341
11-7
36-8
22-8
10-4
100
2-9
1- 4
2- 4
8-0
01
12-9
2-9
1-3
0-2
75-3
51-2
45-8
82-6
12-9
1-5
6-7
200-7
276-0
4-7
280-7
0-9
1-6
2-5
0-9
284-1
1958-59
12-5
11-7
21-1
26-0
9-2
9-3
2-9
1- 7
2- 3
8-6
0-1
14-8
3- 1
1-1
3-8
82-9
52-6
33-8
45-3
10-1
6-4
6-9
155-1
238-0
4-7
242-7
0-8
243-5
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
284
1956, both of which are administered by the Crofters Commission. Under the first
scheme, grants ranging up to 85 per cent are available for a wide range of
agricultural operations and improvement to land equipment. The second scheme
enables loans of from £100 to £500, at an initial interest of per cent, to be given
for the purchase of livestock, to incoming tenants of crofts or to crofters who have
enlarged their crofts or their shares in sheep stocks held in common. Other schemes
operated by the Department of Agriculture for Scotland provide grants and loans
to crofters for erecting and improving houses and farm buildings, and loans to
incoming tenants to enable them to take over their crofts.
Assistance Schemes for Small Farmers
Under the Agriculture (Small Farmers) Act, 1959, two schemes for assisting
small farmers have been introduced:
(1) the Small Farmer Scheme, under which grants are paid to small farmers,
eligible under its provisions, who carry out an approved three to five year
improvement plan to make their farms more profitable. These grants are
of two kinds—field husbandry grants for the improvement or renovation of
grassland and for related ditching and reclamation work; and a farm
business grant, the main purpose of which is to help towards the cost of
such things as additional livestock or machinery forming part of the
improvement plan. This scheme applies in England and Wales, Northern
Ireland and Scotland;
(2) the Supplementary Scheme, which helps those small farmers for whom
improvement plans are not yet practicable, and some small marginal
producers who are not eligible for the Small Farmer Scheme. The Supple¬
mentary Scheme applies to England and Wales and Northern Ireland where
the marginal production schemes are being discontinued. These latter
schemes provided financial assistance to farmers to carry out programmes
mainly of land improvements and reclamation which could not be met out
of farm income because, owing to poor soil or other factors beyond the
farmers’ control, they had no margin of profit to invest in the improve¬
ments. In Scotland, the marginal production schemes are being continued
for a further period under existing powers and, in the meantime, a
supplementary scheme will not be introduced.
Farm Improvement Scheme
This scheme derives from the Agriculture Act, 1957, and, under it, grants
towards the cost of farm improvements and the amalgamation of uneconomic
holdings are available for ten years up to a maximum of £50 million. This period
may be extended to twelve years and the amount to £55 million, if Parliament
approves. The rate of grant for improvements is 33! per cent, and the grants
cover the provision and improvement of farm buildings and fixed equipment, the
construction of farm roads, the supply of electricity, and certain long-term improve¬
ments to land.
Horticulture
A Government plan similar to the Farm Improvement Scheme for assisting
the horticultural industry was announced in January 1959. Legislation is to be
introduced to provide for grants totalling £7-5 million over a period of five years
towards the cost of buildings and equipment necessary for the preparation of
fruit, vegetables and flowers for the market; for certain other assistance to smaller
INDUSTRY
285
businesses growing horticultural crops in the open; and for grants to reduce the
cost of glasshouse produce. The grants will be payable in approved cases to
co-operative marketing associations of producers as well as to individual producers.
LOAN FACILITIES
Short-term finance for farmers and landlords is usually provided by the com¬
mercial banks and long-term borrowing by the raising of mortgages.
In England and Wales, the main sponsored source of long-term finance for
agricultural properties is the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Limited, a company
established under the provisions of the Agricultural Credits Acts, 1928 and 1932.
Loans are made on a first mortgage of agricultural land and buildings for an
amount which may be up to two-thirds of the valuation of the property. The
rate of interest is fixed for the whole term of the loan, which varies from ten to
sixty years, although the longer term of thirty to sixty years is the more usual.
Repayment is made half-yearly and a loan may not be called up before its full
term; in 1944, however, provision was made for non-contractual repayment in
approved cases on payment of a redemption fee.
The corporation’s funds are derived mainly from the proceeds of various issues
of debenture stocks which are subscribed by the public and are repaid by the
operation of sinking funds. The corporation’s reserves include a guarantee fund
for which it receives Exchequer support under the Agricultural Credits Act, 1928,
the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1944, and the Agricultural
Mortgage Corporation Acts, 1956 and 1958, in the form of interest-free loans up
to a total of £5 million. It also receives grants to meet operating deficiencies under
the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1944, and the Agriculture Mortgage
Corporation Act, 1958. At the end of March 1959, the total amount of outstanding
loans on first mortgages was £33-1 million; the security of these loans consisted
of first mortgages of agricultural land, with the necessary farmhouses and buildings,
valued at £58 million.
Landowners in England and Wales also obtain loans for the purpose of carrying
out improvements to agricultural land and buildings in accordance with the
Improvement of Lands Acts, 1864 and 1899. The amount of the loan is charged
on the land improved, in the form of a terminable rent charge payable half-yearly
for a period not exceeding 40 years. This type of improvement loan requires the
sanction of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, but the ministry does
not itself provide the necessary funds. These loans are provided by the Agricultural
Mortgage Corporation and by the Lands Improvement Company, an older institution,
whose funds are provided privately either by way of general loans or against the
assignment of specific rent charges.
In Scotland, loans on favourable terms for agricultural purposes on the security
of agricultural land in Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation Limited, which was set up in accordance with the provisions of the
Agricultural Credits (Scotland) Act, 1929. Both the corporations at present receive
grants from the Treasury towards any deficit in their respective annual profit and
loss accounts.
In Northern Ireland, loans are available to farmers for a wide range of purposes
from the Agricultural Loans Fund set up under the Development Loans Act
(Northern Ireland), 1945, and administered by the Northern Ireland Ministry of
Agriculture. The fund is financed out of the Consolidated Fund, subject to a
statutory limit of £3 million. The bulk of the loans issued are for short-term
periods up to five years for such items as agricultural machinery, but in the case
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
286
of buildings the period may be extended to thirty years. No loans are advanced for
purchase of land. Any deficiency in the income of the fund is financed by the
Northern Ireland Parliament.
AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES
There are a number of agricultural advisory services which operate under
Government auspices.
The National Agricultural Advisory Service
Free technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural matters is available to
every farmer and grower in England and Wales through the Ministry of Agri¬
culture’s National Agricultural Advisory Service (NAAS).
Every county has a county advisory officer in charge of advisory work and
is divided into districts in each of which there is a district advisory officer who can
call on an extensive system of specialist advisers. Advisers in livestock husbandry,
farm machinery, poultry husbandry, and horticulture are available in each county;
at the 12 regional centres and sub-centres there are senior advisers in these subjects
and also in crop and grassland husbandry, and milk production, besides specialists
in animal nutrition, bacteriology, soil chemistry, plant diseases, and plant pests.
These centres are equipped with laboratories for the analysis of soils and feeding-
stuffs, and for the diagnosis of crop pests and diseases. The advisers work in close
consultation with the ministry’s plant pathology laboratory at Harpenden,
Hertfordshire.
In Scotland, the advisory services, similar in scope to the NAAS, are based on
the three agricultural colleges. Northern Ireland has its own separate advisory
service which is closely linked with the research and experimental divisions.
Facilities are provided at the NAAS experimental farms and horticultural
stations in England and Wales and at agricultural college centres in Scotland for
field-scale extensions of research work and investigations of local problems.
Experiments are also carried out at regional advisory centres and on commercial
farms.
Agricultural Improvement Councils
The Agricultural Improvement Council (AIC) for England and Wales and the
Scottish Agricultural Improvement Council advise the agricultural departments on
the application of the results of scientific investigation to farming practice and on
problems requiring investigation. The AIC is also concerned with the problems of
estate management, including buildings and fixed equipment.
The Agricultural Land Service
The main functions of this service, which operates in England and Wales, are:
(1) to advise owners of agricultural land, whether landlords or owner-
occupiers, on estate management matters, including farm buildings and
other fixed equipment;
(2) to provide professional advice and services to the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Agricultural Land Commission and County
Agricultural Executive Committees on all matters relating to agricultural
land, including: the purchase and sale of land by the minister; the
management of land owned by or in the possession of the minister; the
provision of grant-aid under the Hill Farming and Livestock Rearing Acts
and of marginal production assistance; and the provision and management
of smallholdings and allotments by local authorities; and
INDUSTRY
287
(3) to advise the minister and local planning authorities on the agricultural
aspects of planning and the release of agricultural land for other develop¬
ment, including afforestation.
In Scotland, similar duties are carried out by officers of the Department of
Agriculture.
Veterinary Services
There is a comprehensive State Veterinary Service which, in Great Britain, is
administered by the Animal Health Division of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Department of Agriculture for Scotland, and in
Northern Ireland by the Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture. It consists of
a field staff, research workers, and an investigation service which acts as a link
between the field staff, veterinary surgeons in private practice and the research
laboratories. The investigation service in Scotland is linked with agricultural
teaching institutions and is not part of the Government service.
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
Agricultural research in Britain is planned and co-ordinated by the Agricultural
Research Council and is largely financed by the State. (The composition and
functions of the council are described on pp. 210-11.) The council has 23 research
stations and units under its direct control and is responsible for the admini¬
stration of Government grants to 14 independent research institutes in England
and Wales; in Scotland, 8 independent research organisations receive grants through
the Department of Agriculture for Scotland. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food and the Department of Agriculture for Scotland also have their own
research laboratories (see p. 214). Grants are also made by the Agricultural Research
Council to universities and to other recognised research institutions.
Many of the independent research organisations have achieved an international
reputation for their contributions to agricultural progress. The Rothamsted
Experimental Station at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, founded in 1843, was the
first such institute in the world and is still a leading authority for research on
soils, fertilisers and crop husbandry. Others of outstanding importance include
the Macaulay Institute for Soil Research, Aberdeen; the Rowett Research Institute,
Aberdeen, which specialises in the study of animal nutrition; the Research Institute
at Pirbright, Surrey, for animal virus diseases; the East Mailing Research Station,
in Kent, and the Long Ashton Research Station, Bristol University, for fruit
research; the John Innes Horticultural Institution, Bayfordbury, Hertfordshire;
and the National Institute for Research in Dairying, Reading, Berkshire.
Information on research is exchanged with other Commonwealth countries
through the machinery of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and Institutes
(ten Bureaux and two Institutes in the United Kingdom and one Institute in
Canada).
In England and Wales, research and advice are combined in the Provincial
Agricultural Economics Service, attached to the universities and organised in ten
economic advisory centres. In Scotland, agricultural economists are on the staff
of the three agricultural colleges, and the Department of Agriculture has an
economics and statistics unit.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture, which also has its Farm Econo¬
mics Branch, has, in addition, its own research divisions investigating problems of
animal and crop production. The research divisions work in close touch with the
ministry’s county advisory staffs and with the Queen’s University of Belfast, and
288
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
also provide technical advisory services for the farmer. The Plant Disease Division
controls the disinfection of all flax seed sown in Northern Ireland, and the Dairy
Bacteriology Division maintains the hygienic standards laid down for the produc¬
tion and handling of milk. At Hillsborough, in County Down, the Northern Ireland
Agricultural Research Institute owns and operates a farm of some 500 acres. The
institute is endowed from public funds, and the officers of the ministry’s research
divisions are afforded facilities for carrying out their field experiments. The
Ministry of Agriculture maintains a horticultural centre at Loughgall, County
Armagh, at which problems of special interest to Northern Ireland are investigated.
Industrial concerns manufacturing such products as weed-killers, insecticides,
fertilisers and feedingstuffs undertake research on a considerable scale and have
been responsible for developing new and improved products in their particular
spheres. There are also other non-governmental research establishments, such as
the Nuffield Foundation’s ‘working laboratory’ at Great Leigh Farm, Teign Valley,
Devonshire.
There are three types of institutions which provide full-time training in agri¬
cultural subjects—universities, agricultural colleges and, in England and Wales,
county farm institutes. Eight universities in England and Wales (Cambridge,
Durham, Leeds, London, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, and the University of
Wales), and three in Scotland (Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen) provide degree
courses in agriculture, which are of particular value for intending research workers,
advisory officers, teachers and other specialists. The University of Bristol offers
postgraduate diploma courses. In Northern Ireland, a degree course is provided
at Queen’s University, Belfast. A National College of Agricultural Engineering is
to be built next to the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering at Silsoe,
Bedfordshire. This will be the eighth of the national colleges (see p. 170)
established to train people for highly specialised industries whose needs cannot be
met at local technical colleges.
Two-year diploma courses are given at five agricultural colleges and at two of
the county farm institutes in England and Wales (see below); three agricultural
colleges in Scotland give two-year to three-year diploma courses. These are
intended mainly for farmers and farm managers, and are a preparation for the
national diplomas in agriculture, dairying, horticulture, poultry husbandry and
agricultural engineering. In Northern Ireland, there are three agricultural colleges.
There are 32 county farm institutes in England and 5 in Wales run by local
education authorities. They provide residential courses in general agriculture,
dairying, horticulture and poultry husbandry. These courses, which are usually for
one year of about 36 working weeks, are designed for those wishing to become
skilled workers in the industry. Local education authorities also provide a wide
range of short courses and classes for farmers, farmworkers, horticulturists and
domestic producers.
An important means of voluntary informal education in agriculture is provided
by Young Farmers' Clubs, which flourish in villages and towns throughout the
United Kingdom. There are over 1,800 clubs in Britain with well over 70,000
members, mostly under the age of 25. Each club is self-governing but has the
support of an advisory committee of farmers and other adults. Clubs are combined
in county federations and in National Federations for England and Wales (founded
in 1932), Scotland (in 1938), and Northern Ireland (in 1929).
Government assistance is given to develop rural crafts and industries. 2 he
Development Commission, a non-departmental organisation consisting of eight com¬
missioners appointed by the Crown, was set up under the Development and Road
Improvement Fund Acts of 1909 and 1910 to advise the Treasury on advances
INDUSTRY
289
from the Development Fund. The purposes of this fund are now mainly the develop¬
ment of rural industries and amenities in the countryside and the development and
improvement of fisheries, including the promotion of marine and freshwater
research. In England and Wales, the main agencies for the development of rural
industries are the Rural Community Councils, organised on a county basis, with their
Rural Industries Committees, the Rural Industries Bureau, founded in 1921, and
the Rural Industries Loan Fund, Ltd., started in 1940. On the recommendation of
the Rural Community Councils, the Rural Industries Bureau provides technical
advice and instruction to craftsmen and small rural businesses; and loans from the
Loan Fund for the acquisition of equipment and the purchase or improvement of
workshops are available.
In Scotland, the body corresponding to the Rural Industries Bureau is the
Scottish Country Industries Development Trust, founded in 1935, which, in the
absence of Rural Community Councils, exercises local and national responsibilities
for the development of rural industries.
Since the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, schemes in Northern Ireland are
no longer eligible for grants from the Development Fund.
A Museum of English Rural Life was established by the University of Reading in
1951 as a national centre for the study of material connected with the history of the
countryside. It was opened to the public in April 1955.
A large number of agricultural shows held annually throughout Britain focus
attention on modern farming methods and equipment. The chief ones are the Royal
Show, held since 1839 by the Royal Agricultural Society of England; the Bath and
West Show, held since 1780 by the Bath and West and Southern Counties Agri¬
cultural Society; the Royal Highland Show, held since 1822 by the Royal Highland
and Agricultural Society of Scotland; the Royal Ulster Show, held by the Royal
Ulster Agricultural Society; and the Royal Welsh Show, held by the Royal Welsh
Agricultural Society. The Smithfield Show and Agricultural Machinery Exhibition,
held annually in London, which was originally concerned only with livestock, has
now become, in addition, the largest agricultural machinery exhibition in Britain.
FISHERIES
Britain’s sea fishing industry falls into two main divisions, concerned respectively
with white fish and herring. White fish, such as cod, haddock, plaice, turbot and
sole are demersal fish which live on or near the sea-bed. Herring and similar species,
such as pilchard, mackerel and sprats, are pelagic fish which live in intermediate
waters or near the surface.
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three distinct groups: the
distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The distant
waters are those off Iceland, Greenland and the north coast of Norway, and the
Barents Sea; the middle water grounds lie around the Faroe Islands; and the
near water grounds are those in the North Sea, the Irish Sea and in the coastal
areas around Britain. The herring fishing grounds are mainly within 60 miles of
land. The inshore waters also yield considerable quantities of shell fish.
These fishing grounds—other than British coastal waters are regarded by the
United Kingdom as being high seas, and therefore open to ships of any nation; but
in recent years this has been disputed by the States off whose territories they lie.
Territorial waters, in the United Kingdom view, following a widely but not
universally recognised rule of international law, extend only 3 miles from low
water mark. The United Kingdom does not recognise the validity of unilateral
actions seeking to extend territorial waters, but has, for example, at the Geneva
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
290
Conference of 1958 on the Law of the Sea, made proposals for a general extension
of territorial waters to meet the views of countries claiming wider limits.
Fishing Ports
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleetwood,
Milford Haven and Lowestoft for white fish, and Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft
for herring; in Scotland, the chief centres for white fish are Aberdeen, Leith,
Fraserburgh, the Moray Firth ports, Shetland, the west coast and the Clyde, and
for herring they are Fraserburgh, Peterhead, Aberdeen, Shetland, and Stornoway,
as well as the west coast and the Clyde; those in Northern Ireland are Ardglass,
Portavogie and Kilkeel.
Methods of Sea Fishing
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining, and ring and
drift netting. In trawling, a funnel-shaped net of heavy twine is towed along the
sea bed. In seining, a funnel-shaped net with long wings is slowly hauled towards
the vessel, the long manila warps driving the fish into the path of the net. In lining,
long lines are made up with baited hooks at regular intervals and are laid over a
considerable area; deep sea lining can be carried out on grounds too rough for
trawling, as well as on smooth grounds. A limited number of Scottish vessels are
engaged in this fishery. Lining also provides employment, in autumn, winter and 1
early spring, for a large number of inshore fishermen fishing for cod, whiting and
haddock. Ring netting, mainly used by Scottish fishermen, is an efficient method
of encircling shoals of pelagic fish, such as herring or pilchard. In drift net fishing,
a number of finely meshed nets, attached to each other, form a vertical curtain of
netting so that fish swimming against them are caught by the gills. The vessel drifts
with the wind and tide for a few hours, usually starting at dusk, before hauling.
Trawling is carried out in the distant, near and middle waters for all species of
demersal fish throughout the year. Seining is also dependent upon demersal fish
and is operated all the year round. An increasing number of English, Scottish and
Northern Irish vessels depend on seining for a living, the main areas of operation
being in the North Sea, the Minches, the Firth of Clyde, and the Irish Sea. There
are about 800 Scottish and Northern Irish seiners, and about 200 operate from
English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is a summer fishery for herring based
on the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland, and the north-east coast ports of
England, and an autumn fishery off East Anglia based on Lowestoft and Yarmouth.
Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast of Scotland and off Southern
Ireland. The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and
methods of capture; trawling, seining, lining, and drift and ring net fishing are
employed; in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs, lobsters, prawns,
cockles and oysters, and, off Scotland and Northern Ireland, there is a fishery for
‘Norway lobsters’ (nephrops).
The Fishing Fleet
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and Fleetwood,
numbered 248 at the end of 1958. They are over 140 feet and up to 195 feet in |
length and make voyages of 17 to 23 days to fishing grounds in the Arctic Circle.
At the same date, near water vessels numbered 516; they are under 130 feet long
and work near home, making voyages of three to ten days. Middle water vessels
numbered 63; they are 110 to 140 feet in length and undertake voyages of about two
weeks. Included in the near water group are vessels engaged in drift net fishing,
INDUSTRY
291
which usually make daily voyages. The inshore group consists mainly of vessels of
under 70 feet which are seldom at sea for longer than two or three days and more
usually make daily landings, often fishing within sight of land.
In the United Kingdom fishing industry in 1958 there were about 24,000
fishermen in regular employment and some 3,300 were occasionally employed;
10,258 of the former and 1,261 of the latter were from Scottish ports. In Northern
Ireland there were 400 regular fishermen.
Supplies
In the year ended 31st December, 1958, landings of fish, both demersal and
pelagic, in the United Kingdom by British fishing vessels totalled 866,000 tons
(741,000 tons of demersal fish and 125,000 tons of pelagic), valued at about £50-3
million. Landings at British ports by foreign vessels totalled about 91,000 tons of
fresh and frozen fish (including 35,000 tons brought direct from the fishing grounds),
valued at about £8 million. British landings of shellfish yielded £1-79 million.
Cod accounted for 40 per cent of the total value of wet fish (i.e. fish other than
shellfish) landed by British vessels; haddock (18 per cent) and plaice (9 per cent)
were the other most important sources of earnings to the industry.
Net imports of all types of fish (fresh, frozen, salted or canned) into the United
Kingdom in 1958 amounted to about 183,000 tons valued at over £48 million,
including 43,000 tons of canned salmon to the value of £25 million and other
canned fish worth £9-5 million.
Weekly consumption of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish and
imported canned fish) in the United Kingdom averaged 16,300 tons landed weight
in 1958. On an edible (fillet) weight basis, United Kingdom consumption has been
estimated provisionally at i8-8 pounds per head in 1958, compared with
pounds in 1948 and an annual average of 21-8 pounds from 1934-38.
Northern Ireland consumes about one-third of the catch landed there by British
vessels (9,500 tons in 1958) and exports the rest to Great Britain.
Sea Fish Processing
Processing and packaging of fish—curing, kippering, canning and quick-freezing
for consumer packs—are the subject of continuing research and development. For
example, the production of quick-frozen fish increased fivefold between 1952 and
1958. With the increase in quick-freezing, new export outlets have opened up
for white fish, which accounted for about £3'3 million of the total British exports of
fish and fish products, valued at £5'9 million in 1958- Markets abroad for quick-
frozen fish, mainly in Europe and the Commonwealth, have continued to expand,
but exports of herrings, for which Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union have been
large customers, have declined, because of the fall in total catches.
By-products
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal for animal
food and to a much lesser extent for fertilisers. Home production of white fish meal
and herring meal in 1958 fell to 77,000 tons (from 79,700 tons); a large percentage
of the fish meal is obtained from offal and most of the remainder from unsold
catches. Imports of fish meal of all kinds in 1958 totalled 113,000 tons. The prepara¬
tion of vitamin oils from fish livers is also a source of additional earnings. The
oil is extracted at sea as soon as the fish are caught, and is later refined ashore.
Freshwater Fisheries
The main commercial freshwater catches are salmon, sea-trout and eels. In
Scotland and Northern Ireland, fixed nets along the coast and sweep or draught
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
292
nets in rivers and estuaries are used; in England, drift nets are used for catching
salmon in the sea, and draught nets and fixed traps in estuaries. In England and
Wales, the value of the salmon catch is approximately £350.000 a Year> in Scotland
it amounts to about £1 million, and in Northern Ireland to some £200,000. In
Northern Ireland, eels worth £100,000 a year are captured by long lines and by eel
nets placed in river weirs.
Fishing for sport by rod and line in rivers, lakes, streams and canals is wide¬
spread. Salmon, grilse and sea-trout are the most important catches, and the fishing
rights command high rentals. There are also extensive fishings for brown trout and
other freshwater fish, e.g., roach, rudd, perch and dace; figures of catches are not
available.
Distribution System
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate Market
in London, which handles about 400 tons a day, but other large cities also have
central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is through wholesalers,
located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell to inland wholesalers; the port
wholesalers prepare the fish for onward shipment. Some sixty special express fish
trains transport the catch daily from the ports to inland centres, but increasing use
is being made of road transport. Retail sales are handled by some 15,000 fishmongers
and nearly 15,000 fish friers; the latter use about a third of the landings of white fish.
Recent developments include the entry of trawler-owning companies into the
system of distribution. This process is being speeded by two factors. One is the
growing popularity of quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold by other retail
outlets as well as by fishmongers (9 per cent of fish sold in 1958 was estimated to be
quick-frozen). The other is the decline, from about 25,000 in 1950, in the number
of fried fish shops.
Promotion and Regulation of the Industry
Laws in Britain relating to fisheries and fish are principally directed to the follow¬
ing purposes: (1) protection of supply by measures against over-fishing, e.g., the
Sea Fisheries Regulation Act, 1888, the Sea-Fishing Industry Act, 1933, and the
Sea Fish Industry Act, 1938; (2) promotion of the prosperity of the industry, e.g.,
the Herring Industry Acts, 1935 to 1957, the White Fish Industry Acts, 1951 to
1957, and the Fisheries Act, 1955; (3) protection of the quality of the product, e.g.,
the Food and Drugs Act, 1955. The Government departments mainly responsible
for the administration of laws in the first two categories and for the development of
every branch of the fishing industry are the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, the Scottish Home Department, and the Ministry of Commerce for Northern
Ireland; the Ministry of Health and the Department of Health for Scotland are
concerned with questions of nutrition and hygiene affecting fish and fish products.
The safety and welfare of crews of fishing vessels are provided for under the
Merchant Shipping Acts, which are administered by the Ministry of Transport and
Civil Aviation.
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Home Department, the Northern Ireland Ministry
of Commerce, the White Fish Authority, the Herring Industry Board, and the |
Development Commissioners; and, on food investigation, the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research.
A Committee of Inquiry into the Fishing Industry was appointed in November,
1957> to assess, in relation to developments in fishing and the marketing of fish, the
size and pattern of an economic fishing industry in the United Kingdom.
INDUSTRY
293
The Herring Industry Board
The Herring Industry Board was set up under the Herring Industry Act of 1935
to reorganise, develop and regulate the herring industry; subsequent amending
Acts have also been passed. The board consists of a chairman and two other mem¬
bers, all part-time and independent of the industry, who are appointed jointly by
the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Home Secretary. The board, whose activities are financed partly by
Government grants and loans and partly by levies and licence fees, is advised by the
Herring Industry Advisory Council, consisting of representatives of the catching and
shore sections of the industry.
The functions of the board include the. promotion of sales of herring, both at
home and abroad, and the provision of grants and loans for the purchasing of new
boats, nets and gear, and the reconditioning of existing boats. The board is
particularly active in developing new and wider markets for herring, and applying
the benefits of technical progress to the industry, including the adoption of new
fishing methods, and the construction of new processing plants for quick-freezing
and kippering. The board buys all herring not sold for other purposes for reduction
to oil and meal, and, with the aid of Government grants, has built a number of
processing factories for this purpose.
A Government subsidy has been paid to herring fishermen since May 1957; in
the year ended 31st March, 1959, £383,000 was made available.
The White Fish Authority
The White Fish Authority was set up under the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1951, to
reorganise, develop and regulate the white fish industry. It is composed of five
independent members, appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Home Secretary, and works
in consultation with the industry and consumers through the White Fish Industry
Advisory Council. The authority’s activities are financed partly by Government
grants and loans and partly by a levy on first-hand sales and by registration fees.
The White Fish Authority has powers similar to those of the Herring Board; it
makes loans and grants for the purchase of new vessels and engines and for the
conversion of coal-using vessels to the use of oil, including diesel oil, and it makes
loans for the reconditioning of old vessels to further the modernisation of the fishing
fleet. Up to 31st March, 1959, nearly £18 million in loans and nearly £6-8 million
in grants were approved for this purpose by the authority.
Since 1950, a subsidy from public funds has been paid to near and middle water
vessels and to inshore vessels engaged in the white fish industry in the United
Kingdom. In 1958-59, £2-64 million was made available; a large proportion of
this sum was used to assist steam vessels.
International Fisheries Conservation Convention
A new Fisheries Conservation Convention, covering the north-east Atlantic,
was signed in London in January 1959. The United Kingdom is among the
signatories. The convention which, on ratification, will replace the one at present in
force, which is more limited in scope, will make possible further measures for
conserving fish stocks throughout the north-east Atlantic Ocean and its dependent
seas (excluding the Baltic).
Whaling
Whaling is mainly conducted by expeditions, each consisting of a large floating
factory ship accompanied by its attendant whale catchers and tankers, which
operate mainly in the Antarctic Ocean. It is regulated by the International Whaling
294
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commission, set up under the International Whaling Convention of 1946, which
controls the dates of the season and sets a limit on the Antarctic catch of whales.
The offices of the commission are in London.
The United Kingdom industry ranks third in size after those of Norway and
Japan; it sends three expeditions to the Antarctic each year. In addition, whaling
is also undertaken from land stations on South Georgia, a British island in the
South Atlantic. The volume of whale oil obtained by the British expeditions in the
1958-59 season amounted to about 295,000 barrels.
FORESTRY
The total woodland area of Great Britain is just over 4 million acres, or about
7 per cent of the total land area. Timber and its products are of great importance
to the economy of the country, and large quantities of industrial timber (i.e. wood
other than that used for domestic "fuel) are needed to meet all demands; but, except
for the period of the second world war when, of necessity, much over-felling
took place, home woodlands have not been in a position to make more than a small
contribution to the nation’s timber requirements. At present, Great Britain imports
about 85 per cent of her needs of timber and wood products. The Government
is, however, devoting continuous effort through the Forestry Commission to the
long-term task of increasing the country’s timber resources.
Forest Areas
At 30th September, i957> the area of woodland in blocks of one acre and over
in extent was estimated to be 4,011,000 acres of which 52 per cent lay in England,
37 per cent in Scotland and 11 per cent in Wales. The greatest density of woodland
jn Qreat Britain occurs in the north and east of Scotland and in the southern counties
of England, although afforestation is now increasing the importance of forestry
in many counties which were not previously heavily wooded. The classification of
forest area showing type and ownership in 1957 is given in Table 19.
TABLE 19
Classification of Forest Area in Great Britain (1957)
Thousands of acres
Forest Type
Forestry
Com¬
mission
woodlands
Mainly coniferous high forest
Mainly broadleaved high forest . .
Coppice and coppice with standards
Unproductive woodlands . .
Totals ..
Percentage of total forest area
Private
woodlands
(«)
996
125
29
101
1,251
31
576
761
307
1,116
2,760
69
Total
1,572
886
336
1,217
4,011
100
Percentage
of total
forest
area
39
22
8
31
100
Source: Forestry Commission.
(a) Forest owned by private individuals and bodies; in this classification a small area of
communal forest is included, i.e. forest owned by public bodies such as local authorities
and water supply undertakings.
INDUSTRY
295
The high proportion of unproductive woodland, i.e. scrub and areas where
trees have been felled and partially felled, is largely a legacy of two wars when
many woods were felled to meet home demands for timber. During the past ten
years the area of this unproductive category has been reduced by about 150,000 acres,
but the large area which remains gives some indication of the problem of rehabilita¬
tion which still lies ahead.
The most common of the coniferous tree species in Great Britain is probably
the Scots pine, but such trees as the Sitka and Norway spruce are also plentiful.
Of the broadleaved species, the most common tree is the oak, and there are
considerable numbers of beech, ash, birch, sycamore and elm.
Volume of Timber
At 30th September, 1957, the volume of standing timber in woodlands in Great
Britain, including that in hedgerows and in woods of less than one acre in extent,
was estimated to be 3,500 million hoppus feet.1 This consisted of 1,350 million
hoppus feet of softwood (derived from coniferous species) and 2,150 million hoppus
feet of hardwood (derived from broadleaved species). The net annual increment
(the year’s growth minus losses due to fire, decay or similar causes) was about
115 million hoppus feet. The climate and soil of Great Britain are favourable to
the growth of timber; the annual rate of growth which can be obtained in Great
Britain under systematic management compares most favourably with that achieved
in other European countries.
Forest Policy
From the early Middle Ages there was a continuous process of deforestation in
Great Britain. Woodlands were cleared for agriculture, and timber was used for a
variety of domestic and industrial purposes, for instance, as charcoal in iron¬
smelting, for fuel, housebuilding, domestic and agricultural equipment, and ship¬
building. Occasionally, from the sixteenth century onwards, Governments
encouraged the planting of high forest as an insurance against the blockade of war,
but in times of normal trading it was the practice to buy timber from abroad.
Following the Industrial Revolution, cheap and easily workable timber began to be
required in ever-increasing amounts for a variety of new industrial uses. Home
woodlands contained neither the types nor the quantities of timber to meet this
demand and the importation of timber, principally of softwoods, expanded greatly.
By 1914 the trade in imported timber had grown, and the contribution from home
woodlands had shrunk, to a point where no more than 7 Per cent of the country s
total requirements were being met from home sources. The sudden demands of
the first world war, however, brought about a realisation of the need for a national
forest policy. The Forestry Commission (see p. 296) was established under the
Forestry Act, 1919, to give effect to such a policy, but, although some progress
was made, the devastation of the country’s woodlands caused by extensive felling
during the second world war showed clearly that larger scale measures were needed.
In 1943, the Forestry Commissioners recommended, in their report on post-war
forest policy, that the nation should aim at having at least 5 rnillion acres of
productive forest, of which 2 million acres, mostly in private ownership, would
accrue from the rehabilitation of existing woodlands and 3 million acres would be
obtained by the afforestation of bare land by the Forestry Commission. The acreage
of woodland proposed would, it was estimated, produce ultimately a volume of
1 The measure for standing timber: the square of the quarter-girth of timber (in inches)
multiplied by the length (in feet) and divided by 144 gives the measure of volume in
hoppus feet.
U
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
296
timber equivalent to about one-third of the country’s needs. On this basis, forestry
would become a major industry which, in addition to its economic value, would
help to arrest the depopulation of rural areas.
In July 1958, the Government announced its conclusion, reached after a review
of forestry policy, that the planting programmes of the Forestry Commission should
be fixed for periods of ten years at a time. For the five-year period 1959 to 1963 the
programme would be about 300,000 acres. For the period 1964 to 1968 the planting
programme would be reduced to about 235,000 acres, when the Forestry Com¬
mission’s existing plantations would begin to come into full production. The
size of the subsequent programme is to be reviewed in 1963. In deciding where
planting shall take place, special attention is to be paid to the upland areas, particu¬
larly in the Highlands of Scotland and in Wales, where expansion of forestry would
provide, among other benefits, new opportunities for employment.
Future developments are likely to include the encouragement of still greater
integration of forestry and agriculture in the marginal hill areas. A recommendation
to this effect was made in the Report on Forestry, Agriculture and Marginal Land,
by the Natural Resources (Technical) Committee, published in March 1957.
As an example of such integration, the committee cites among others the
‘Strathoykell’ scheme which is proceeding in adjoining sheep farming areas in
Ross-shire and Sutherlandshire in Scotland. In this area a substantial acreage has
been planted by the Forestry Commission, houses have been built, grant-aided farm
improvements have been made, and stocks of sheep and cattle have been increased.
The Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission was established in 1919 as the national forest authority;
it has the general duty of promoting the interests of forestry, the development of
afforestation and the production and supply of timber in the United Kingdom. The
commission consists of a chairman and not more than nine commissioners who are
appointed by the Crown; in exercising their functions, they are required to comply
with such directions as may be given to them by the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Forestry Act, 1951,
placed responsibility for the maintenance of an adequate reserve of growing trees in
Great Britain on the Forestry Commissioners and gave them powers to regulate the
felling of trees by the issue of licences. Besides conducting its own forest operations,
the commission represents the interests of British forestry at inter-governmental
meetings, gives encouragement to private forestry and performs a wide range of
general forestry duties such as research and education and the publication of
technical and other literature on forestry. In the administration of its duties in
relation to private forestry there is continual contact between the commission’s staff
and private land-owners, and the staff gives advice, free of charge, on silvicultural
and management problems; substantial grants for planting and other forestry
activities are paid to woodland owners (see pp. 297-8). The commission has also
played an important part in encouraging the establishment of new timber-using
industries.
During the years 1919-581, the Forestry Commission acquired land through the
Forestry Fund (see p. 297), under the Forestry (Transfer of Woods) Act, 1923, and
by gifts which, after taking account of disposals, totalled 2,361,300 acres. This total
comprises 1,498,400 acres classified as ‘forest land’, of which 1 million acres had
been planted by 1956 and the rest would be planted in due course, and 863,000
acres of ‘other land’ which includes forest nurseries, rough grazing, agricultural
land and land unsuitable for planting, such as the tops of mountains. The total
1 To the end of the Forest Year 1958 (30th September).
INDUSTRY
297
number of commission forests in Great Britain at 30th September, 1958, was 508,
of which 222 were in England, 210 in Scotland and 76 in Wales. In 1954, the peak
year, the area planted was 70,400 acres; it decreased to 52,400 acres in 1958, owing
to the continuing difficulty of acquiring sufficient plantable land.
Nearly half of the Forestry Commission’s new planting is being carried out in
Scotland, about a quarter of it in the Highland counties. The poorer types of land
are being used, such as sour, peaty soil which is unsuitable for other agricultural
purposes, and has become suitable for forestry only as a result of recent advances
in deep ploughing. Sand dunes are also used; on the southern shore of the Moray
Firth, Culbin Forest now covers 7,700 acres of land which had been unproductive
for centuries. Similarly, in Wales, 1,900 acres of sand dunes at Newborough,
Anglesey, and nearly 2,400 acres at Pembrey, Carmarthenshire, are being success¬
fully planted. In several forests, complete new villages are being built to re-house
forestry workers.
All the commission’s forests are covered by management plans, which provide
for such work as planting, road construction, thinning and fire protection. Since
1956, the commission has employed and trained game wardens to protect young
trees against deer, rabbits, voles and other wild animals. Besides these and other
forest officers, the commission employs two groups of specialist officers, estate
officers and engineers. During the years 1950—58, the engineers constructed some
3,000 miles of new roads, and the estate officers were responsible for the building of
over 2,000 new houses.
Finance
The Forestry Fund was established by the Forestry Act, 1919; from it is paid
all the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid their receipts
from sales of produce, rentals and other sources, together with the amounts voted
annually by Parliament. From 1920 to 1958, parliamentary grants totalled
£97'5 million and receipts from other sources £32 million. Expenditure during
these years totalled £130 million. Actual expenditure during the year ended 30th
September, 1958, totalled £10-25 million, of which £864,000 represented various
grants to private forestry.
Private Forestry
Privately owned woods in 1957 comprised 69 per cent of the total forest area in
Great Britain (as shown in Table 19, p. 294), and contain most of the mature and
semi-mature timber. The size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges from a
few acres to several thousand acres, and a high proportion of the privately owned
woodland area belongs to small owners (i.e. owners of woods of up to about
250 acres).
Impetus has been given to the effective management of private woodlands by
the introduction, under the Forestry Act, i947» the Dedication of Woodlands
Scheme. Under this scheme, owners are invited to put their land permanently to
timber production and to manage their woods in accordance with a plan agreed
with the Forestry Commission, in return for the provision of planting and manage¬
ment grants and technical assistance. By September 1958 the total area dedicated
was 540,418 acres. The owners are to be represented, in their relations with the
Forestry Commission, by a Woodland Owners’ Association now being formed in
accordance with the recommendation of the Committee on the Marketing of
Woodland Produce in its report issued in 195b. Id addition, there are the
woodlands covered by the Approved Woodlands Scheme in which a planting grant,
but no management grant, is made; and these bring the total area managed under
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
298
an agreed plan to over 690,200 acres. This does not take into account other estates
that are already working to a plan but have not been put forward for inclusion in
either scheme.
The Forestry Commissioners have encouraged the development of co-operative
forestry schemes and have made loans available. The co-operative societies
provide for landowners and farmers the services of skilled staff, centralised
purchasing facilities, and a central agency for the disposal of forest produce. The
whole of Scotland, a number of areas in Wales and several districts in England are
now served by such societies. The commission also co-operates with the principal
forestry societies, such as the Royal Forestry Society of England and Wales and the
Royal Scottish Forestry Society, in spreading technical knowledge. In 1948, the
United Kingdom Forestry Committee was formed, bringing together representatives t
of the Country Landowners’ Association, the Scottish Landowners’ Federation
and the two Royal Forestry Societies, with additional members possessing
experience of land agency, forest economics and timber trade. This committee has
been accepted in forestry negotiations as the body which represents the collective
interests of owners of private woodlands.
The total area estimated to have been planted annually by private owners has
risen from 9,000 acres in 1947 32>ioo acres in 1958; this compares with a pre¬
war average of 6,000 to 7,000 acres.
Consultative Machinery
The Forestry Act, 1945, established national committees for England, Scotland
and Wales, composed partly of forestry commissioners and partly of persons
outside the commission. These committees, working directly under the authority
of the commissioners, supervise certain aspects of the commission’s work, including
particularly the acquisition and management of land and the promotion of prrv ate
forestry; in the latter task they are required to maintain direct contact with the
regional advisory committees which have been set up in each of the commission s
conservancies with the purpose of providing a link with all those in the conservancy
who are interested in forestry. On all proposals for acquisition of land, the
commission consults the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the
Department of Agriculture for Scotland.
Other bodies have been set up to provide for consultation on the marketing and
utilisation of home grown timber.
The Home Grown Timber Advisory Committee, established by the Forestry
Commissioners in 1939, consists of representatives of the Forestry Commission,
the Board of Trade and associations of landowners and timber merchants; it meets
quarterly to discuss various matters affecting the marketing of home grown timber.
In 1949, the Forestry Commissioners set up the Advisory Committee on Utilisation
of Home Grown Timber to advise landowners and to undertake research into
problems connected with the marketing of timber from the commission’s own
forests. Among the members of this committee are representatives of the Forest
Products Research Laboratory (see p. 299), the Rural Industries Bureau (see
p. 289) and the Timber Development Association.
Forestry Education and Research
The Forestry Commission maintains four forester training schools: in England, at
Parkend in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire; in Wales, near Bettws-y-Coed in
Caernarvonshire; and in Scotland at Benmore, Argyllshire, and Faskally, near
Pitlochry in Perthshire. Northerwood House in the New Forest, Hampshire, is the
commission’s educational centre, and is used for practical courses for university
INDUSTRY
299
students, landowners and agents, planning officers, school teachers and others
connected with, or interested in, forestry.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities; a proportion of
suitable graduates is recruited by the commission as forest officers.
The commission’s forest research station at Alice Holt Lodge, near Farnham,
Surrey, was opened in 1946. Expenditure on research work at this station and in
experimental areas in many forests in Great Britain amounted to £306,000 in 1958.
The commission makes grants for special forestry research work to various
institutions and to university departments including the Imperial Forestry Institute
at Oxford, which is also financed by the University, the Colonial Office, and Colonial
Governments. Research into the qualities of home grown timber is carried out by
the Forest Products Research Laboratory at Princes Risborough, which is one of
the establishments of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and
also by grant-aided research associations.
The Forestry Commission has played a leading part in the Commonwealth
Forestry Conference, since its first meeting in 1920; the seventh meeting was
held in Australia and New Zealand in 1957. The commission is also closely
associated with the work of the International Union of Forest Research Organisa¬
tions, whose twelfth congress was held at Oxford in 1956.
Forestry in Northern Ireland
When the Government of Northern Ireland was formed in 1922, the new
Ministry of Agriculture became the forest authority working with similar powers
and duties to those conferred on the Forestry Commission by the Forestry Act,
1919. At that time the ministry took over some 4,000 acres for afforestation, of
which 700 acres had been planted.
Forest policy in Northern Ireland is now implemented by the Forestry Act
(Northern Ireland), 1953, which replaced earlier legislation. This Act provides the
ministry with powers to acquire and manage land, and to give financial and technical
assistance for private planting. It introduced measures for the protection of all
woodlands, whether owned by the State or privately owned, against destruction by
over-cutting, fire or depredation by animals.
The State forest area has grown steadily and at a greatly accelerated pace since
the end of the second world war. By 1959, over 100,000 acres had been acquired, of
which some 50,000 acres had been planted. The present afforestation programme
provides for the creation, as soon as possible, of an area of 150,000 acres of
productive State forest. To reach this objective, a minimum annual planting rate
of 4,000 acres, increasing to 5,000 acres within the next two years, has been set.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and receipts
from forest produce, rentals and other sources. From 1922 to 1959) expenditure
amounted to about £6 million, and receipts, other than parliamentary grants, were
in the region of £2 million. Output and employment are growing steadily. The area
of exploitable private woodlands is at present some 20,000 acres, and private plant¬
ing, which is gaining impetus, is assisted by schemes for the supply at a low cost
of young trees from the ministry’s nurseries, by grants towards the cost of the
establishment of new plantations, and by free technical advice.
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy currently used in Britain are coal, petroleum
and, to a small extent, water power j secondary sources produced from these are
electricity, gas and coke.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
300
Coal, mined within the country, supplies some 80 per cent of this energy and it
will remain the principal source for many years to come. For supplies of crude
petroleum Britain is virtually dependent on imports; water power resources are
small. A large-scale programme for the construction of nuclear power stations has
been inaugurated, and it is estimated that by 1966 nuclear energy may account for
some 15 per cent of electricity generating capacity and some 25 per cent of electricity
output.
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of the petroleum industry,
are under public ownership. General responsibility for ensuring the effective and
co-ordinated development of fuel and power resources lies with the Minister of
Power. Fuel research is undertaken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research as well as by the individual industries.
The Government’s long-term fuel and power policy has two principal objectives.
The first is to ensure that power supplies are adequate to meet fully and at minimum
cost the rapidly growing demands of industry and of the domestic consumer in a
country with an expanding national income. The second is to make the best use of
indigenous resources and so lighten the load on the balance of payments.
The Government also aims to reduce air pollution. The Clean Air Act, 1956,
which came fully into force on 1st June, I95^> rnakes it an offence to emit dark
smoke or to fail to provide industrial premises with equipment to arrest grit
and dirt, and empowers local authorities, subject to the approval of the Minister
of Housing and Local Government, to declare ‘smoke control areas’, in which the
emission of smoke from chimneys will constitute an offence; provision is made for
the payment of grants by local authorities and by the Exchequer towards the costs
incurred by owners and occupiers of premises in these areas in making necessary
changes to appliances. A Clean Air Council, to review progress and to advise the
minister, was set up in May 1957- By the end of March I959> 100 smoke control
areas had been confirmed by the minister.
COAL
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coalmining
industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years longer than in
any other European country. British coal exports dominated the world coal market
until about 1910. By 1913—the peak production year—the industry was producing
287 million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons and employing over a million
workers.
The very fact that the British coalmining industry was developed so early has
meant that many of the best seams of coal are now worked out; every year coal has
to be mined from deeper and thinner seams and productivity can be maintained
only by a high level of investment.
The industry declined during the first world war owing to a shortage of man¬
power and to the shortage of plant and materials necessary for undertaking any
mechanical improvement. Moreover, alternative sources of energy and lower prices
in other countries led to a later decline in exports, which had fallen to 67 million
tons in 1925.
Attempts at securing economies through amalgamation date from the Sankey
Commission of 1919. In 1930, a Coal Mines Act established commissioners to I
bring about the formation of larger and more efficient units. The Coal Act of 1938
transferred ownership of mineral coal to the State and made it the statutory
responsibility of a Coal Commission to accelerate the integration of the industry
by reducing still further the number of separate undertakings. At the outbreak of
the second world war in i939> however, this process was not far advanced.
INDUSTRY
301
The National Coal Board
In 1942, the Government assumed full control of the industry’s operations,
though the colliery undertakings continued to own the coal mines. In July 1946,
the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act received the Royal Assent. On 1st January,
1947, the assets of the industry were vested in the National Coal Board, which was
appointed by the then Minister of Fuel and Power and became responsible for the
industry’s management. Under the Coal Industry Act, 1949, the board consists of
a chairman and not fewer than eight or more than 11 other members; the number
of full-time members must not exceed eight and there must be one, and may be
two, deputy chairmen.
The main duties of the National Coal Board are:
(1) to work and get the coal in Great Britain to the exclusion of any other
person;
(2) to secure the efficient development of the coalmining industry; and
(3) to make supplies of coal available of such qualities and sizes and in such
quantities and at such prices as may seem to it best calculated to further
the public interest.
The board is also charged with securing the safety, health and welfare of its
employees. Its policies must be directed to ensure that its revenues shall be not
less than its outgoings properly chargeable to revenue account, on an average of
good and bad years.
There are minor exceptions to the board’s exclusive monopoly to work coal in
Britain: for example, it may license private enterprise to work small mines in which
the number of underground workers does not greatly exceed 30, and also to work
opencast sites where the total output is not expected to exceed 25,000 tons.
The board is responsible for its own regional organisation. The collieries,
numbering about 750, are grouped into 50 areas which are the basic units for
commercial management. The size of the areas varies according to geological,
geographical and other technical considerations. The areas are grouped into nine
divisions which roughly correspond to the main coal-bearing regions. A divisional
board for each division supervises and co-ordinates the work of the areas within
the division (except in the small south-eastern division, which is administered by
a general manager), formulates divisional policy, and is answerable to the National
Coal Board, which is responsible for questions of national policy, finance and the
co-ordinating of major schemes of development. The day-to-day work of running
the collieries is under the direction of colliery managers.
Two Coal Consumers’ Councils were set up under the 1946 Act: the Industrial
Coal Consumers' Council, members of which represent consumers, merchants and
suppliers of coal, coke and manufactured fuel for industrial and other purposes,
involving supply in bulk; and the Domestic Coal Consumers' Council, members of
which represent similar groups concerned with coal for domestic use. These two
councils have the duty of considering, and where necessary reporting to the
Minister of Power on, any matter affecting the sale or supply of these fuels.
In its first year, 1947, the board had a deficit of £23-3 million, and since then
has made surpluses in some years and deficits in others. The cumulative deficit at
the end of 1958 amounted to over £32 million.
The National Coal Board raises capital by long-term borrowing direct from the
Exchequer, instead of through the issue of stock. There is a statutory limit of £650
million at present on such borrowing and special authorisation is needed for
borrowing, in any one year, more than £75 million in excess of the highest level of
aggregate advances in the preceding year.
302
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production and Manpower
It has been estimated that Britain’s workable reserves of coal will last for about
400 to 500 years at current rates of consumption. But certain types such as high
quality coking coal will be exhausted long before then unless they are eked out by
blending with other types of coal.
The main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and Nottingham¬
shire field, which produces about 45 per cent of the total output, (2) the Durham
and Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and (4) the Scottish field.
Other important coal-bearing areas are those of Lancashire and the West Midlands
(Staffordshire and Warwickshire). There are no coal-bearing areas in Northern
Ireland. .
In the early years following nationalisation, the National Coal Board was able
to secure quick increases in production and productivity by reorganisation, by a
wider application of improved working methods and by increased mechanisation
of cutting and conveying. As a result, deepmined production increased from 187
million tons in 1947 to 214 million tons in 1954. Production remained roughly
stationary until 1957, but in 1958 a decline in demand resulted in deepmined
output falling back to 201-5 million tons. Overall output in tons per man-shift
worked at the coal face has increased gradually, and in 1958 reached 3-52 tons as
compared with 3-34 tons in 1954 and 3-05 tons in 1938. In addition, output from
opencast workings, which are operated by civil engineering contractors on behalf
of the board, totalled 14-3 million tons in 1958.
To meet the fall in demand, the board decided to reduce opencast production
(in 1959 by 20 to 25 per cent to 11 million tons) and to accelerate the closure of
uneconomic pits. _ .
Future progress depends on bringing efficient new mines into production, the
development of machines for power-loading the coal at the face on to face-
conveyor belts and the reorganisation of the haulage systems. The National Coal
Board has launched a large programme of major reconstruction and new sinkings.
During the post-war years until i957> the industry suffered from a shortage of
manpower. During 1958, however, because of falling demand and rising stocks
the numbers employed were reduced by over 20,000 to 687,000 (of whom 271,000
were employed at the coal face) at the end of the year, with a further drop in 1959.
Recruiting has been temporarily restricted.
Marketing
Although the National Coal Board, as sole producer, makes the first sales of coal it
has no monopoly of distribution. In many cases it acts as a wholesaler and in a few
areas makes direct retail sales. Retail distribution is, for the most part, carried on by
private firms. Control of domestic coal supplies ended in July 1958 and, in the same
year, the allocation scheme for industrial coal was brought to an end.
Consumption and Overseas Trade
Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of 3 million
tons between 1947 and 1956 and, to cover requirements in certain years, supplies
had to be imported from the United States. In 1957, sales fell by 5 million tons to
213-2 million tons and in 1958 by over 10 million tons to 202-8 million tons. The
reasons for the decline included the pause in the expansion of industrial production,
the growing competition from fuel oil and increasing efficiency in the use of coal.
There was a further decline in the first half of 1959-
INDUSTRY
3°3
Table 20 summarises the pattern of coal consumption in Britain in the years
1956-58. The electricity authorities took about one-quarter of total supplies,
much of it in the form of small coal not suitable for other uses.
TABLE 20
Inland Coal Consumption in the United Kingdom 1956-58
Million tons
Type of User
Gas ..
Electricity ..
Railways (excluding use of briquettes)
Coke ovens ..
Iron and steel
Engineering and other industries . .
Domestic and miscellaneous
Totals
1956
27-8
45-6
12-1
29-3
64
33-3
64-2
218-4
1957
26-4
46-5
11-4
30- 7
5-6
31- 9
60-7
213-2
1958
24-8
46-2
10-3
27-8
4-5
29-1
60-1
202-8
Source: Ministry of Power.
Coal exports have fallen heavily in relation to pre-war levels, due, at first, partly
to increased internal consumption and, more recently, to keener competition in a
diminishing market. In 1958, exports amounted to 5-8 million tons (including
one million tons of briquettes) valued at £32-7 million, the principal markets being
Denmark, the Irish Republic, France and Norway.
Safety, Health and Welfare
The safety, health and welfare of miners are safeguarded by comprehensive
legislation, which was consolidated and brought up to date by the Mines and
Quarries Act, 1954. Responsibility for the enforcement of safety regulations lies
with the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate of the Ministry of Power.
The National Coal Board has its own safety organisation and, in accordance with
the Nationalisation Act, follows a policy directed towards securing the safety,
health and welfare of its employees; examples of voluntary action by the board
to reduce risks are the installation of fire-resistant conveyor belts, the replacement
of light alloy supports (which had been found to be liable to produce dangerous
sparks) and the widespread introduction of courses of training for various classes
of officials and workmen. The board has also continued to strengthen the medical
services which existed before nationalisation. Chief divisional and area medical
officers have been appointed and assistant medical officers are being appointed
in areas with a labour force of more than 15,000 men. Medical centres are being
set up at the pit head.
The board is responsible for its employees’ welfare at their work-places, for
example, by the provision of pit-head baths and canteens, while the social welfare
of coalminers and their families has, since i952> been the responsibility of the Coal
Industry Social Welfare Organisation, which is controlled by the board and the
miners’ trade unions.
Research into problems of safety and health is carried out also at the Ministry
of Power’s Safety in Mines Research Establishment, which maintains a close liaison
with the Mines Inspectorate and the National Coal Board’s research organisation.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
304
Development and Research
Contraction and curtailment of development in the industry since the peak year,
1913, had led to a position in which, by 1950, less than one-third of current output
was being obtained from pits started in the twentieth century. Large-scale
development was therefore essential.
Capital Investment
In 1950, the National Coal Board announced its long-term plan of development
for the industry, involving the reorganisation and increased mechanisation of
existing mines and the sinking of new ones. The plan was not rigid, and a revised
version (in May 1956) took account of changing circumstances and new knowledge
and envisaged the expenditure of £1,000 million in the period 1956-65. In the
period 1947-55, capital expenditure had amounted to £462 million. Expenditure
under the revised plan totalled £303 million during the years 1956-58, and an
outlay of £122 million was planned for 1959. Despite the fall in demand experienced
in 1957 and 1958, there is need for substantial investment in the coal industry to
ensure that future output comes as far as possible from fully modernised mines
capable of producing coal in competition with other sources of energy. A further
revision of the plan was due to be published in the autumn of i959'
Mechanisation
All but a small proportion of coal output is now mechanically cut and conveyed.
In 1958, 63 per cent, or 126 million tons, was mechanically cleaned; each man
at a mechanically worked coalface produced an average of 6 tons per shift, and
66 million tons were power-loaded, compared with 14 million tons in 1953 and
5 million tons in 1947-
Research
In 1948, the National Coal Board established a central research organisation,
the Coal Research Establishment, at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucester¬
shire, to provide facilities for fundamental research in the coalmining industry, as
distinct from the day-to-day scientific control exercised by the divisional and area
scientific organisation. A second central research organisation for the investigation
of underground problems, the Mining Research Establishment, was formed in
1952 by the board at Isleworth, Middlesex, and a Central Engineering Establish¬
ment for developing new machines and testing equipment is now operating near
Bretby, in Derbyshire.
The National Coal Board also subscribes to a number of autonomous research
associations in receipt of grants from the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (DSIR), including the British Coal Utilisation Research Association, the
British Coke Research Association and the Coal Tar Research Association. In
addition, much of the work of other bodies, such as the Safety in Mines Research
Establishment of the Ministry of Power, is closely related to the board’s problems.
The new research station of DSIR at Warren Spring, Stevenage, Hertfordshire,
(see also pp. 208-9) is responsible for the fuel research previously undertaken by
the former fuel research station at Greenwich. In 1947, the National Coal Board
took over, with other assets, the Coal Survey, a national organisation for surveying
coal resources within Britain, and 70 laboratories in the various coalfields, which
it has since extended and modernised.
In April 1959, the National Coal Board announced the setting up of a new
department concerned primarily with the development of new processes for the
making of smokeless briquettes from small coal. Research at the Coal Research
Establishment at Stoke Orchard had already led to a promising new process.
INDUSTRY
305
A committee was appointed by the Minister of Power, in April 1959, to investigate
possible methods of converting coal into chemicals, gas and oil, and to recommend
further research and development work on any processes that appear to hold promise
of industrial application.
PETROLEUM
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young, a
Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from natural
mineral oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish shale deposits,
yielding similar products, were first worked in 1858.
Indigenous Production
Sources of crude oil within Britain (including oil extracted from shale) supply
altogether less than one per cent of total United Kingdom requirements, the
remainder being imported from overseas.
Crude oil is extracted from shale at five shale mines and one opencast quarry
and retorted in two crude oil works. Output of shale reached a peak of 3-4 million
tons in 1913, but the cost of the processes and other economic difficulties led to a
reduction of output. Production amounted to some 740,000 tons in 1958, yielding
over 63,000 tons of crude shale oil. From the latter, some 60,000 tons of refined
products were obtained. In 1958, about 49,000 tons of motor spirit were obtained
from coal by hydrogenation, and 6,000 tons by low temperature carbonisation.
Some 304,000 tons of refined benzole were derived from coke ovens and gas works.
Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the establishment of several small
oilfields in Nottinghamshire (Eakring and Egmanton), in Leicestershire (Plungar),
in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough) and in Lancashire (Formby). Annual production
of crude oil from indigenous oilfields totals about 80,000 tons. At Broadbench, in
Dorset, a single boring has found oil, possibly in commercial quantities. This is
the first oil strike in the south of England during the post-war search.
Indigenous crude oil both from shale and from oil wells is refined at Pumpherston,
near Edinburgh.
International Trade
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the Middle
East, Far East and Caribbean areas.
Today these companies produce one-third of all oil entering into international
trade, with a tanker fleet (part owned by them and part on charter) amounting to
nearly one-third of the world’s tanker tonnage. (United Kingdom registered tanker
tonnage is nearly one-fifth of the world’s total.)
In 1958, the United Kingdom imported 33-9 million tons of crude oil, costing
£296 million; nearly half came from Kuwait, the other largest suppliers being
Iraq, Iran, and Venezuela, in that order.
Consumption
Inland consumption of petroleum products in the United Kingdom, which
declined by two per cent in 1957* owing to restrictions imposed during the Suez
crisis, recovered sharply in 1958- At 28-5 million tons, excluding refinery con¬
sumption, the 1958 total showed a rise of 26 per cent over i957> and 23 Per cent
over 1956. The outstanding feature was the further rapid advance in use of black
oils; fuel oil consumption rose by 63 per cent between 1957 and I958 to io-6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
3°6
million tons, the chief factor being the large increase in power station usage;
while the use of industrial gas oil rose by 25 per cent to nearly 3 million tons.
Motor spirit sales rose by 5 per cent. In the first half of 1959 the upward trend in
sales of petroleum products continued.
Refineries
Before 1939, three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum
products was refined overseas, as it was considered more economical at that time
to refine at the source of production. Since the second world war, however, the
industry has come to favour the siting of refineries in the consuming areas. The
expansion programme in the United Kingdom carried out by the major oil
companies between 1947 and I958 cost nearly £300 million.
By the end of April 1959, refinery capacity in the United Kingdom amounted
to some 41 million tons a year. Of the 15 refineries in operation, seven have a
capacity of under 0-2 million tons. The largest are situated at Fawley, near
Southampton (12 million tons), Shellhaven (4 million tons) and Isle of Grain
(7 million tons), both in the Thames Estuary, and Stanlow (5 million tons), in
Cheshire. A new refinery at Milford Haven, in Pembrokeshire, costing some
£18 million and with a capacity of nearly 5 million tons, is expected to be ready
by i960.
Production of refined products rose from 4 million tons in 1948 to the record
total of 30-4 million tons in 1958. There is a substantial external trade in refined
products which tends to follow trading and seasonal requirements and the com¬
mercial arrangements of the oil companies. United Kingdom exports, mainly in
the form of heavier products to European countries, were valued at £106 million
in 1958. Imports of refined products were valued at £160 million in 1957, and
£138 million in 1958.
Research
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities on a
substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames (the British
Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock, in Kent (Shell),
and Abingdon, in Berkshire (Esso). Research covers the evolution of new and
improved lubricants, the development of new uses for oil and of new products
based on oil, especially chemicals.
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Public supply of electricity was first provided in 1881, at Godaiming, Surrey,
though there were earlier demonstrations of its use to consumers, such as the
lighting of the Thames Embankment by the former Metropolitan Board of Works.
From the earliest days a measure of public control has been a feature of the industry,
and the Electric Lighting Act of 1882 authorised the Board of Trade to grant
licences for the establishment of electricity undertakings by local authorities or by
companies (which the local authorities might compulsorily purchase after a given
period of time) to supply consumers in given areas. By the turn of the century,
technical developments, including the introduction of the electric motor as a source
of motive power, had led to a large increase in the scale of distribution of electricity,
and a variety of independent supply systems had grown up all over the country.
It was not until after the first world war that steps were taken to reorganise the
industry on a national scale in order to realise the benefits of concentration, integra-
INDUSTRY
3°7
tion and standardisation in electricity supply. In 1919, the Electricity Commis¬
sioners were set up as a supervisory body and to promote reorganisation through
voluntary agreement. Then, in 1926, the Central Electricity Board was established
to co-ordinate more efficiently the generation of electricity. Its main duties were to
concentrate the output of electricity in certain stations, selected for their efficiency
and low operating costs, and to connect these selected stations with one another and
with local distribution undertakings by means of a national system of main trans¬
mission lines, known as the Grid. Thenceforward, steady progress was made in
putting this plan into effect and, by March 1948, 143 selected stations, out of some
300, were supplying 95 per cent of the electricity generated for public supply.
Organisation under Public Ownership
Under the Electricity Act of 1947, a central authority, then known as the British
Electricity Authority, and 14 Area Electricity Boards took over in April 1948 the
assets of former municipal and private electricity supply undertakings throughout
Great Britain, except in the area already served by the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electric Board (see p. 308). Under the Electricity Reorganisation (Scotland) Act of
1954, the authority’s functions in Scotland were taken over in April 1955 by the
South of Scotland Electricity Board (see p. 308). The name of the authority was
changed from British Electricity Authority to Central Electricity Authority and the
number of area boards was reduced to twelve.
On 1st January, 1958, under the Electricity Act, 1957, the Central Electricity
Authority was dissolved and replaced by two new bodies, the Electricity Council
and the Central Electricity Generating Board.
The present organisation of the electricity supply industry, in which more than
200,000 people are employed, is described below.
England and Wales
The Electricity Council, the central body of the industry, is composed of a chair¬
man, two deputy chairmen, not more than three other persons, and the chairman
and two other members of the Central Electricity Generating Board, and, ex officio,
the twelve chairmen of the Area Electricity Boards. The main functions of the
council are to advise the Minister of Power on matters relating to the electricity
supply industry and to promote and assist the maintenance and development by
electricity boards in England and Wales of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical
system of electricity supply. More specifically, the council is responsible for a
number of common services, including capital financing and research.
The Central Electricity Generating Board consists of a chairman and not fewer
than seven, nor more than nine, other members. The board has taken over certain
of the executive functions of the former Central Electricity Authority in England
and Wales: i.e. to generate or acquire supplies of electricity and to provide bulk
supplies to the area boards.
The Area Boards (of which there are at present 12) are responsible for the
distribution and sale of electricity in England and Wales. Each consists of a full¬
time chairman and deputy chairman and four to seven part-time members,
appointed by the Minister of Power.
Area Consultative Councils were set up under the Electricity Act, I947> in the
area of each board to represent the interests of consumers. They each consist
of between 20 and 30 members, of whom between 4° and 60 per cent are nominated
by local authority associations. The chairman of each area consultative council
is an ex officio member of the corresponding area board. These arrangements
continue under the Act of I957-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
308
The most important functions of the Minister of Power in England and Wales,
under the new arrangements, are: to appoint the chairmen, deputy chairmen and
members of the Electricity Council and the Central Electricity Generating Board;
to approve each area board’s capital development plans and the industry s research
programme; and to approve, in consultation with the Treasury, the boards
borrowing requirements, having regard to the development programmes submitted
by the industry. The minister also has power to issue general directions to the
council and the boards if he considers this necessary in the national interest.
The Central Electricity Authority (and its successors the Electricity Council and
the Central Electricity Generating Board) together with the area boards, have made
a consolidated net surplus on their operations in each of the years since they were
established. Up to and includingthe financial year 1957-58, these surpluses amounted
in the aggregate to over £98 million. Under the 1957 Act, each electricity board, as dis¬
tinct from the industry as a whole, must pay its own way, taking one year with another.
Scotland
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board was set up in 1943 as a public cor¬
poration to develop the water power resources of the Highlands and Islands and
to distribute electricity in the more sparsely populated parts of Scotland not
covered by existing undertakings. The board consists of a chairman, a deputy
chairman and not fewer than four nor more than eight other members, appointed
by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The Act of 1947 made the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board solely
responsible to the Secretary of State for Scotland for all generation and distribution
in its area. This area was extended under the Act to include that part of Scotland
north and west of a line running roughly from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde
to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay.
On 1 st April, 1955, the South of Scotland Electricity Boardy answerable to the
Secretary of State for Scotland, took over the then British Electricity Authority’s
functions in Scotland, and also the functions of the two area boards in the south
of Scotland, which were dissolved. The board consists of a chairman, deputy
chairman, and not fewer than four nor more than eight other members, appointed
by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Under the Electricity Reorganisation (Scotland) Act, 1954, the then Minister of
Fuel and Power retained only three functions in regard to electricity in Scotland,
namely, to act jointly with the Secretary of State on matters relating to staff pensions
and to safety measures, and to remain solely responsible for the certification of meters.
A consultative council has been appointed for the district of each board by the
Secretary of State, to represent the interests of consumers. The constitutions of
these councils are similar to those of the area consultative councils, and the chairman
of each is a member of the appropriate board.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland, electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast, Bally-
lumford, Larne and Londonderry. Those in Belfast are owned and operated by
the Belfast Corporation, and the next two by the Electricity Board for Northern
Ireland. Generation at these stations is co-ordinated by the Northern Ireland Joint
Electricity Committee, set up by statute in 1948, which purchases their output and
resells it to distributors—the Belfast Corporation, for Belfast and district, and the
Electricity Board for the rest of Northern Ireland except Londonderry. In London¬
derry the city council both generates and distributes electricity independently of
the committee.
INDUSTRY
309
Generation
Most of Britain’s electricity is produced in coal-fired steam generating stations.
Abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail and water transport for
moving it, in contrast to the remote and scattered location of relatively small
water power resources, led to this preponderant development of electricity supplies
from thermal generating stations. The development of hydro-electricity on any
scale is comparatively recent.
The installed generating capacity of the electricity authorities (including the
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board) in Great Britain at the end of 1958
totalled 28,023 megawatts (MW)—maximum continuous rating—compared with
12,546 MW at the end of 1946, and 20,562 MW at the end of 1954.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where the total installed generating
capacity of 444 MW is in coal-fired thermal stations) amounted to 1,190 million
kilowatt-hours in 1958, when the maximum load sustained was 362 MW.
In 1958, 96,236 million units (one unit = one kilowatt-hour), or slightly under
98 per cent of the public supply in Great Britain, was generated at steam stations,
2,109 million units, or about 2 per cent, from water power, and 153 million units
by other means, e.g., diesel and waste heat and refuse destruction. The high rate
of expansion of output, which has been a feature of the industry since its earliest
years, has been continued since the war. Total production in 1958 was more than
nine times that of 1930, and had increased by 50 per cent since 1953.
Thermal. The electricity authorities are the largest consumers of primary fuel
in Britain, and, in 1958, used 47-2 million tons of coal and coke and about 2-6
million tons of oil (seven times the quantity used in 1956). Average thermal
efficiency of steam stations in England and Wales (i.e. the ratio of power output to
the fuel consumed) rose from 21-9 per cent in 1947 to 25-99 Per cent in I958 as
new plant was brought into use. Twenty stations containing much of the newest
plant had an average efficiency of 30-23 per cent in that year.
The Central Electricity Generating Board will have in commission by 1962
a generating set of 275 MW capacity, and, a year later, a 550 MW set is due to be
commissioned at Thorpe Marsh, near Doncaster. The latter is much larger than
any now in operation, and, as far as is known, than any at present projected anywhere
in the world. These large machines will show substantial economies in capital
cost, in fuel consumption and in operational costs. At present, the generating
stations installed at Blyth in Northumberland, at Drakelow, near Burton-upon-
Trent, Derbyshire, and at Kincardine in Scotland are the largest in Britain, each
with a capacity of 120 MW. Reheat steam turbines of 200 MW are to be installed
at High Marnham, in the east Midlands, West Thurrock near Grays, Essex, and
Willington, near Derby. The largest power station yet projected in Britain—one of
1,500 MW, which will also be situated at Drakelow—received ministerial consent
in April 1959.
Hydro-Electric. The setting up of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
in 1943 marked the beginning of a new era of intensive water power development
in the Highlands of Scotland. A development scheme drawn up by the board in
1944, showing the water power resources which it proposed to examine, listed
102 hydro-electric projects with an estimated annual output of 6,274 million units
of electricity. The ultimate output of hydro-electric power is expected to be
substantially higher and eventually may exceed 10,000 million units. In 1958, 1,683
million units were generated from water power compared with 322 million in 1949-
At the end of 1958, there were 35 full-scale hydro-electric stations in operation in
Scotland with a total capacity of 81 o MW^ and the largest the Loch Sloy station
3IO BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
had a capacity of 130 MW; further hydro-electric schemes with a total capacity of
672 MW were under consideration.
Alternative Fuels. To meet increasing demands for electricity, generation from
alternative fuels is being promoted. The chief alternatives are oil and nucear
energy. As regards oil, dual firing apparatus able to use either coal or oil has been
fitted to a new power station at Marchwood, on Southampton Water, and similar
apparatus has been installed in 10 other power stations, which are also situated on
river estuaries and thus able to be fed conveniently from nearby oil refineries.
Another alternative, used in Scotland, is peat; a pilot project at Altnabreac,
Caithness, is in operation, and the peat is used in the peat-burning gas turbine
developed by a Scottish firm assisted financially by the Development bund.
Nuclear Power Stations
As an extension of its experimental work and to produce plutonium, the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) has built and is building a number
of reactors which also produce electricity. There are two stations at Calder Hall,
in Cumberland, A and B, which together have an output capacity of some 150 MW.
Each has two reactors; the first of the two at the A station started operating m
May iQSb, and, on being connected to the Grid by the Queen on 17th October, 1950,
became the first nuclear power station in the world to produce electricity on an
industrial scale. Both reactors at the A station have been supplying electricity to
the Grid since February 195?; over 750 million units had been supplied up to
December 1958. The first reactor at the B station started operating in March 1958
and was delivering electricity before the end of that year; the second reactor
began delivering electricity in March i959- Similar stations at Chapelcross in
Dumfriesshire, were expected to be completed by the end of 1959; the first of the
four reactors started to provide electricity in February 1959.
The main commercial power stations under the Government s nuclear power
programme are being built for the electricity authorities by groups of manufac¬
turers specially organised for the construction of nuclear power plants (see also
D The revised Government programme, announced m March 1957, Provides
for between 5,000 and 6,000 MW capacity for the generation of electricity from
nuclear energy to be brought into operation by the end of 1965. In October 1957,
the target date for the completion of the programme was extended to the end ot
1066 by which time nuclear energy may be contributing some 25 per cent ot tota
electricity output, assuming operation at not less than 75 per cent load factor
It will be producing the equivalent of 18 million tons of coal (or 10 million tons of
oil) required by conventional stations for a similar output. The total cost of t e
programme is estimated at about £900 million, includmg £177 million for the
initial charges of uranium fuel. . . „ , ,
Special factors have to be taken into account in the siting of the nuclear power
stations, notably the need for firm rock foundations to bear the great weight of
the reactors and their supporting structure, a location distant from heavily built-up
areas, and plentiful supplies of water for cooling. Work on two stations at Bradwe
in Essex (300 MW installed capacity) and at Berkeley in Gloucestershire (275 MW)
—started in January i957, and is due for completion by Two ^rther stations
at Hunterston (360 MW), in Ayrshire, Scotland, and at Hinkley Point (500 MW),
in Somerset, will be ready in 1961 and 1962. Provision is being made for a possible
doubling of capacity at Hinkley Point. At the end of June work started on a
fifth nuclear power station at Trawsfynydd (500 MW), in North Wales, which
expected to be in operation by 1964. Approval has been given for the construction
of a sixth station at Dungeness in Kent.
-lereford cows and calves, one of Britain’s famous breeds of beef cattle, on the Welsh border
The 1Q59 Aberdeen Angus champion at Perth, Scotland,
was sold to a United States’ buyer for 25,000 guineas.
The British Hydrocarhon Chemicals plant at
Grangemouth, Scotland, one of Britain s major
petroleum chemical establishments (see p. 339)-
A Conzvay by-pass gas turbine engine being
fitted into one of the test cells at the Rolls-Royce
altitude test plant at Derby.
Berkeley Nuclear Power Station under con¬
struction ; one of about 12 nuclear power stations
to be built for the electricity authorities, it is
due for completion by 1961 (seep. 310).
INDUSTRY
311
Sites for additional stations are being considered—at Sizewell, in Suffolk;
Earnley, in west Sussex; Hamstead, on the Isle of Wight; at several points on the
coast of Anglesey; at Edern, in North Wales; and at Oldbury-upon-Severn,
Gloucestershire. The Northern Ireland Electricity Board is planning to build a
station on a site yet to be determined.
A series of engineering advances are enabling nuclear power stations with
greatly improved output to be constructed. Thus the station proposed at Sizewrell
is expected to have an output capacity of 650 MW (the largest so far projected in
the world) and one of as much as 1,000 MW is envisaged for the station at Oldbury-
upon-Severn. As a result, it is expected that not more than 14 stations will be
required for the 6,000 MW programme.
Pumped Storage. In order that nuclear power stations with their higher capital
costs and lower operating costs should be run as continuously as possible, pumped
storage schemes are being developed. Construction started at Blaenau Ffestiniog,
near Trawsfynydd in North Wales, in 1956, of a 300 MW pumped storage
scheme, and suitable sites for other such schemes are being investigated. The first
large-scale pumped storage works in Scotland, comprising a 400 MW combined
pumping and generating plant costing some £24-5 million, forms part of the Loch
Awe Constructional Scheme, which received the approval of Parliament in
May 1959. .
Sites in Northern Ireland suitable for this type of project are being surveyed.
Transmission and Distribution
Main electricity transmission lines—the National Grid—cover most of the
country. In 1958, those of the Central Electricity Generating Board totalled some
5,900 route miles (9,420 circuit miles), of which 584 miles were operated at
275,000 volts, 4,95s miles were operated at 132,000 volts and the remainder at
66,000 volts and below. In Scotland, there were 2,571 circuit miles of main
transmission lines at the end of 1958, of which 170 circuit miles operated at
275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000 volts. Energy movements on the
Grid in England and Wales are controlled through the seven operational areas,
set up for that purpose and distinct from the divisions in which the generating
side of the industry is organised; each area has a separate control, and the operations
are co-ordinated by a National Control in London. The Grid in Scotland is
operated from the North of Scotland control centre at Tummel Bridge and the
South of Scotland control centre at Glasgow.
The new Supergrid of main transmission lines at 275)®°° v°hs will assist in
meeting the growing demand for electricity during the next 20 years and will
make the British electricity supply the most closely integrated power network in
the world. A scheme for interchange of energy by direct current by means of a
single cross-Channel cable link capable of transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000
volts (direct current) is expected to be in operation by 1960—61. It is estimated
to cost £4 million. The object of the scheme is to take advantage of the differences
in the incidence of peak loads in the two countries.
In England and WTales, the Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers
electricity acquired mainly from the Central Electricity Generating Board, but in
part from other sources, e.g., collieries. There are IS-1 million consumers, an
increase of about 5-5 million on those supplied in December 1939* Industrial
concerns are the biggest users of electricity and their demands are increasing
rapidly. The principal domestic uses of electricity are for lighting, cooking, and
for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous other domestic purposes
is increasing.
x
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
312
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board has also pressed ahead with the
distribution of electricity to consumers in the north of Scotland. At the end of
1958, there were 374,200 consumers of electricity in the board’s district and
63-4 per cent of the farms and crofts had a supply of electricity. At the same date
the South of Scotland Electricity Board supplied 1,321,488 consumers, including
88-3 per cent of the farmers in the area.
Capital Investment
About 8 per cent of the annual gross fixed capital formation of the United King¬
dom is attributable to the electricity supply industry. Capital expenditure by the
industry on thermal plant over the eleven years 1956-67 is estimated at about
£3,300 million, broadly made up as follows: transmission and distribution, £1,400
million; construction of conventional stations, £835 million; nuclear powTer stations,
£900 million. . f
The long-term capital of the electricity authorities is obtained from both internal
resources and borrowing. Under the Finance Act, 1956, as amended by that of
1958, the authorities have power to raise money by means of Exchequer advances
from'the Minister of Power and the Secretary of State for Scotland. Since 1956,
issues of stock have been suspended and the authorities have had recourse to
Exchequer advances.
Total capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry in Great Britain
from the time of its nationalisation (in 1947) to 31st March, 1958 (in the case of the
council) and 31st December, 1957 (in the case of the boards) amounted to £1,922
million, of which £591 million had been financed from internal resources, leaving
£1,3 3/million to be raised by borrowing against a total statutory authorisation of
£1,675 million. The Electricity (Borrowing Powers) Act, 1959, authorised an
increase in maximum borrowings from £1,675 million to £2,150 million. The
minister is authorised, under certain circumstances, to raise this ceiling to £2,735
million. The position in the case of each authority is shown in Table 21.
In England and Wales, the Electricity Council estimates that demand for
electricity will rise by an average of 6-6 per cent annually compared with an annual
average of 7-6 per cent in the seven years ended in 1958. In 1958-59, actual capital
expenditure is estimated at £258-5 million and expenditure approved for 1959-60
amounts to £303-5 million. In addition, authority has been given for the expenditure
of £8-9 million on nuclear fuel in 1959-60.
In Scotland, demand for electricity doubles itself about every ten years.
Expenditure in 1958 by the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board totalled
£15.4 million, and £15-75 million has been approved for 1959. Expenditure in
1958 by the South of Scotland Electricity Board amounted to £27-6 million and a
sum of £28-25 million has been approved for 1959.
Research
The Electricity Council undertakes research on its own account and helps to
finance research through its membership of the British Electrical and Allied
Industries Research Association, an organisation to which manufacturing firms and
large consumers of electricity also belong and which was established before the
supply industry passed into public ownership. This association is one of the
autonomous research associations in receipt of grants from the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research. The Electricity Council also has an Electricity
Supply Research Council including independent experts to advise it and the area
boards, and can consult the Minister of Power’s Scientific Advisory Council on
problems affecting the supply and use of electricity. Direct research on a laboratory
INDUSTRY
313
scale is carried on by the Central Electricity Generating Board at the Electricity
Council’s laboratories at Leatherhead, Surrey.
The Central Electricity Generating Board announced in March 1959 that it was
to establish a new research centre, at a cost of £1 million, adjacent to the Berkeley
nuclear power station in Gloucestershire. The centre will be used to investigate
operational techniques and problems arising in the running of nuclear power
stations.
TABLE 21
Borrowings of the Electricity Supply Industry
£ million
Statutory
borrowing
limits
prior to
1959 Act
Borrow¬
ings out¬
standing
at March
1959
Estimated
additional
borrow¬
ings
required
(to 1965)
Total
borrow¬
ings
required
(to 1965)
New
borrowing
limits (a)
Electricity Council
North of Scotland
Hydro-Electric Board
South of Scotland
Electricity Board
Totals, Great Britain
1,400(6)
200(c)
75(d)
1,140
164
27
1,150
135
105
2,290
299
132
1,800-
2,300
240-300
110-135
1,675
1,331
1,390
2,721
2,150-
2,735
Source: Cmnd. 618, and Ministry of Power.
(a) Under the Electricity (Borrowing Powers) Act, 1959. The lower limit without, the
upper only with, further ministerial authorisation.
(b) Electricity Act, 1957.
(c) Electricity Act, 1947 as amended by the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland)
Act, 1952.
(d) Electricity Act, 1947, as amended by the Electricity Reorganisation (Scotland) Act,
1954-
GAS SUPPLY
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London, was
first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light and Coke
Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London. In the early years
of the industry, gas was used almost exclusively for lighting and was provided by
a growing number of company and municipal undertakings. After the middle of
the century and the invention of the Bunsen burner in 1855* 8as was used in¬
creasingly as a source of heat for many purposes, such as domestic cooking and
space and water heating, in addition to a number of industrial uses. In the last
twenty years of the century, however, gas for lighting purposes was subjected to
increasing competition from the new electricity supply industry; but the invention
of the Welsbach incandescent mantle in i887> which raised the efficiency of gas
lighting very considerably, enabled the industry to hold its own wffiile the supply
of gas for purposes other than lighting increased.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
3H
The gas industry in its present form developed in the main during the period
between the wars when increasing competition from electricity had to be met and
when changes in social habits and outlook were taking place. The industry under¬
took a large-scale programme of modernisation of production and distribution and
launched widespread sales promotion campaigns, especially for the numerous uses
of gas in the home. By I939> the industry had become mainly a supplier of heating
instead of lighting.
Organisation under Public Ownership
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the gas industry under public ownership and
control on 1st May, 1949. The assets of 991 undertakings, of which 269 belonged
to local authorities, were vested in 12 Area Gas Boards. Together they cover the
whole of Great Britain and are charged with a statutory duty to develop and
maintain an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of gas supply to domestic,
industrial and other consumers. The national body is the Gas Council, which is
appointed by the Minister of Power and is responsible, among other matters, for
advising him on questions affecting the gas industry. It is a co-ordinating council,
not a trading body. It consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman and
the twelve chairmen of the area boards.
The Area Gas Boards, which have a large measure of financial and operational
responsibility and are similar in most respects to the central bodies of the other
publicly owned corporations, are charged with the responsibility of manufacturing
and distributing gas to consumers. Each of the Area Gas Boards, which, like the
Gas Council, are appointed by the Minister of Power, consists of a full-time
chairman and deputy chairman, in some cases one, and in three cases two, full-time
members, and usually five or six part-time members, including the chairman of the
Area Consultative Council. There is no common pattern of organisation; each
board is fully independent and has devised its own subordinate structure. Each
board is required to pay its way, taking one year with another.
When the gas industry came under public ownership, a link between the industry
and the consuming public was established by the creation of a Consultative Council
in each board area. These councils consist of not fewer than 20 and not more than
30 members, of whom between 50 and 75 per cent are chosen from panels of
persons nominated by the local authority associations.
In Northern Ireland, the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a number
of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
Although the Gas Council is not a trading body, the operations of the area
boards have resulted, in the nine years up to 31st March, 1958, in an aggregate
disposable surplus of approximately £23 million before taxation.
Production
In 1958, in Great Britain, 25 million tons of coal were carbonised by gas under¬
takings and 28 million tons by coke ovens operated outside the gas industry.
Nearly one-third of the output of gas from coke ovens is sold to gas undertakings
for general distribution; the remainder is mainly consumed at the ovens or at
collieries or steelworks.
In 1921, 250,300 million cubic feet of gas was manufactured by authorised gas
undertakings or acquired from coke ovens, and the number of consumers was 7-6
million. By 1958, gas manufactured and acquired from coke ovens and other
sources for distribution had risen to 592,600 million cubic feet and the number
of consumers had risen to over 12-9 million, an increase of 137 per cent in the
volume of gas available and of about 70 per cent in the number of consumers.
INDUSTRY
315
In 1958, the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was 7,165 million
cubic feet, most of it for household use.
The total number of persons employed in the gas industry in Great Britain in
1958 was about 134,000.
Consumption
Half of all gas produced is sold for household use and the remainder for industrial
and commercial purposes.
Domestic Use. While an accurate statistical analysis of the domestic load is not
possible, evidence given before the Ridley Committee (on Fuel and Power Policy),
appointed by the then Minister of Fuel and Power in 1951, suggested that about
70 per cent of the domestic load was used for cooking, the remaining 30 per cent
being spread over space heating, water heating and other installations. Most homes
in Britain are nowr supplied with gas, except in some rural areas where, owing to
difficulties in storage and transmission, gas is not economic. These difficulties have
been overcome to some extent by the use of local high-pressure storage tanks but
this development is unlikely to grow, owing to the steady extension of rural
electricity supplies. Bottled gas, derived from petroleum, is widely used in rural
areas.
Industrial and Commercial Use. Gas is used extensively in industries which
require the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, for example,
in the pottery industry and in certain processes in the manufacture of iron and
steel products. In 1958, industrial consumption of gas totalled 165,800 million
cubic feet.
Coke and By-products
Production of coke at gas works in 1958 was ii-i million tons, and at coke ovens
18-5 million tons. The gas industry and coke ovens jointly produce about 3 million
tons of crude coal tar and 108 million gallons of crude benzole a year. These
products, together with those of the phenolic and basic types and sulphur, provide
a source for the manufacture of essential derivatives which include dyestuffs (of
which Britain now produces most of its own requirements), fertilisers, plastics,
germicides (the sulphonamides and sulphanilamides), insecticides, refrigerants,
perfumes, and synthetic yarns.
With further research and development, more especially in the field of organic
chemistry, the production of coal carbonisation derivatives is of great importance
to the industry.
Capital Investment, Development and Research
The chief objects of capital expenditure in the years immediately after the war
were to overtake arrears of plant renewal. Plans for further expansion were approved
by the then Minister of Fuel and Power in 1954 and are outlined in the Gas
Council’s publication Fuel for the Nation.
Under the Gas Act, 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the Area Gas
Boards was limited to £250 million. The Gas and Electricity (Borrowing Powers)
Act, 1954, extended these borrowing powers to £450 million.
The industry in recent years has been spending about £5° million a year
on capital investment. Between vesting day (1st May, 1949) and March 1958,
£422 million had been invested in fixed assets, of which £154 million had been
provided out of depreciation. Estimated capital expenditure in 1958-59 totalled
£48-8 million and a further £55-5 million has been approved for 1959-60.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
316
The post-war structure of the industry has already permitted considerable inte¬
gration by the linking of undertakings for the transmission of gas (through gas
grids and long-distance mains), enabling production to be concentrated in the most
efficient units. Progress is also being made in interconnections for the reception
of gas from coke ovens, notably in Wales, Durham and Yorkshire.
The industry is investigating processes of gasifying coal of inferior quality.
In October 1958, work was started at Westfield, in Fife, Scotland, on a gas plfint,
to cost £6-6 million, using low-grade coal. This plant is planned to provide, by
the autumn of i960, some 15 million cubic feet of gas a day and, when completed
by 1962, will be producing 30 million cubic feet of gas a day, about one-fifth of
the total gas requirements of Scotland. 1 he plant marks a change within the
industry from conventional carbonisation of coal to the use of chemical processes.
Because the gas will be made at high pressure, it will be possible to pipe it through
a 133-mile grid-main covering industrial Scotland. Further advantages of this
method are low costs and the production of by-products such as tar, ammonia and
benzole. Experiments in the gasification of poor quality deep-mined coal are
taking place at Coleshill, in Warwickshire.
Alternative sources of gas are being developed by the Gas Council. Gases from oil
refineries (butane or propane) are used in several installations in smaller towns
remote from large gas works or the grid systems. Progress has also been made
with the use of methane, drained from coal mines. A new process for the hydro¬
genation of petroleum fuels (and, it is hoped, ultimately, of poor quality coal)
evolved by the Gas Council’s Midland Research Station at Solihull, near Birming¬
ham, is to be applied in a £2 million pilot plant at Partington, near Manchester.
By March 1959, 30 oil gasification plants had been completed. These include a
plant, jointly constructed by the South Eastern Gas Board and the British Petroleum
Company, to convert petroleum products from the company’s Kent oil refinery to
gas of acceptable quality. This installation, which began operating in the summer
of 1958, converts some 50,000 tons of petroleum products a year to gas and has a
daily output of 18 million cubic feet of gas.
The world’s first shipload of liquid natural gas arrived at Canvey Island, Essex,
from the United States Gulf Coast, in February 1959 in a specially converted
3,000-ton cargo ship, the Methane Pioneer, owned jointly by the Gas Council
and an American concern. This experimental quantity of 2,000 tons was re-formed
by the North Thames Gas Board at Romford by the Onia-Gegi catalytic process.
If the experiment proves successful, imports on a much larger scale may be
undertaken. .
The research organisation established by the Gas Council consists of a research
committee which advises the council on initiation and implementation of research
policy, two research stations, one in London and one at Solihull, and the Watson
House Centre at Fulham, London, for the design, testing and development of
appliances. Research is also carried out on behalf of the Gas Council at Leeds
University and at other universities and colleges.
FUEL EFFICIENCY
The Government has for a number of years sought to promote efficiency in the
use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, and has been assisted by
various bodies representative of producers and consumers.
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National Coal
Board, coal distributors and coal appliance manufacturers. It was formed in 1932
to give information and advice on the best use of solid fuel, including the choice
INDUSTRY
317
of installation and the operation of solid fuel appliances, to domestic users and to
retailers. During the second world war, the reduction in coal production and the
demands of war industry made economy imperative. When the Ministry of Fuel
and Power was formed in 1942, an industrial fuel advisory service with regional
branches was incorporated within it. In 1943 the Women's Advisory Council on
Solid Fuel, consisting mainly of representatives of appliance manufacturers,
women’s organisations and others interested in the housewife’s point of view on
domestic fuel arrangements, was formed to advise women on the use of solid fuel
for heating and cooking.
A non-profit-making company, the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service,
which was formed to promote fuel saving in industry, came into operation in
May 1954. It provides advice and services to all non-domestic fuel users in a
variety of forms, from ‘spot’ inspection to full-scale heat and power surveys and
regular visits on a contract basis.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, in general, sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. The sources of water, however, are often distant from the areas
where supplies are needed, and water undertakings are therefore mainly concerned
with abstraction, storage, treatment and distribution. Supplies are obtained partly
from surface sources such as mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gather¬
ing grounds and river intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of
wells, adits and boreholes. Unlike other public services in Great Britain, such as
electricity and gas, water supply remains in the hands of a large number of under¬
takings of different kinds. Ministerial responsibility for national water policy rests
with the Minister of Housing and Local Government in England and Wales, with
the Secretary of State for Scotland in Scotland and with the IMinister of Health and
Local Government in Northern Ireland.
Development of Water Supply in England and Wales
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies
became a general public service and then only after long and bitter controversy.
It was largely due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick and his colleagues, who
demonstrated the dangers arising from inadequate water supply and sanitation, that
the Public Health Act, 1848, became law in England and Wales and laid the basis
for a long series of statutes dealing with public health.
From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards a number of separate large
water undertakings were set up to provide adequate supplies of pure water to the
expanding urban population, and the water supply system developed rapidly,
although in piecemeal fashion and with some overlapping and waste.
Organisation of Water Supply in England, and Wales
Local authorities have a duty as sanitary authorities to ensure that water supplies
are adequate for the needs of their areas, and they may do this either by operating
a water undertaking themselves or by ensuring that other bodies are providing an
adequate supply. The householder receives his domestic water supply at a com¬
paratively small charge, varying in different areas, which he usually pays by way of
a water rate levied, like other rates, on the value of his house.
By the Water Act, 1945, the Minister of Housing and Local Government has a
duty to promote the conservation and proper use of water supplies in England and
Wales. The same Act provided for a statutory Central Advisory Water Committee
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
318
(replacing the previous non-statutory committee) to advise the minister on general
questions relating to water and to deal with the local organisation of water supplies
and the powers and duties of local authorities and other water concerns. Local
authorities were required, in extension of the duties placed on them under the
Public Health Acts, to secure piped wholesome water in every part of their districts
where there were houses or schools, unless it was impracticable to do so at reasonable
cost.
In the years between the passing of the Water Act and i959> 324 smaller water
authorities in England and Wales were absorbed by larger authorities or by the
creation of joint boards. The principal object of such amalgamation is the constitu¬
tion of more efficient units in the water supply industry, and efforts to reduce the
number of separate undertakings have recently been intensified.
In March 1959, there were, in England and Wales, 808 local authority water
undertakings, 67 joint water boards (including bulk supply boards) and 13 joint
water committees, 77 statutory water companies, 18 non-statutory water companies,
and 3 private proprietors with statutory powers. A considerable number of private
proprietors without statutory powers also provide small supplies. Water under¬
takings vary greatly in size; about half the population is served by the 55 largest
undertakings, and the other half by over 900 smaller ones.
The Metropolitan Water Board, which is probably the largest single water
undertaking in the world, supplies about 335 million gallons daily to about 6-5
million people in the London area. The board was established in 1903, and in the
following year took over the undertakings of eight water companies which were
supplying the London area. It now consists of 88 part-time members who are the
elected representatives of the various local authorities within the board’s area of
operations, together with one representative each from the Thames and Lee Con¬
servancies. The chairman and vice-chairman are chosen by members of the board.
Present Supplies in England and Wales
Today, piped water reaches some 97 per cent of the total population of England
and Wales and more than 90 per cent of the rural population.
About £30 million a year is spent on capital development, financed mainly by
loans, the interest on which, together with running costs, is paid by the water under¬
takings from annual income. This income is derived from local water rates levied
on domestic consumers and from charges for supplies as recorded by meter in the
case of most industrial users. In addition to supplies from water undertakings, large
quantities of water are taken by industry from rivers or underground sources.
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by grants
under the Rural Water Supplies Act, 1934, and under the Rural Water Supplies
and Sewerage Acts, 1944 to 1955. By March 1959, schemes costing £74 million
had been completed or were in progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The steady growth of towns in England and Wales has meant increased demands
for water and some diminution in supplies in so far as such growth involves covering
the ground with impervious material, so that water which previously would have
percolated through to underground natural reservoirs is now carried off in drains
and rivers. On the other hand, improved methods of purification in recent years
have resulted in greater use being made of water drawn from the lower reaches of
rivers. In 1955, a sub-committee was set up by the Central Advisory Water
Committee to study the growing demand for water and the problems involved in
meeting it. In its first report, The Growing Demand for Water, published in
February 1959, the sub-committee stated that in spite of an expected 23 per cent
increase in consumption of water in the ten years ending 1965, development
INDUSTRY
319
schemes prepared by the public water suppliers should enable them amply to
meet likely demands. After 1965, the country’s rainfall would be sufficient to ensure
an adequate supply of water to meet growing needs, provided that the proper
means of conservation and distribution were developed.
Water Supply in Scotland and Northern Ireland
In Scotland, public water undertakings are carried on entirely by local authori¬
ties, either separately or in combination with each other; they supply over 95 per
cent of the total population. The water problem in Scotland is broadly similar to
that in England and Wales save that less reliance needs to be placed on underground
sources. Scotland has separate legislation. The Water (Scotland) Acts, 1946 and
1949, among other provisions, impose a general duty on the Secretary of State to
promote the conservation of water resources in Scotland; require local authorities
to provide supplies of wholesome water everywhere in their districts, where this
can be done at reasonable cost; and provide for a uniform system of rating for
water throughout the country. The Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Acts,
1944 to 1955, make available to Scottish local authorities grant assistance up to a
maximum of £30 million towards the cost of water supplies and sewerage schemes
in rural areas. By December 1958, water schemes for rural areas costing £12-6
million had been completed with the aid of such grants, and schemes worth £14-9
million were in progress.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water. The Water Supplies and
Sewerage Act (Northern Ireland), 1945, in addition to making provision for
the payment of Government grants to all water supply authorities, places upon
them statutory obligations with regard to the supply of water to houses and
schools. Since 1945, a piped water supply has been, or is being, provided for every
town, and in rural areas piped water supplies are being extended. Progress has been
very rapid, and at 30th September, i9S^> £20-8 million had been expended,
including grants totalling £8-9 million.
River Management
The 32 river boards set up under the River Boards Act, i94^> carry out the
functions and co-ordinate the various aspects of river management in England and
Wales previously performed by a large number of separate authorities.
Each river board covers a river board area. The river board areas together
comprise the whole of England and Wales, except the Thames and Lee Catchment
Areas (which are under the jurisdiction of the Thames Conservancy and Lee
Conservancy Catchment Boards1 respectively), the administrative county of London,
and areas adjoining that county not included in any catchment area.
River boards are composite bodies representing local government, agricultural
and fishery interests, and most of their expenses are apportioned among the councils
of the counties or county boroughs concerned, in proportion to the rateable values
of property in the river board area.
River management in Scotland and Northern Ireland has not been concentrated
to the same extent.
It is an offence for any person to permit any polluting matter, solid or liquid,
to enter a river. The Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act, iqSL revised and
1 The Thames Conservancy and Lee Conservancy Catchment Boards are similar in
constitution and powers to the river boards; because London draws most of its water
supplies from these two rivers, however, they have long been regulated under powers
granted by Acts of Parliament of purely local application.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
320
strengthened previous legislation for the prevention of river pollution in England
and Wales. Enforcement of the Act is vested in the river boards, the Thames and
Lee conservators, and, in London and adjacent areas, in the councils of the metro¬
politan boroughs, counties, and county boroughs concerned. There is a similar Act
for Scotland under which nine river purification boards have been set up to pro¬
mote the cleanliness of the rivers in their areas.
Measurement of Water Resources
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation s surface water
resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain, published
annually by H.M. Stationery Office. This publication contains particulars of the
run-off and related rainfall from a large number of rivers, streams and reservoired
areas. The Surface Water Survey Centre of the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government is responsible for the promotion of gauging, the collection of hydro-
logical information, and the publication of the year book. The field work of surface
water measurement is carried out by river boards, water undertakings and other
bodies. General information on rainfall, published annually in British Rainfall,
is the responsibility of the Meteorological Office, while the subject of ground water
comes under the Geological Survey and Museum. In special cases the Hydraulics
Research Station of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research carries
out research into problems of the design and calibration of gauging weirs and flumes
for the measurement of surface water. A close liaison is maintained between these
organisations.
A report by a sub-committee of the Central Advisory Water Committee,
Information on Water Resources, published in February 1959, proposed that steps
should be taken to review current research work and to determine how such work
should be co-ordinated. The sub-committee recommended certain extensions of
existing facilities for recording rainfall, snowfall and underground water and for
measuring river flows.
Water Pollution Research
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research is engaged in investigating problems connected with the treat¬
ment of water for domestic and industrial supply, the treatment and disposal of
sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention of pollution of
surface water and underground water. The laboratory maintains close contact
with other interested Government departments, with municipal and other public
authorities and with industry. Research is carried out with general supervision and
advice from the Water Pollution Research Board of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research. The board was set up in 1927 and its members are
appointed by the Lord President of the Council.
The Central Advisory Water Committee has appointed a sub-committee to
consider problems arising out of the disposal of trade effluents, and it has also a
standing technical committee concerned with the effects of the discharge o
water containing synthetic detergents (for instance, persistent foaming) into rivers,
canals and sewerage works. In its first progress report, published in February 1958,
the standing committee noted that the consumption of surface-active agents, on
which detergents are based, increased very little in 1955 and 1956 (average increase
2-5 per cent) compared with the years i95I-54 (average increase 30-6 per cent).
It appeared, therefore, that the home market had almost reached the limit of
consumption under present conditions, and that existing conditions were unlikely
to change significantly.
INDUSTRY
321
BUILDING AND CONTRACTING
The building and contracting industry is concerned primarily with the con¬
struction and repair of houses, hospitals, schools, offices, shops and factories, and
with civil engineering works such as bridges, docks, harbours, railways, roads, air¬
ports, power stations, hydro-electric schemes, irrigation systems and atomic energy
establishments. The industry employs some 1,400,000 persons (including about
70,000 women) and provides over 6 per cent of the gross domestic output of goods
and services. It also makes an important contribution to overseas development.
Structure
Over four-fifths of the industry is in the hands of private concerns. The typical
firm is small or medium-sized. Over 30 per cent of the firms in the industry are one-
man businesses engaged in such trades as house painting or plumbing, and nearly
60 per cent employ fewer than nineteen persons. At the other end of the scale there
are fewer than a dozen firms of building and civil engineering contractors, each
employing more than 5,000 persons on its permanent staff. Some of these are
integrated concerns owning quarries as well as workshops, extensive stocks of
mechanical plant, and the standard stores and tackle of builders’ yards: they also
undertake large-scale constructional contracts overseas.
There are also about 200 United Kingdom firms of consulting engineers which
undertake detailed investigations of constructional projects, report on the type of
work recommended and materials required, provide estimates of the time and cost
of construction, obtain competitive tenders from contracting firms and supervise
the carrying out of the work by the contractor.
In addition, there are hundreds of firms of architects and quantity surveyors
which are concerned with the design, planning and costing of building and civil
engineering projects.
A growing proportion of construction work, in Britain and overseas, is being
undertaken by 'consortia’, i.e. organisations in which several firms group together
to secure large contracts—such as the building of nuclear power stations (see p. 331)
—which are beyond the technical or financial resources of a single firm. One
example is the consortium of 13 firms engaged in manufacture or construction, set
up to build a steel works at Durgapur, India, which will have an annual capacity
of 11 million tons.
Value of Output
The value of the annual output of the industry has been rising fairly steadily
since 1945, and the total for Great Britain in 1958 is estimated to amount to £2,168
million. Of this total, £348 million represented building work carried out by the
staffs employed directly by the public authorities (including Government depart¬
ments, local authorities and certain public utilities), while the balance of £1,820
million represented the output of private firms (new work, £i,4°5 million, and
other work, £415 million).
Housing Construction
In the post-war period most new houses in Britain have been built by private
firms working under contract to local authorities, but the proportion built by private
firms for private owners has increased appreciably since I951- About 15 per cent of
local authorities employ direct labour in housing construction, while about 64 per
cent use their own labour for repair and maintenance. In 1958, the value of new
housing built in Great Britain by private firms was £5! 8 million, of which £264
million was for private owners and £254 million for public authorities.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
322
Between 1945 and 1958, some 3,190,000 new permanent houses and other dwell¬
ings and some 160,000 temporary houses were built in the United Kingdom.
Prefabricated Buildings
Prefabrication is generally taken to mean factory production of most of the
component parts of buildings for transport to, and rapid erection on, a site.
Techniques of prefabrication have been developed in Britain over a period of at
least 150 years. A notable early example was the Crystal Palace, originally erected
in Hyde Park, London, from component parts made in Birmingham, for the Great
Exhibition of 1851.
Considerable advances in technology were made during the second world war
when greater use was made of lightweight materials, including aluminium alloys,
light strip steel and asbestos cement panels. In the earlier post-war years, prefabri¬
cation techniques were used extensively in the construction of temporary houses;
by 1949, 156,000 temporary houses had been provided by the Ministry of Works for
erection on sites made available by local authorities. These new techniques are also
used in the construction of permanent houses, and are being developed and applied
in the building of schools, hospitals, offices and shops.
The industry has made useful contributions to the post-war need for houses and
other forms of accommodation overseas. In 1958, exports of prefabricated buildings
were valued at £5-8 million.
Civil Engineering and Industrial Building
Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale modern
industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment to carry out
major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent figures in the
early development of civil engineering included: James Brindley (1716-1772),
builder of canals; John Loudon McAdam (1756-1836), pioneer in road construc¬
tion; Thomas Telford (1757-1834), builder of roads, docks and bridges; and George
Stephenson (1781-1848), Robert Stephenson (1803-1859), Joseph Locke (1805-
1860), Isambard Kingdom Brunei (1806-1859) and Thomas Brassey (1805-1870),
builders of railways.
Within the United Kingdom the industry has been occupied since the war with
large-scale reconstruction and development schemes. These have included work
on the repair, modernisation and electrification of railways, road and dock develop¬
ment schemes, airports, sea defence works, thermo-electric and hydro-electric
power stations, improved water supplies, and drainage and sewerage systems.
Among the important civil engineering projects under construction in the
United Kingdom in 1959, were the Whiteinch Tunnel, under the river Clyde at
Glasgow; the Dartford-Purfleet Tunnel under the Thames; the road bridge over
the Firth of Forth; and a 5 million ton capacity oil refinery at Milford Haven.
Some £55-^65 million is being spent annually on new motorways and road
reorganisation (see pp. 370-71). Investment programmes of the nationalised
industries in coal, hydro-electric development, nuclear power stations and rail
transport also involve building and contracting work on a large scale.
In Great Britain since the war, more than 18,000 industrial buildings of over
5,000 sq. ft. (with a total area of over 400 million sq. ft.) and many smaller factories
have been erected.
Output in Northern Ireland
Developments in the building and civil engineering industries in Northern
Ireland have followed much the same pattern as in Great Britain.
INDUSTRY
323
The output of these industries has been relatively higher in Northern Ireland
since 1946 than before the war, as considerable leeway had to be made up. Progress
has been particularly marked in housing, hospitals and schools, water supply and
sewerage, arterial drainage and harbour schemes. An extensive programme of
factory construction has been under way since 1947 with the object of attracting
new industries to Northern Ireland.
Overseas Constructional Work
Constructional work carried out overseas by British firms has included railways
in most parts of the world; large-scale irrigation works in India, Pakistan, Egypt
and Greece; and canals, roads, docks, harbours, power stations, airfields, hydro¬
electric schemes and industrial and housing estates in several countries. British
conditions of contract for international civil engineering work have been widely
adopted as standard throughout the world.
Examples of large contracts in recent years include: hydro-electric schemes at
Owen Falls (Uganda), and Hirfanli (Turkey); dock extensions at Calcutta and
Bombay (India); harbour works at Takoradi and Tema (Ghana), and Aden (one of
the largest bunkering stations for oil in the world); a new port at Salaverry (Peru);
thermal power stations at Pretoria and Johannesburg (South Africa); a geothermal
power station at Wairakei (New Zealand); dry docks at Karachi (Pakistan), houses,
airfields, roads and bridges in Iraq; modernisation of the trunk road system in Iran;
and industrial estate development in Annacis Island (Canada); 12-storey office
blocks in Toronto (Canada); irrigation schemes for sugar and citrus estates in
Southern Rhodesia; an oil refinery at Rio de Janeiro (Brazil); a pharmaceutical
products factory in Iran; the Auckland harbour bridge (New Zealand), opened in
May 1959; the Adomi bridge across the river Volta (Ghana); and a mile-long road
bridge costing £si million over the river Niger (Nigeria).
It has been estimated that the value of work done during the year ended March
1959 by some 63 principal British building and civil engineering firms, operating
in some 66 countries, was over £120 million, compared with £114 million in the
previous year; and the value of contracts obtained rose from £102 million in i9S^—57
to £115 million in 1958-59. Most of the work done was in the sterling area, although
about 22 per cent was in the dollar area.
Among the major projects on which British consulting engineers have been
engaged in recent years are the hydro-electric scheme at Kariba and the power
development, irrigation and flood control project in Shire Valley (both in the
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland), the Kai Tak airport at Hong Kong, and
the trans-Iranian pipe line survey.
Research and Development
Research into various aspects of civil engineering is undertaken by the Depart¬
ment of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), the Admiralty, various
universities and technical colleges, and by individual firms and trade associations.
The civil engineering research work of DSIR is carried out through several
research laboratories, including the National Physical Laboratory, the Building
Research Station, the Road Research Laboratory, the Forest Products Research
Laboratory, the Geological Survey and Museum, the YV ater Pollution Research
Laboratory, the Fire Research Station and the Hydraulics Research Station.
One notable example of this work is the research conducted during the past
twenty years on concrete manufacture by the Building Research Station and the
Road Research Laboratory in conjunction with United Kingdom universities and
the Cement and Concrete Association. Another is the research carried out at the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
324
National Physical Laboratory into the effect of wind-pressure on bridges. This
work has been in progress since 1946, with the aid of wind-tunnels for the scale
models, and led to the discovery of two types of aerodynamic instability—an up
and down motion of the whole platform and oscillations of a twisting character.
Methods were evolved to modify or eliminate this instability. At the Imperial
College of Science and Technology, London, important research has been carried
out to discover the manner in which waves exert shock pressure on walls a matter
of considerable importance to civil engineers, especially for maritime structures.
The principal professional body in the civil engineering industry is the Institution
of Civil Engineers, incorporated in 1828 by Royal Charter.
Some major advances in technology and materials have been made in recent
years, for example, in the mechanisation of earth excavating and site clearance, the
development of mobile hoists, improvements in road-making techniques, new
methods of welding, the introduction of unit construction processes for bridge
building, and progress in concrete mixing and prefabrication.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
The United Kingdom’s manufacturing industries provide an exceedingly wide
range of products many of which play a major role in world trade. In terms of net
output and exports the most important groups of industries are those concerned
with the manufacture of metals and metal products, though the textile and chemical
industries are also of considerable significance. Some impression of the relative
importance of the different groups in terms of the value of net output is given in
Table 22, which is based on the results of the Census of Production for 1956 and
the provisional results of a sample census for 1957-
TABLE 22
Value of Net Output of Industry Groups in 1956 and 1957
1956
1957 (a)
£ million
Percentage
of total
Metal manufacture . .
Shipbuilding, engineering and electrical
goods
Vehicles
Miscellaneous metal products
Chemicals and allied trades
Textiles and clothing
Food, drink and tobacco . .
Other manufacturing industries
Totals
662-3
1,743-3
811-0
405-7
614-6
926-8
680-3
1,335-5
7,179-5
682-9
1,859-7
828-1
413-6
656-2
961-1
699-9
1,433-7
7,535-2
9-1
24-8
11-0
5-5
8- 5
12-9
9- 3
18-9
100-0
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
(a) Provisional figures. The final total, published in advance of complete figures, is
£7.535-04 million.
INDUSTRY
325
The pattern of manufacturing industry has changed markedly in response to
technological progress, new demands from home and export markets and the
introduction of new and improved materials. The rate of expansion has been
especially rapid in electronics and in most sections of electrical engineering, in
almost all branches of the chemical industry and in the aircraft and motor vehicle
industries.
Expansion has been particularly marked in those industries which are in a
position to make use of automation equipment, for example, transfer machines,
the linking of machine tools in automatic production lines, the use of electronic
control equipment and electronic data processing machines. In several industries,
such as oil refining, steel making, motor vehicles, electronic components and
chemicals, automation is being adapted on a wide scale.
METAL MANUFACTURE
The metal manufacturing industries employed about 550,000 persons at the
end of 1958. Nearly four-fifths of these were engaged in the iron and steel industry.
Iron and Steel
Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the
seventeenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the series
of discoveries which led to the great expansion of steelmaking in the second half
of the nineteenth century. Today, Britain is one of the world’s four largest pro¬
ducers of steel and is renowned for the quality of its special and alloy steels.
Production of crude steel, which in 1946 totalled 12-7 million ingot tons, rose to
21-7 million ingot tons in 1957, falling back to 19-3 million ingot tons in 1958;
capacity is available to produce about 24-5 million ingot tons. Pig iron production
has risen from 7-8 million tons in 1946 to I4'3 million tons in 1957» output in 1958
was 13 million tons. In 1958, direct exports of iron and steel amounted to 3-4 million
ingot tons valued at £188 million, in addition to indirect exports, estimated in 1958
to amount to the equivalent of 4-2 million ingot tons, in the form of sales by the
steel-consuming industries; exports of the machinery industry (other than electrical
machinery), and of the shipbuilding and vehicle industries, which are major con¬
sumers of steel, were valued at over £1,000 million in 1958.
South Wales and the north-east coast of England are the United Kingdom’s two
largest steel-producing areas, together responsible for an annual crude steel pro¬
duction of nearly 9-5 million ingot tons, or more than 40 per cent of the total
output. South Wales is engaged mainly in the production of flat products, and is
especially noted for tinplate. In the north-east coast area of England, production
is concentrated on heavy sections and rails, and plates for the shipbuilding industry.
Scotland, with an annual production of over 2 million ingot tons, finds its chief
internal markets in the shipbuilding and engineering industries of the Clyde valley.
Sheffield is known throughout the world for its special alloy steels. Two other areas
with a substantial share of output are north Lincolnshire and Lancashire. Britain
possesses some of the most up-to-date steel plants in Europe; for example, the
£18 million universal beam mill near Middlesbrough, in the north-east of Yorkshire,
for the production of structural steel which came into operation in i958> the
steelworks at Ravenscraig near Motherwell, Scotland, completed in 1957 at a cost
of £22-5 million, and the integrated strip mill at Margam in South Wales.
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public supervision
since 1932, when a Government-appointed body, the Import Duties Advisory
Committee, gave special attention to the reorganisation of the industry. In
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
326
February 1951, the greater part of the industry came under public ownership by
virtue of the Iron and Steel Act, 1949. The 1949 Act was repealed by the Iron and
Steel Act, 1953, which established an Iron and Steel Holding and Realisation
Agency with the duty of returning the companies, which had continued to operate
as separate units, to private ownership. By September 1958, there remained 13 com¬
panies, of which two are major companies, in which the agency had direct holdings.
The 1953 Act also provided for the establishment of the Iron and Steel Board
to exercise a general supervision over the iron and steel industry. The board is
responsible to the Minister of Power and includes, in addition to the chairman and
two other full-time members, a number of part-time members drawn from steel
producers, steel consumers and trade unions. The representative trade association
of the industry is the British Iron and Steel Federation.
Since 1945, modernisation and development on a large scale have been under¬
taken; in 1958, investment expenditures were £105 million, compared with £75
million in 1956. It is planned to raise productive capacity for crude steel to nearly
28 million ingot tons by 1962, of which 5 million ingot tons are expected to be re¬
quired for export. Plans in hand for expansion and further modernisation of the
industry, ranging from iron ore mining to finishing capacity, are estimated to cost
£650 million. Two new steel strip mills, which are to be constructed in Wales and
Scotland with financial aid from the Government, will increase steel strip capacity
by 1 million tons to 4-7 million tons by 1962. The industry plans to increase its
consumption of home-produced ore from nearly 15 million tons in 1958 to 22
million tons by 1962, and that of foreign ores from nearly 13 million tons (in 1957,
nearly 16 million tons) to between 22 and 24 million tons. The industry’s long-term
programme provides for a fleet of 72 special ore carriers; 37 were in service at the
end of 1958.
Some 325,000 people were employed in 1958 in iron and steel manufacture
(excluding iron foundries). Of these, 223,000 were engaged in iron and steel
smelting and rolling, and 23,000 in blast furnaces.
Iron Founding
Iron castings are required by most branches of the engineering industry, and
especially in the manufacture of motor vehicles, tractors, machine tools and power
units of all kinds; they are also used by the building industry. There are some
1,800 firms in the industry, ranging from small units to foundries employing over
1,500 people. About 125,000 people are employed, including 15,000 in foundries run
by engineering firms. Iron foundries are found in all parts of the United Kingdom,
but there is some concentration in the Midlands and other engineering centres.
Output of iron in castings fell back to 3-47 million tons in 1958 (compared
with 3-93 million tons in the peak year of 1955). as a result of a reduced demand in
some trades. Over half a million tons each are used annually by the motor vehicle
industry, by the machinery, general engineering and electrical engineering industries,
and for pressure pipes; about 400,000 tons are required by the building industry.
The British Cast Iron Research Association undertakes basic research into iron
technology. It was responsible for the development of one form of spheroidal
graphite (SG) cast iron, which has made possible in recent years the production of
a range of castings not previously available.
Non-ferrous Metals
The non-ferrous metals industry in Britain, employing some 113,000 persons,
is the largest in Europe and, in i957> contributed over £125 million to the net
national output.
The Vickers
Vanguard
turbo-prop
airliner
carries up to
139 passengers
and cruises
at 425 m.p.h.
Above: Short SCl vertical take-off research aircraft: it has four
folls-Royce jet engines for downward thrust and a horizontal
pngine in the tail.
Alight: The Fairey Rotodyne vertical take-off airliner {above) and
he Westland Westminster heavy-duty helicopter (see p. 383).
Be/ozc: The Armstrong Whitworth Argosy can carry 13! tons
>f freight or 80 passengers.
The first British-built mobile oil-drilling
platform; to be used off British Borneo.
The Acrow jet dredger uses powerful jets
of water to loosen materials.
Vickers Vigor tractor engaged in road-making in
Malaya.
The Rapier W1400 walking dragline, probably the
largest in the world, is used in iron-ore mining. Its
tubular steel jib is 282 feet long.
INDUSTRY
327
Nowadays the mining in Britain of non-ferrous ores is confined to the working
of lead, zinc, tin and tungsten ores on a small scale. However, the United Kingdom
is a large consumer of non-ferrous metals, being second only to the United States
among Western countries in its consumption of aluminium, copper, lead, tin and
zinc. Production in 1958 included the following: aluminium, 26,000 tons of virgin
metal and 100,000 tons of secondary metal; refined copper, 98,000 tons of virgin
copper and 95,000 tons of secondary metal; lead, 81,000 tons of refined metal;
zinc, 75,000 tons of slab metal; and tin, 33,000 tons. In almost every case, output
in 1958 was well below the peak level of previous years.
The industry, nearly half of which is situated in the Midlands, consists mainly of
factories for smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling, extrusion and drawing
of the metals mentioned above and of nickel and magnesium. The techniques of
powder metallurgy and pressure diecasting are also employed where appropriate.
Some of the non-ferrous metals such as nickel, molybdenum and tungsten are
largely used in steel alloys. New uses for non-ferrous metals with special properties
have emerged with the growth of new industries having their own particular
requirements, as, for example, production of nuclear energy (uranium, zirconium,
beryllium), jet aircraft (niobium, magnesium, titanium) and electronic apparatus
(selenium, silicon, tungsten, germanium, tantalum).
In 1958, direct exports of non-ferrous base metals (including semi-fabricated
products) were valued at £93 million, of which copper and its alloys accounted for
£55 million, aluminium and its alloys for £12 million and nickel for £12 million.
In addition, there was a further substantial export of non-ferrous metals in many
fabricated forms.
SHIPBUILDING, SHIP REPAIRING AND MARINE ENGINEERING
Britain has for centuries been one of the most important shipbuilding countries^
Modern shipbuilding dates from the middle of the nineteenth century, when the
iron-clad steam-driven vessel replaced the earlier sailing ship. Britain led the way
in the substitution of steel for iron and in the development of the steam turbine..
Between 1890 and 1913 Britain produced more than half the world’s new tonnage,
and in 1920 launched over two million tons, still the peace-time record for the
industry. In the inter-war years the problem of surplus capacity, common to all
shipbuilding countries, caused a substantial fall in activity and periodic heavy
unemployment. During the second world war the industry was fully occupied in
building and repairing warships and merchant ships and a high level of acti\ ity in
the building and repair of merchant ships has been maintained since 1945. At the
end of June 1959, however, the order books of the shipyards, which totalled 4-7
million tons, showed a decline of some 2J million tons during the past two years.
Well over three-quarters of the tonnage of ships built in the United Kingdom
comes from four areas:
1. On the river Clyde in Scotland (where the Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth,
the world’s largest ships, were built in the inter-war years).
2. On the north-east coast of England—along the lower reaches of the rivers
Tyne, Wear and Tees, and at West Hartlepool, and Blyth.
3. On the north-west coast of England—on the river Mersey, and at Barrow-
in-Furness, where the Oriana (see p. 355) was c^ue be launched in
November 1959- . .
4. At Belfast, in Northern Ireland, where the largest individual shipyard is
situated. A 45,000-ton luxury liner of revolutionary design, the Canberra,
the largest passenger vessel to be built in Britain since the Queen Elizabeth,
is under construction at Belfast for the P. and O. Company.
Y
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
328
In each of these areas there is capacity for building warships and all types of
merchant ships from large passenger liners and tankers to small sea-going ships
such as coasters and cross-Channel steamers. Ships are also built in the Southamp¬
ton area, in the Isle of Wight, and along the estuaries of the rivers Forth and Tay,
in Scotland, while numerous places along the coast build fishing vessels, yachts,
harbour craft and barges. Repair yards and dry docks are situated in all the great
ports. The majority of the fourteen largest firms engaged in repair work also
carry on shipbuilding work. The recession in shipping in 1958 and 1959 led to
reduced activity in ship repairing, and the numbers employed fell to about 64,000
by February 1959.
In 1958, there were about 215,000 persons employed in the shipbuilding and
ship repairing industries, including those employed in naval dockyards, and about
87,000 in marine engineering.
Between 1945 and 1958, British shipyards launched nearly 17 million gross
tons of shipping, including more than 4 million gross tons for foreign owners.
Output had been held back on account of shortages of steel, skilled labour and
components, and launchings in 1958, at approximately 1-4 million gross tons, did
not represent the industry’s full capacity. Of the ships launched in 1958, 41 per
cent were oil tankers and about 24 per cent were for overseas. The value of exports
of ships and boats in 1958 totalled £63 million. Orders held by United Kingdom
shipyards at the end of 1958 amounted to over 5J million gross tons; 2-1 million
gross tons were under construction.
Over the past twenty years, traditional methods of shipbuilding have undergone
radical changes, primarily due to advances in welding technique. These have led
to the production of ships in large units, 50 to 60 tons in weight, prefabricated
under cover and rapidly assembled for launching. The industry is spending large
sums on the modernisation and mechanisation of shipyards; £50 million was
invested in the period 1946-57 and it is planned to spend about £70 million in the
following five years, including the construction of berths for the building of tankers
of up to 100,000 gross tons.
The British Shipbuilding Research Association (BSRA) is engaged in all aspects
of shipbuilding research, and the Parsons and Marine Engineering Turbine
Research and Development Association (Pametrada) are developing gas turbines
and improving the efficiency of diesel and steam units. The Atomic Energy
Authority and private nuclear and marine engineering groups submitted plans in
1959 to the Admiralty for nuclear reactors to be used in the propulsion of merchant
ships, especially large tankers.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Mechanical engineering comprises a very wide range of industries, including
agricultural machinery, boilers and boilerhouse plant, machine tools, stationary
engines, textile machinery and accessories, ordnance and small arms, fabricated
steelwork, office machinery, cranes, conveyors and mechanical handling plant.
The total number of persons employed in mechanical engineering in 1958 was
about 1,100,000, and the value of exports in 1958 exceeded £550 million.
Agricultural Machinery and Tractors
The agricultural machinery industry employs about 55,000 people and, in 1958,
its annual output, including both machinery and tractors, was valued at £142
million. Britain has some of the most up-to-date tractor manufacturing plants
in the world, and production is chiefly in the hands of firms in, or closely associated
INDUSTRY
329
with, the motor vehicle industry. In 1958, production of tractors, almost all of
which were diesel-powered, totalled 186,300, and exports amounted to 107,000,
making the United Kingdom the world’s second largest exporter and producer.
Agricultural machinery and implements are manufactured in several areas, with
some concentration in Lincolnshire, East Anglia, and the north of England. In
1958, 6,550 combine harvesters and 27,800 mouldboard ploughs were produced,
but the largest expansion was in output of pick-up balers which totalled 13,560, an
increase of 70 per cent over 1957.
Exports of agricultural machinery and tractors in 1958 totalled £91-5 million—a
record; of this total, £55-3 million was accounted for by tractors, £i7'9 million by
tractor parts and £16-7 million by machinery and implements. Although Common¬
wealth countries are the largest markets, a considerable proportion of exports go to
Scandinavian countries and other parts of Europe.
Metal-Working Machine Tools
Britain was the birthplace of the machine tool industry, and by the early 1830s
had developed to an advanced stage the boring machine and screw cutting lathe,
as well as other machine tools. The industry’s output today ranges from transfer
lines for motor vehicle manufacture to electronically controlled machine tools
giving accuracies of one ten-thousandth part of an inch.
There are over 300 separate firms making machine tools, but the greater part of
the industry’s output comes from about 120 firms. The high degree of specialisation
makes it possible for the small firm to flourish. About 45,000 workers are employed.
The industry is centred mainly in the Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire, and to
a lesser extent near London and Glasgow. The Machine Tool Trades Association
of Great Britain is the representative body of most of the machine tool manufacturers
and importers and is responsible for the International Machine Tool Exhibitions
held in Britain every four years; the next exhibition is due to take place in i960.
The value of deliveries of metal-working machine tools has risen from £6 million
in 1935 to £95 million in 1957; in 1958 it was £84 million. Deliveries for export
in 1958 amounted to £20-^. million, while orders on hand at the end of 1958 totalled
nearly £56 million, of which nearly 30 per cent was for export.
Substantial expenditures on plant and buildings have been made in recent years;
it is estimated that the value of the capital employed in the industry trebled between
1948 and 1957, and about £9 million is being spent on research and development
in the three years ending in i960.
Industrial Engines
United Kingdom manufacturers have a world-wide reputation for small marine
and industrial internal combustion engines, in particular for lightweight diesel
engines. The value of deliveries of industrial engines, including small marine engines,
rose from £27 million in 1948 to the record level of over £50 million in 1956-
In 1958, 352,000 engines valued at nearly £49 rnillion were delivered, including
about £20 million for export. Production of parts and accessories accounted for a
further £15 million.
Textile Machinery
One of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical engineering industries is the textile
machinery industry which developed rapidly after the introduction of mechanical
spinning and weaving towards the end of the eighteenth century. The industry
now gives employment to about 55>000 pc°ple aud comprises about 45° firms,
situated largely in Lancashire, Yorkshire, Northern Ireland, Dundee, Leicester and
330
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nottingham, making every kind of machine and accessory for the manufacture and
processing of yams and fabrics from all types of natural and man-made fibres,
including bast and leaf fibre machinery of which the United Kingdom is still by
far the world’s largest supplier.
The industry enjoys a world-wide reputation, not only for the high quality of
its products but also because it offers a complete and modern range of equipment
■consisting of: spinning machinery, including machinery for all the preparatory
processes; winding machinery and machinery for other processes prior to weaving;
weaving machinery; knitting, hosiery and lace machinery; printing, dyeing and
•other finishing machinery; and all types of mill stores and textile machinery
accessories. In 1958, deliveries (including accessories) totalled £64 million. Exports
were valued at £40 million, or about two-thirds of total deliveries.
Contractors’ Plant and Quarrying Machinery
Production of contractors’ plant in the United Kingdom before the second world
war was mainly concerned with small excavators, concrete mixing machinery and
road surfacing plant, including road rollers. But today many new machines, especi¬
ally machinery for earth-moving, are in production; examples are crawler tractors,
motor graders, scrapers, trenchers, dozer equipment, dumpers, rippers and rooters.
Whereas output in 1935 was valued at only £2 million, in 1958 it reached nearly
£80 million, of which two-fifths was for export. The most important items were
earth-moving machinery, about 30 per cent of the total value, and excavators and
parts (about one-quarter of the total). Excavators are the largest single export
product by value.
Office Machinery
The United Kingdom office machinery industry is now second in size only to
that of the United States, and since 1946 has expanded at a remarkable rate.
In 1958, the value of deliveries of office machinery (such as accounting machinery,
punched-card machinery and some types of electronic computers, typewriters,
■dictating machines, and duplicating and copying machinery) was £51-7 million,
■of which £ig million worth was exported, including £2-5 million worth to Canadian
;and United States markets (exports of other office equipment, such as office metal
furniture and office stationery, were worth about £7-5 million). In 1958, output of
portable typewriters, which has increased by 40 per cent since 1955 to 146,000, for
the first time exceeded that of standard machines (133,000); more than half the
typewriters manufactured are for overseas, and exports in 1958 were valued at
nearly £3-8 million. British subsidiaries or associates of United States firms are
prominent in the office machinery industry.
Refrigeration Machinery
The United Kingdom industry makes a wide range of equipment and appliances,
extending from refrigerators of varying sizes suitable for domestic and commercial
use to industrial refrigeration equipment for cold stores, manufacture of chemicals
and other products, ice-making plant and refrigeration plant for ships. Production
of commercial and industrial refrigeration machinery was well established before
the second world war, but the present large production of domestic refrigerators
has been built up since 1946.
The value of the deliveries of refrigeration machinery in 1958 totalled over
£44 million, an increase of £10 million above the 1957 total; more than half
consisted of domestic refrigerators (which numbered 560,000). Exports were
valued at £15 million, and represented about one-third of the output.
INDUSTRY
331
Industrial Valves
Industrial valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are a vital
component in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. About 90 per cent of the United Kingdom production
is made by 63 firms, mainly situated in the Midlands, Glasgow and the north of
England; some 15,000 persons are employed in this branch of the engineering
industry.
Exports more than doubled between 1949 and 1958, when they were valued at
£11-5 million. The United Kingdom ranks second to the United States in world
exports of industrial valves, and accounts for about one-fifth of the total.
Boilers and Boilerhouse Plant
Boilers and boilerhouse plant manufactured in the United Kingdom have many
industrial applications. Water tube boilers of advanced design and large steam¬
raising capacity are produced by the industry for home power stations and for
export. Firms in the industry are members of the groups formed for the purpose
of building nuclear power stations, both in the United Kingdom and overseas.
Shell boilers are used for steam raising and heating purposes in factories and in
buildings. Items of steam-raising plant accessories produced include plain and
corrugated boiler furnaces, forced draught boiler furnaces and grates, stokers, fuel
economisers and preheaters, superheaters and desuperheaters, pulverisers, coal and
ash handling plant, soot blower equipment, steam pipework, and feed water
heaters. The total number of people employed in the industry is about 36,000.
In 1958, production of shell boilers and boilerhouse plant, much of which is
used in the construction of complete installations, was valued at £26 million, and
production of water tube boiler installations at £61 million. Exports in the same
year were valued at £18-5 million, of which £8-9 million was accounted for by
water tube boilers. India took nearly one-fifth of total exports.
Nuclear Power Station Plant
The design and construction of nuclear power stations is one of the outstanding
present-day enterprises of British industry. Five major groups of firms have been
formed for this purpose, consisting of leading firms in the heavy electrical engineer¬
ing, civil engineering, boiler, instrument, and associated industries. In addition to
the nuclear power stations being built for the United Kingdom electricity authori¬
ties, these groups are undertaking export orders for such stations in Italy and
Japan. Design teams from the companies concerned have been trained by the
United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) in the design of gas-cooled
graphite-moderated reactors, and the authority grants them non-exclusive manu¬
facturing licences and keeps them informed of the results of further research and
development work. Industrial firms themselves are also engaged on research into a
range of problems relating to nuclear energy.
Other concerns have also joined together to carry out research into nuclear
developments and to supply nuclear power plant. Two have arrangements with
United States firms to supply ‘package’ type reactors designed to serve less
developed countries. Others, in collaboration with the UKAEA, are studying further
possible applications of nuclear power, for example marine propulsion. Companies
have also been established for the manufacture, machining and preparation of
graphite for use in reactors. The services of United Kingdom firms of consulting
engineers are being utilised for specification planning, inspection and advice.
The Nuclear Energy Trade Associations’ Conference (NETAC) was formed
towards the end of 1956 to establish a permanent means of liaison and to pool more
332
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
effectively the experience of nuclear development among the firms and trade
associations concerned.
Steelworks Plant
As a major steel-producing country, Britain has an expanding industry for the
manufacture of steelworks plant. Up to 1939, production fell considerably short
of internal requirements. The post-war modernisation and expansion of the United
Kingdom steel industry have led to the rapid development of the steelworks plant
industry, which today provides about nine-tenths of Britain’s requirements for
steel-making equipment and can supply complete plant as efficient and economical
in operation as any in the world.
Some 40 firms produce equipment for making steel in all its stages. In 1945,
six of these firms, together capable of supplying the entire range of steel-making
plant, formed the Metallurgical Equipment Export Company Limited (MEECO)
to co-ordinate export operations and to facilitate the placing of foreign orders in
the United Kingdom for complete steelworks. This group of firms has carried out
a number of large contracts for equipping steelworks in Sweden, Norway, Spain
and France. It forms part of the consortium of engineering firms constructing the
£100 million steel plant at Durgapur, in India.
The value of deliveries of steel and non-ferrous metal works plant, including
rolling mills, amounted in 1958 to some £50 million, of which about one-quarter
was for export.
Petroleum Equipment
Before the second world war, the production of specialised equipment for the-
oil industry was on a small scale, but the rapid expansion in oil production and
refining throughout the world has given rise to a substantial export business in
British fittings and plant. In 1958, British firms within a number of industries
received orders for oil equipment and materials (excluding tankers) for the home
and export market to the value of about £122 million; these included orders for
tubes, pipe-fittings and valves (£15 million), specialised drilling and production
equipment (£10-4 million), tools and machinery (£9-1 million) and electrical
equipment (£S-6 million). Britain ranks second to the United States as a supplier
of equipment for the petroleum industry.
Chemical Plant
Some 225 firms are engaged in the highly specialised chemical engineering
industry, which designs and supplies all types of plant and equipment for use in
the manufacture of chemicals. The range of activities includes the manufacture of
distillation columns, heat exchangers, high vacuum drying equipment, and plants
for the manufacture of fertilisers, petroleum chemicals, sulphuric acid and other
basic chemicals. The value of deliveries of chemical plant in 1958 was about
£50 million.
Scientific and Industrial Instruments
Scientific instruments have been made commercially in Britain for over three
centuries, early products being chiefly navigational and optical instruments. The
last twenty years have brought a large-scale expansion of capacity in every branch
of the industry to meet the needs of the defence services during the war and, later,
the expanding world demand for all types of instruments (optical, mechanical,
pneumatic, electrical, electronic and nucleonic), for both pure and applied science.
The sector which is expanding most rapidly is that making industrial instruments—
INDUSTRY
333
an essential element in the movement towards full automation in industry. British
scientific instrument manufacturers can supply all types of instrumentation for
research, and any form of control or automatic device.
The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers’ Association estimates that the
annual turnover of all types of scientific and industrial measuring instruments is
about £70 million a year, of which about one-quarter is exported. Aeronautical
instruments are the largest export group, exceeding £2 million in 1958. Some
50,000 people are employed in the industry.
Clocks and Watches
Britain was at one time the world’s leading producer of clocks and watches, but,
by the end of the nineteenth century, production had virtually died out. The
present industry is largely a post-war development. It employs about 17,000 people,
the great majority skilled craftsmen, and many of the factories are located in the
Development Areas, and particularly in Scotland. In 1958, 8-8 million clocks,
watches and time switches, including 2-3 million watches and over 3-5 million
mechanical alarm clocks, were produced, with a total value of £11-7 million.
Exports were valued at about £2 million.
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
The United Kingdom electrical engineering industry is engaged in the manu¬
facture and installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment, ranging from
giant generators to domestic appliances and the smallest components of radio sets.
The total value of its output has risen from about £155 million in 1938 to nearly
£1,300 million in 1958. It exports large quantities of power station equipment and
other electrical machinery and appliances to all parts of the world. In terms of
monetary value it is one of the two largest exporters of electrical goods in the world,
and sends overseas about a quarter of the value of its output, as compared with
less than one-eighth in the immediate pre-war period. The value of exports in 1958
totalled £276 million, compared with the record level of £279 million in 1957.
In the five years, 1954-58, the value of the industry’s exports amounted to about
£1,300 million, more than one-sixth going to European countries.
Altogether the industry employs a labour force of more than 730,000, including
over 210,000 engaged in the manufacture of electrical machinery, over 140,000 in
the production of radio and other electronic equipment and gramophones, and
about 54,000 in wireless valves and electric lamps.
Heavy Electrical Plant
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic
advances in the generation and transmission of electricity power. The experiments
of Michael Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity as a source of
cheap and abundant power; Sir Charles Parsons produced and patented the first
turbo-dynamo, the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating sets of today. The
industry has provided the plant required for the large-scale post-war expansion
programme of the United Kingdom electricity authorities, and has built all types
of equipment for overseas countries, including the United States. In order to meet
the growing volume of orders, extensions to capacity have been carried out by the
principal manufacturers. Manufacture takes place in many areas, among the most
important being Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside, and Stafford. Among the orders
on hand are a 275,000 kilowatt (kW) generating set for commissioning in 1962
and one of 550,000 kW in 1963.
In 1958, more than 1-13 million kW of steam turbine plant of 10,000 kW and
over was exported, an increase of about one-quarter on the 1957 export total, it was
334
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
also a record year for output of hydraulic turbines and the total capacity of deliveries
exceeded i -03 million b.h.p., almost all of which was for export. The value of exports
of electrical machinery in 1958 totalled £70 million, and included £34-5 million
worth of generating sets, generators and motors, £17-4 million worth of switchgear,
and £12-6 million worth of transformers.
Radio and Other Electronic Apparatus
Production of electronic equipment is one of the most rapidly expanding of
Britain’s industries. United Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many
basic contributions to electronics—the thermionic valve, the development of radar
(a British firm has fitted nearly half the world’s radar-equipped ocean-going
ships), the first public transmission television service, and the ‘printed circuit’
which has led to far-reaching changes in methods of production in the radio
industry. The volume of the industry’s output is estimated to have risen by about
40 per cent between 1953 and 1958. Its range of activities extends from consumer
articles, such as television and radio sets, and sound reproduction equipment, to
complex industrial equipment, including machine tool controls, radio and television
transmitters (British companies have equipped television transmission systems
throughout the world), air and marine navigation aids, nucleonic control instru¬
ments and data processing machines. There are nineteen manufacturers producing
some 600 different types of transistors and semi-conductor devices, and some
25 million units are expected to be manufactured in 1959-60.
The electronics industry has no separate statistical identity, but it is estimated
that over 200,000 people are employed in the industry (including telecommunica¬
tions), and that the value of its gross output in 1958 exceeded £350 million. In that
year, production included 1,950 million electronic components (worth over £100
million), slightly fewer than 2 million television sets, and 1-78 million radio sets
and radiograms.
The value of exports (including telecommunication equipment) reached the
record level of £46-5 million in 1958 and, in recent years, exports of capital equip¬
ment (for example, marine and air navigation aids) have tended to expand faster
than consumer products. In the same year, exports of navigational aid equipment
were worth £14-5 million, exports of electronic valves and cathode ray tubes over
£5 million, and those of sound-reproducing equipment and accessories were valued
at £11 million. The largest market is the Netherlands. Indirect exports in the
form of equipment in other products, for example in aircraft, ships and machinery,
are also considerable.
Insulated Wires and Cables
This industry is concerned with the manufacture of cables and wires (including
submarine cables) for the distribution of electric power, for the telephone and
telegraph network and for many other purposes.
In 1958, workers employed in the industry totalled about 59,000. As a result of
recent amalgamations, the two largest firms account for about half the total output.
The value of deliveries of insulated wires and cables totalled £114 million in 1958.
The value of exports between 1954 and 1957 increased by 88 per cent to over £36
million, falling back to £26 million in 1958; in some degree, the fall reflected
lower prices.
Domestic Electrical Appliances
There are some 200 firms, many of them small and serving local markets, in the
United Kingdom manufacturing a wide range of electrical appliances for use in
INDUSTRY
335
the home. The removal of controls on hire-purchase transactions in the autumn of
1958 and reductions in purchase tax in the Budgets of 1958 and 1959 gave rise to
a sharp expansion in domestic sales. In 1958, deliveries included washing machines
(876,000, of which 181,000 were for export), vacuum cleaners (1,340,000, including
205,000 for export), dry-shavers (1,158,000, including 297,000 for export), cookers
(340,000) and irons (2,448,000, including 672,000 for export). The annual output is
valued at approximately £100 million, of which about one-sixth is exported.
VEHICLES
Of the engineering and allied industries, the vehicles group (comprising motor
vehicles, cycles, aircraft and railway vehicles) makes the largest contribution to
the export trade (about £503 million in 1958). In 1958, it employed about 1,200,000
people, including 311,000 in the manufacture of motor vehicles and cycles, 250,000
in the manufacture and repair of aircraft, and 150,000 in the manufacture and
repair of locomotives, railway carriages and wagons.
Motor Vehicles
In size and value the vehicles industries are headed by the motor vehicles
industry, which comprises the manufacture of cars, commercial vehicles and
tractors (see pp. 328-9). The industry is located mainly in the Midlands and the
London area, but is represented in most regions; it consists of a relatively small
number of assembly firms—headed by the ‘Big Five’ (British Motor Corporation,
Ford, Rootes, Standard, and Vauxhall), backed by a large number of specialist
engine, body and component manufacturers. It has been estimated that over 50 per
cent of the ex-works value of passenger cars consists of components purchased from
the latter. The ‘Big Five’ are responsible for about 90 per cent of the output of
complete vehicles of all kinds; the balance of the industry’s motor production
(other than tractors) consists of heavy commercial vehicles, and sports and other
specialist cars, some of which have a large market in overseas countries.
The industry has expanded very rapidly since 1945, and in 1958 produced the
record number of 1,052,000 passenger cars, 298,000 commercial goods vehicles
(compared with a record of 330,000 in 1955) and 15,000 omnibuses, coaches and
trolleybuses. Exports of passenger cars in 1958 were the highest so far reached,
487,000 (including chassis); those of commercial goods vehicles at 112,000 were
28,000 below the 1955 peak, while the 5,775 public service vehicles exported
represented an increase of over 50 per cent on 1956 exports. The value of exports
of passenger cars totalled £189 million, and that of commercial vehicles £80 million.
Exports of spares and replacement parts were valued at nearly £43 million. The
largest market for cars was the United States which took some 152,000 cars
(slightly less than one-third of total exports), followed by Canada, South Africa
and Australia. In the first half of 1959, output of passenger cars had risen to an
annual rate of 1,150,000, and car exports to an annual rate of 565,000.
Research is carried out at Lindley, Warwickshire, by the Motor Industry
Research Association, an autonomous body founded in 1946 and partly financed
by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, but mainly by the industry
itself. Individual firms also have their own research and development facilities.
Some of the new assembly plants in Britain, electronically controlled and using
the minimum of labour, are among the most advanced in the world. Leading motor
manufacturers are undertaking expansion plans, most of which were completed by
1958, costing about £150 million; in addition, makers of components and
accessories have large projects in hand.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
336
The principal trade association in the industry is the Society of Motor Manu¬
facturers and Traders Limited (SMMT), founded in 1902, which holds a Motor
Show annually in London, and a Commercial Motor Exhibition every two years.
Motor Cycles and Pedal Cycles
In 1958, output of motor cycles, including motorised bicycles (mopeds), three¬
wheeled motor vehicles, and scooters, totalled 144,000, of which 37,000 (compared
with 60,000 in 1955) were for shipment overseas, over one-quarter to the United
States. The total value of United Kingdom production, including parts and
accessories, was about £23 million, and that of exports about £5 million. United
Kingdom manufacturers introduced advanced models of scooters and mopeds in
1958, and production, which totalled about 45,000 in 1958, is expected to increase
rapidly over the next few years.
Production of pedal cycles is concentrated mainly in two groups of manufacturers.
In addition, there are several smaller companies, some of which specialise in
particular types such as racing cycles. Output in 1958 totalled 2,160,000, of which
some three-fifths were exported. In the peak year of 1955, nearly 3-6 million were
manufactured. The value of exports of pedal cycles, parts and accessories in 1958
amounted to £22-5 million; the United States, Nigeria, the Federation of Rhodesia
and Nyasaland, and Iran were the largest overseas markets.
The British Cycle and Motor Cycle Industries Association Limited holds an
annual exhibition in London, usually in the autumn.
Aircraft
The development of the aircraft industry in the United Kingdom, as in other
countries, has been strongly influenced by defence requirements, and at the peak
of war-time activity it employed nearly 2 million people as compared with some
35,000 in 1935. Following the adjustments to peace-time conditions, the industry
has undergone a further period of marked expansion, with the numbers employed
increasing from 162,000 in 1951 to 250,00° in about 20,000 fewer than in the
years 1956 and 1957. The numbers will tend to fall to some extent in the next few
years as a result of changes in defence policy. The value of the industry’s gross
output in 1958 was about £400 million. The industry manufactures a wide
range of civil and military aircraft, including gas turbine airliners, supersonic
fighters, bombers, freighters, crop-spraying aircraft and helicopters.
Britain’s achievements in developing aviation and the aircraft industry have
been notable. The science of aerodynamics was founded by Sir George Cayley
in the early nineteenth century; more recently, Sir Frank Whittle developed the
gas turbine engine aircraft, and its first applications to scheduled airline service
were the turbo-jet Comet and the turbo-prop Viscount, the latter the most
successful post-war civil aircraft now in service all over the world; sales have
exceeded 400. The larger Britannia, which entered into scheduled service in 1957,
was the first gas turbine airliper to be used on North Atlantic services and has
also been ordered by several overseas airlines. The Comet 4, which went into service
in 1958, is being used by both British and foreign airlines. The Vanguard, a turbo¬
prop aircraft with exceptionally low operating costs, is due to enter into service
with British European Airways (BEA) in i960. Other new gas turbine aircraft in
production in Britain are the Armstrong Whitworth Argosy and the Handley Page
Herald. It is estimated that nearly half the world orders for gas turbine aircraft
have been placed with United Kingdom firms. The British Overseas Airways
Corporation (BOAC) has ordered the Vickers VC10 and BEA the de Havilland
DH121; both aircraft are expected to enter into service by 1964. Britain is also the
INDUSTRY
337
largest producer in Europe of rotary wing aircraft, and more than 500 British
helicopters are in service in the world. Orders have been placed for the world’s
first vertical-take-off airliner, the Fairey Rotodyne, which made its maiden flight in
1957. The industry has been responsible for many advances in military aviation,
including the jet flap (for assisting landing and take-off within a small space), the
cartridge-operated ejector seat, and the first experimental machines to be capable
of vertical take-off from a normal horizontal position. It is also engaged on
the development of guided missiles, some of which have been delivered to the
Services.
The British aircraft industry makes an important and growing contribution to
export earnings. The record 1958 total of £154-1 million was nearly £88 million
higher than in 1955; it included £49-6 million for aero engines and £98-5 million
for aircraft and parts. In the first half of 1959, exports (especially of aero engines)
showed a further increase to £87-8 million. The largest markets for aircraft were
India, Canada, the United States, and Western Germany. Patent and royalty
payments from abroad are also important. Licence agreements have been made
for fifteen to twenty types of British aero engines to be built abroad, and a number
of foreign aircraft have been designed to use British aero engines and equipment.
The representative body of the United Kingdom aircraft industry is the Society
of British Aircraft Constructors, founded in 1916. Its annual exhibition and flying
display at Farnborough is one of the most important events of its kind.
Besides extensive research work by the industry, research on a substantial scale
on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out by the Ministry of Supply,
largely at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the National Gas Turbine Estab¬
lishment, both at Farnborough. This work is done in collaboration with the industry
and results are made known to manufacturers, who are in close touch with the
ministry’s establishments. In addition, the National Physical Laboratory under¬
takes research on aerodynamics.
Railway Vehicles
Britain was the first country to build railways, and British engineers pioneered
railway development in most parts of the world.
Locomotive production in the United Kingdom is derived from two separate
sources. British Railways own 19 main railway workshops, which are engaged in
the production and repair of locomotives and other rolling stock and in the
production of miscellaneous railway components exclusively for their own use;
private firms build locomotives and carriages and wagons of all types for both
home and export markets, some for British Railways.
The industry is organised to meet the conditions resulting from the change-over
from steam to other forms of traction by most of the world’s railways. British
Railways, under their modernisation plans, are to take delivery of 388 main line
diesel locomotives, ranging from 800 to 3,300 h.p., in 1959, compared with 83 in
1958.
In 1958, about 70,000 people were employed in making locomotives and 81,000
in making and repairing carriages and wagons. In the same year, only 43 steam
locomotives were made by private firms and 62 by British Railways. Of the 689
diesel and diesel-electric locomotives built in 1958 by private firms, 311 were for
export; 354 diesels of 275 h.p. and over were built for British Railways by their
own workshops and by private firms. In the same year, 4,200 wagons and 2,575
coaching vehicles were built by British Railways and private firms, the latter
exporting about 4,000 wagons and 400 coaching vehicles. The total value of exports
of railway vehicles in 1958 amounted to £46-3 million.
338
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MISCELLANEOUS METAL PRODUCTS
According to the 1954 Census of Production, the group of industries falling
within this classification comprises some 9,500 firms; in i957» they had a net output
valued at £414 million. It is composed of some firms making intermediate products,
such as wire, nuts and screws, drop forgings, pressings and metal windows, and
others manufacturing a great variety of finished products ranging from hand
tools, cutlery, metal hollow-ware of all kinds and metal furniture to pins and
needles.
Notes on some of these industries are given below.
Cutlery and Flatware
The production of cutlery and flatware is centred in the city of Sheffield. The
industry has been built up on the high degree of skill of its craftsmen, but the
introduction of modern machinery has largely replaced hand forging, and mass
production methods are used today by some firms in producing the cheaper range
of products. The highest quality wares, however, are still produced by skilled
craftsmen. Although in recent years there has been some increase in the size of the
production units, they remain mainly small, and, of some 400 establishments
manufacturing cutlery and flatware, over 200 still employ fewer than ten persons.
The annual output of the cutlery and flatware industry is now valued at about
j£ii million, of which £4 million represents exports, mainly to Australia, the
United States and South Africa.
Hollow-ware
This industry is mainly located in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, South
Wales and London. About 58,000 people were employed at the end of 1958.
Hollow-ware production covers a wide range of goods and these are roughly
divided into six classes: wrought steel (including galvanised, enamelled and tinned),
aluminium, tinplate and terneplate, cast iron, copper, and other metals. There is,
however, an increasing development in the production of plastic hollow-ware.
There are some 250 establishments, of varying size, which are known to be
manufacturing domestic hollow-ware, for example, saucepans and similar kitchen
utensils.
The value of annual production approaches £20 million, of which nearly one-
fifth represents exports, mainly to Commonwealth countries overseas. Aluminium
manufacturers comprise the largest single group, both in the value of total produc¬
tion and in exports.
Hand Tools
The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest industries of the United
Kingdom. Over 400 different types of hand tools—in many thousands of sizes and
patterns—are made in British factories, with Sheffield, Birmingham and other
towns in the Midlands as the most important centres. The industry has about 300
establishments employing 10 or more persons, and 450 smaller ones (the majority
very small). There are also large manufacturing firms, some of which have more
than 1,000 employees, including research and design staffs. The ‘do-it-yourself
movement has given rise to a keen demand for tools for use in the home and for
woodworking.
In 1958, hand tools to the value of £14! million were exported, nearly two-fifths
of the total output. The four largest markets are India, Australia, South Africa
and Canada; the United States is also an important buyer.
INDUSTRY
339
CHEMICALS
It is difficult to define the chemical industry since, with the increasing dependence
of industry generally on synthetic raw materials, its scope is continually widening.
But on the broadest definition the industry includes the manufacture of such
products as acids, alkalis, alcohols, industrial gases, explosives, fertilisers, dyestuffs,
soaps and detergents, petroleum chemicals, plastics materials, paints and pharma¬
ceuticals. Manufacturing these and other products, the chemical and allied trades
(other than mineral oil refining) employ nearly 500,000 people and contribute over
8 per cent of the total net output of all manufacturing industry. Exports of chemicals
are also substantial and have increased in value by nearly one-third, and in volume
by more than one-third, since 1954, amounting in 1958 to £263 million, or 8 per
cent of total United Kingdom exports. Capital investment in the industry (excluding
mineral oil refining) totalled nearly £800 million in the ten-year period 1948-57,
and is currently running at £120 million to £130 million annually.
The British chemical industry has expanded considerably during the present
century. More particularly, recent years have seen a rapid growth which has brought
the industry’s production up to about three times its pre-war level. The volume of
production has nearly doubled since 1948, and the number of employees during
that period rose by about one-fifth. This post-war expansion has been most marked
in two fields (apart from mineral oil refining)—production of plastics materials
generally, and the large-scale manufacture of a wide range of organic chemicals
from petroleum.
Heavy Chemicals and Dyestuffs
The heavy chemicals sector covers a wide range of acids, alkalis, alcohols
industrial gases and other basic chemical substances, many of which are funda¬
mental to other branches of the chemical industry as well as to other industries.
Output in 1958 of sulphuric acid, one of the most important products, at 2-24
million tons, was more than double the immediate pre-war figure.
Since the war, there has also been a greatly expanded production of raw materials
for the manufacture of synthetic detergents, while trichlorethylene has been in big
demand in the engineering trades for mechanical degreasing plants. Exports of
chemical elements and compounds, which in 1954 were valued at £50-6 million,
rose to £60-4 million in 1958; about half were inorganic products. The largest
market was Australia, followed by India, Western Germany, the United States,
the Netherlands and Canada.
The dyestuffs industry also continues to add to the already comprehensive range
of its products, many of them developed from British discoveries in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. Exports of synthetic organic dyestuffs and pigments in
1958 were valued at £10-2 million.
Petroleum Chemicals
The petroleum chemicals industry in Britain, based on the use of petroleum pro¬
ducts and refinery gases, is the largest in Europe. It provides raw materials for the
plastics, synthetic detergents, solvents, synthetic rubber and other branches of the
chemicals and associated industries. The principal plants are adjacent to the oil
refineries at Fawley (on Southampton Water), Stanlow (in Cheshire) and Grange¬
mouth (in Scotland), and at Wilton (in Yorkshire). About £95 million was invested
in plant and fixed equipment for the industry in the post-war period to 1958, and
it is estimated that over half as much again will be spent in the three years 1959-61
on new plant expected to be in operation by the end of 1961. The oil companies
340
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have a large stake in the industry. Production in 1958 totalled about 320,000 tons
(carbon content), nearly double the 1954 quantity. Plants designed to expand
substantially supplies of ethylene, styrene monomer, butadiene and other basic
materials are being brought into production.
Plastics
The first plastic, celluloid, originally known as Tarkesine’, was produced in
Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes. Modern plastics originating in Britain include
‘Perspex’, polyethylene and silicones. (Silicones, which were discovered by Pro¬
fessor Kipping at Nottingham, were developed in the United States and have been
made in Britain since 1952.) Since 1939, there has been a very large increase in
the overall production of plastics materials. Expansion during the last few years
has been concentrated mainly on thermoplastic materials such as polyethylene (used
in cable coverings, packaging—notably for foodstuffs—and domestic mouldings),
polystyrene (a cheap non-inflammable material used for toys, light mouldings and,
more recently, for durable consumer goods), and polyvinyl chloride (known as
PVC, and made into industrial conveyor belting as well as a variety of other con¬
sumer goods such as raincoats and curtains). Britain was the first country to
manufacture plastic-coated steel, in 1957.
In the period 1948-58, net sales of plastics materials have multiplied more than
threefold to a total of 416,000 tons in 1958; compared with 1954, net sales have
increased by over 50 per cent. Thermoplastic materials, which in 1958 accounted
for 245,000 tons, have increased by nearly 90 per cent since 1954. Exports have
also grown rapidly, and (including waste and scrap) 123,000 tons, valued at more
than £32 million, were exported in 1958; 40 per cent of exports go to European
countries. The industry is undertaking large extensions to its productive capacity
and is also spending considerable sums on development of improved materials.
Plants for commercial production of polypropylene were built in Britain in 1959-
Fertilisers
The production of fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of the British
scientists, Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert, and the research now carried on
at Rothamsted, Hertfordshire, and at the Macaulay Institute, Aberdeen, is of
world-wide importance. Output of nitrogenous fertilisers (in terms of nitrogen
content) in 1958 totalled 342,000 tons, nearly three times the pre-war volume, and
330,000 tons of phosphatic fertilisers were produced (in terms of phosphate
content), more than twice the pre-war figure. Sales in the form of compound
fertilisers in granulated form are increasing; production of these was 2-2 million
tons (gross weight) in 1958.
The value of exports of manufactured fertilisers, almost all in the form of
ammonium sulphate, totalled £5-4 million in 1958, the principal markets being
Ceylon and other Commonwealth countries overseas.
Pesticides
Important British discoveries in recent years have led to major developments in
the production of selective weed-killers such as methyl chloro phenoxy acetic acid
(MCPA), and of insecticides based on benzenehexachloride (BHC). Overseas markets
take the major proportion of United Kingdom production of these and other well-
known pesticides, such as systemic insecticides, and exports reached a value of
some £3-9 million in 1958. New products for plant protection, notably newforms
of synthetic hormones, are being developed.
INDUSTRY
341
Pharmaceuticals and Toilet Preparations
Many of the pharmaceutical products sold today have been introduced in the
past twenty years. These products include sulphonamides, antibiotics (e.g.,
penicillin, whose properties were first discovered by Sir Alexander Fleming in
1928), hormones, anti-malarial drugs (e.g., ‘Paludrine’), liver extracts, anti¬
histamines and anti-tubercular drugs.
Recent British discoveries include the isolation of the basic molecule of peni¬
cillin, and a new drug for the treatment of leprosy. Some £4 million a year is spent
on research. About half of the larger drug manufacturing firms in Britain are
subsidiaries of overseas concerns. Total exports of medicinal and pharmaceutical
preparations and druggists’ wares in 1958 amounted to a value of £40-5 million,
of which £8-2 million worth consisted of antibiotics.
The toilet preparations and soap industry has shown a steady expansion since the
war, and the value of exports was £26-2 million in 1958, about one-quarter being
detergents. Although many firms are subsidiaries of American and French com¬
panies, there are several wholly British firms whose products have world-wide sales.
Paints
About 40,000 people are employed in the paint industry, which comprises some
600 establishments; about half the total production is accounted for by fewer than
40 establishments, each employing more than 200 persons.
In recent years, the application of improved techniques has resulted in rapid
development, in particular the use of important new ranges of synthetic resins and
various types of titanium dioxide pigment. The value of direct exports of pigments
and paints rose by one-third between 1954 and 1958 to a total of £23-8 million, of
which 9 per cent represented shipments to Canada, the largest single market.
One-third of the exports are in the form of ready-mixed paints, which command
a growing market overseas. The industry’s indirect contribution to exports in the
form of surface coatings for finished goods is also very considerable.
Isotopes and Radioactive Materials
Isotopes and radioactive materials, used in medicine, agriculture and industry,
are produced in the United Kingdom at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment
at Harwell and dispatched from there and from the Radiochemical Centre at
Amersham. Britain is the world’s largest exporter of these substances. In the year
ended 31st March, 1959, sales of isotopes and related products were valued at about
£800,000, some 60 per cent representing sales to overseas countries.
TEXTILES AND CLOTHING
The value of exports in the textiles and clothing group as a whole, including
manufactures of wool, cotton, linen, jute, silk, rayon and other man-made fibres,
lace, hosiery, woven apparel and carpets, amounted in 1958 to about £340 million
or slightly over 10-5 per cent of total United Kingdom exports. Nearly 1-5 million
people were employed in these industries at the end of 1958, including about
216,000 in the cotton textile industry, 196,000 in the wool textile industry, 83,000
in rayon and other man-made fibre production and weaving and in silk, 89,000
in textile finishing and associated processes, 120,000 in hosiery and knitted goods,
and about half a million in clothing (excluding footwear).
Cotton
The invention of mechanical spinning and weaving in the second half of the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
342
eighteenth century led to cotton becoming Britain’s chief consumer goods industry
and cotton piece-goods its largest export during the nineteenth century.
In the twentieth century, increasing foreign competition and the tendency of
many countries, notably India, to set up their own textile industry cut progressively
into British markets. During the second world war, numbers of mills were closed
and, wdiile many were brought back into production in the early post-war years, the
industry has recently again been declining in size, although it remains one of the
largest consumer goods industries. The labour force has dropped to about 50 per
cent of the 1937 level, and at the end of 1958, there were about 125,000 persons
employed in the spinning and doubling section of the industry, and 91,000 in
weaving. Two-thirds of the workers in the industry are women.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county being
mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning. Manchester is
the commercial centre. The Cotton Exchange, which deals in raw cotton, is situated
in Liverpool.
In April 1959, the Government announced a plan to reduce surplus capacity in
the industry. Exchequer funds will pay for two-thirds of the cost of removing
surplus capacity, and will provide a grant of about one-quarter towards costs of
modernisation and re-equipment. The scheme is estimated to cost about £30
million spread over five years, and will be administered by a special agency under
the Cotton Board, a statutory body with the constitution and powers of a
Development Council.
Production rose steadily from 1945 until the end of 1951, since when the level of
activity has been subject to marked fluctuations. Technical advances, notably the
introduction of new finishes for cotton goods with drip-dry, crease-resisting and
other properties, have helped to widen the industry’s markets, but the rising scale
of duty-free imports of grey cloth (240 million square yards in 1958) has caused
concern. Agreements have been, or are being, negotiated with Commonwealth
countries to fix ceilings for such imports. Production of cotton, man-made fibres
and mixture cloth in the industry in 1958 was about 50 per cent of the 1937 level,
and consumption of raw cotton totalled some 287,000 tons as against about
639,000 tons in 1937. The United States in 1958 supplied nearly half Britain’s
imports of raw cotton, and the second largest supplier was the Sudan, which
provides the bulk of the long-staple varieties.
Exports have suffered as a result of widespread import restrictions and the
tendency for industries, protected by quotas, to be established in former markets.
In 1958, the value of exports of yarn, thread and woven fabrics amounted to £71
million. About 384 million square yards of cotton fabrics valued at £51 million
were sent overseas, two-thirds to Commonwealth countries, the largest markets
being Australia, South Africa and New Zealand.
The British Cotton Industry Research Association (Shirley Institute), founded
in 1919, undertakes scientific and technical research in connection with cotton and
its utilisation.
Wool
The United Kingdom wool textile industry, the largest in the world, is the most
ancient of Britain’s staple industries and has been an important source of wealth
since medieval times. There are two main branches—woollen and worsted. W hile
about 85 per cent of woollens and 95 per cent of worsteds are made in the West
Riding of Yorkshire, Scotland and the West of England have retained their impor¬
tance as specialised producers of high quality woollen cloth. The woollen side of
the industry is normally organised on a vertical basis, with each firm undertaking
INDUSTRY
343
the full process of manufacture from raw material to finished product, but for a
variety of reasons the worsted industry is organised horizontally—combing, spin¬
ning and weaving being done by separate firms. In recent years, however, there has
been a tendency in the worsted industry towards the formation of holding com¬
panies controlling a number of subsidiary combing, spinning and weaving firms,
all the worsted processes being carried out within the one organisation. Small firms,
employing fewer than 300 workers, predominate in the industry. Output reached a
post-war peak at the end of 1950, but this was followed by the recession of 1951-52,
which reached the lowest point in the middle of 1952. Production subsequently
recovered and output in some sections in 1957 exceeded the level of 1950. A world¬
wide decline in the wool textile industry gave rise to a marked drop in output in
1958; a recovery was in evidence by the end of that year.
Persons employed in the industry in December 1958 numbered 196,000.
The United Kingdom’s annual consumption of virgin wool is about 480 million
lb. (clean weight), equivalent to about 20 per cent of total world consumption
(excluding Eastern Europe and China), and about 600 million lb. if re-used and
re-processed wools are included. Blending of wool with man-made fibres has grown
rapidly and accounted for some 10 per cent of total consumption of all fibres
used in the industry in 1957; in 1958, however, the price of wool having dropped
sharply, the proportion tended to fall.
The wool industry remains one of Britain’s leading export industries, with about
one-quarter of its total output shipped abroad, despite the obstacles in the form of
widespread import restrictions which it has to face; the total value of exports of
wool tops, woollen and worsted yarns and woven fabrics in 1958 was about £119
million, of which £25 million represented exports to the United States and Canada.
In addition, there were considerable exports of wool in other forms, including
carpets and clothing.
Research is carried on mainly by the Wool Industries Research Association,
which is financed partly by a statutory levy on the industry and partly by a grant
from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
The National Wool Textile Export Corporation, which is financed by a statutory
levy on the industry, is responsible for assistance to exporters and for developing
overseas markets.
Man-made Fibres
Rayon is produced from cellulose, either in the form of woodpulp or cotton
linters. Its early development took place to a large extent in Britain. Production is
spread throughout the Midlands and Lancashire, with outposts in other areas.
There are seven companies engaged in the production of rayon, four producing
only viscose, two producing only acetate, and one both viscose and acetate.
One company accounts for over four-fifths of total output. Annual average produc¬
tion has in recent years been of the order of 420 million lb., of which about 240
million lb. was in the form of staple fibre—about ten times the pre-war average.
Exports in 1958 were lower than for some years and fell to £2-8 million in value.
Technical problems are studied at the research station of the British Rayon
Research Association at Wythenshawe, Manchester.
Nylon is produced from a combination of chemical substances, most of which
are obtained from indigenous raw materials. Production of nylon yarn started in
Britain in 1941 for military uses, such as parachutes. Large-scale production began
at Pontypool, in South Wales, in 1948. Capacity at this plant has been greatly
increased, and a second factory came into operation at Doncaster, in Yorkshire,
z
344
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in 1955. A third plant is to be opened near Gloucester in i960. Nylon is used
extensively for clothing fabrics and stockings and has wide industrial uses, including
the manufacture of tyre cords, fishing nets, fire hose, ropes and conveyor belts.
Annual productive capacity is expected to amount to 70 million lb. by i960.
‘ Terylene’ polyester fibre, a product of research in the laboratories of the Calico
Printers’ Association, Manchester, is made on a large scale at Wilton, Yorkshire,
by Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. Annual productive capacity was increased
to 30 million pounds weight in 1959, and it is planned to construct a new plant,
also at Wilton, which will enable annual production to reach 50 million pounds.
A plant for the manufacture of ‘Terylene’ has been set up in Canada, and the
British patent holders have licensed its manufacture in other countries, including
France, the German Federal Republic, Italy, the Netherlands, and Japan.
‘Fibrolane’ is a British-made protein fibre, with wool-like properties, derived
from casein. Other man-made fibres at present produced in Britain include
‘Courlene’ (a polythene fibre), and 'Alginate' (derived from seaweed).
‘Courtelle’, an acrylic fibre, has been manufactured on a commercial scale at
Grimsby, in Lincolnshire, since early in 1959. A plant to manufacture another
acrylic fibre, ‘Acrilan’, started operating at Coleraine, in Northern Ireland, early in
1959 and is expected to reach full production of n million lb. a year in i960.
Since the advent of rayon in its various forms and, more recently, of the new
man-made fibres, British textile manufacturers have been developing a number of
ways of blending these with natural fibres and with each other. By this means they
can produce economically fabrics and garments with attractive and useful new
combinations of texture, colour, and finish, and with moisture-absorbent, hard-
wearing, drip-dry and crease-resisting properties.
Hosiery and Knitwear
The hosiery and knitwear industry employs about 120,000 workers, of whom
two-thirds are women. About 80 per cent of the 1,100 firms in the industry employ
fewer than 50, and only three manufacturers have more than 4,000 employees. The
industry is widely distributed throughout Great Britain, with Scotland and the
east Midlands as the two most important centres. Annual consumption of yarns
totals about 80,000 tons, nearly half of which are woollen yarns, and a growing
proportion are of fully synthetic fibres. Exports of stockings and socks in 1958
were worth £3-5 million, Canada being the largest market, while those of knitted
goods totalled £7-9 million; sales to the largest buyer, the United States, have
dropped appreciably since 1956.
The Hosiery and Allied Trades Research Association, with laboratories at
Nottingham, undertakes collective research, and is particularly concerned with the
improvement of quality.
Other Textiles
Linen has been made in Britain for more than a thousand years and it is believed
that the art of linen weaving was already being practised during the seventh
century. Today it is an industry mainly of small firms, chiefly in Northern Ireland
(the greatest linen manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder
in Scotland. The principal raw material of the industry is flax, which is mainly
imported (the chief supplier is Belgium), but considerable quantities of man-made
fibres and cotton are also used, and a certain amount of soft hemp and jute, particu¬
larly in Scotland. Broadly speaking, the Northern Ireland industry concentrates on
INDUSTRY
345
the lighter types of fabrics, while in Scotland production is largely, but not
exclusively, of coarse linens and canvas. Exports were valued at £14 million in
1958, including £8-4 million worth of linen fabrics, £2-1 million of flax linen
yarns and £1 million of damask table linen. Technical problems are investigated by
the Research Institute of the Linen Industry Research Association, formed in 1919.
Jute is manufactured on a large scale in Dundee—the centre of the world’s
oldest jute industry. About 40 per cent of jute yarn production is utilised in the
manufacture of carpets, cordage, ropes and other products. The balance is woven
into fabrics for a wide range of uses, but principally for packaging material.
Annual production of jute tissues averages about 80,000 tons. Some 17,600 workers
are employed. The value of exports in 1958 totalled about £4 million (including
second-hand bags).
Research facilities are concentrated at the laboratories of the British Jute Trade
Research Association. About £11 million has been spent on a post-war re-equipment
programme.
Silk exports were valued at about £0-5 million in 1958. Raw silk is supplied mainly
from Japan, China and Italy.
Clothing
The clothing industry in Britain, the largest in Europe, is one of the most
important employers of labour with about 500,000 workers, three-quarters of whom
are women and girls. It had a gross annual output valued at about £540 million
(including hats and other millinery) in 1957. Although the industry is highly
mechanised—only in the women’s outerwear section and in the quality fashion
trade do tailors and dressmakers predominate—the typical firm is small. Unofficial
estimates suggest that five-sixths of the concerns in the industry employ fewer than
100 workers. The principal manufacturing centres are London, Leeds and Man¬
chester. Many of the newest factories are located in the Development Areas.
Both the textile trades and the ready-to-wear clothes industries are engaged in
promoting British fashions. The fashion industry, principally through the Apparel
and Fashion Industry’s Association, and the textile trades, through the Textile and
London Fashion Organisation, arrange fashion shows. In the haute couture branch
of the trade, models are shown by the Incorporated Society of London Fashion
Designers.
Carpets
There are some 70 manufacturers in the United Kingdom of the traditional
Axminster and Wilton carpets, ranging in size from enterprises with several
thousand employees to very small firms with only a few workers. In addition, there
is also an expanding branch of the industry engaged in making tufted carpets, a
form of carpeting in which the pile is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Over
30,000 workers are employed, and the principal manufacturing centres include
Kidderminster (in Worcestershire), Halifax and Dewsbury (in the West Riding of
Yorkshire), Durham, Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland). Wool accounts for
about 90 per cent of the raw materials used in the surface yarns in carpet manu¬
facture, and, in fact, more than two-thirds of the traditional carpets produced are
of a pure woollen or worsted pile.
According to the Federation of British Carpet Manufacturers, 1958 was the
most successful year in the history of the industry. Sales (at ex-factory values)
totalled 48-7 million square yards, valued at foi-i million, compared with £66-8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
346
million in 1957. Exports, however, have been faced with growing import restric¬
tions in overseas markets, and the 1958 total at a value of £9-2 million was the
lowest for several years.
FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO
The industries coming within the food, drink and tobacco group employ more
than 900,000 people, and the annual value of exports averages about £200 million.
Notes on some of these industries are given below.
Bread and Flour Confectionery and Biscuits
The average weekly household consumption of bread per head of population
in Great Britain in 1958 was about 3 pounds. In England and Wales particularly,
the small ‘family’ type of baker, producing bread by hand or by semi-mechanical
methods, is still numerous, but there is an increasing trend towards concentrating
production in large mechanical bakeries; about 60 per cent of bread is made in
these bakeries, which specialise in sliced and wrapped loaves. In the smaller
bakeries, numbering about 12,000, production of cake and other flour confectionery
is usually allied to bread production. Some 190,000 people are employed in the
bread and flour confectionery industry.
Production of biscuits, of which there are about 250 manufacturers with some
56,000 employees, is estimated to be about 75 per cent higher than in the
immediate pre-war period. Weekly consumption of biscuits per head in Britain
was about 5J oz. in 1958. British biscuits have gained a world-wide reputation, and
despite the problem of import restrictions in several overseas markets, exports in
1958 were valued at £5-6 million.
Cocoa, Chocolate and Sugar Confectionery
The chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which employs some 110,000
persons, is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and many
hundreds of medium-sized and smaller manufacturers. The industry’s products
are highly competitive and highly advertised. Over 90 per cent of the production of
chocolate and sugar confectionery is in the hands of about 100 firms, while the
more specialised products—cocoa powder, cocoa butter and chocolate covering—are
manufactured by about 50 firms.
The main ingredients used by the industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose, milk,
nuts and fats. Production of chocolate and sugar confectionery for home and export
sale totalled about 660,000 tons in 1958. There are virtually no restrictions on
imports of chocolate and confectionery, but these totalled less than 9,000 tons in
1958. Consumption of chocolate and confectionery in the United Kingdom is far
higher than in any other country, being equivalent to about 8i oz. per head per
week in 1958, compared with 7 oz. per head before the war. In 1958, the value of
exports of chocolate, sugar confectionery and cocoa products totalled £18-7
million, compared with a record level of over £19 million in 1955- About two-thirds
of exports consist of cocoa products and chocolate, and about one-third goes to
dollar markets. Manufacturers’ total annual turnover is well over £200 million,
and retail expenditure on chocolate and sugar confectionery is estimated in 1958 to
have been at the record level of £259 million.
Jams and Marmalades
The jams and marmalades industry in the United Kingdom is highly competitive,
with the three largest manufacturers accounting for over half the total output.
Changes in the pattern of consumer expenditure on food in the past ten years have
INDUSTRY
347
led to a gradual fall in production—from 329,000 tons in 1949 to 214,000 tons in
1957, recovering to 223,000 tons in 1958. Strawberry, raspberry and blackcurrant
jams have the largest sales. There is a sizable export trade in high-quality products,
especially marmalade, and £i-6 million worth was exported in 1958.
Canned Foods and Quick-Frozen Foods
The British Navy was using canned foods as long ago as 1813, but it was not
until the present century that a considerable industry developed. Rapid expansion
has taken place since 1935, and the annual sales of the industry are now believed
to be worth some £200 million.
By far the largest product of the canning industry is vegetables, of which 509,000
tons were produced in 1958; over one-third is processed peas, while output of
beans in tomato sauce is almost as large. About 90,000 tons of fruit (in particular,
plums) are canned annually. Canned soup production has increased by over two-
thirds since 1953, totalling 155,000 tons in 1958; the largest firm probably accounts
for half the total market. Canned meat production has also risen sharply, the 1958
total of 46,000 tons being 50 per cent higher than in 1953. About 75,000 workers
are employed in preserving fruit and vegetables. Exports of canned fruit in 1958
reached a value of £4 million. Basic research is undertaken by the British Food
Manufacturing Industries Research Association.
The quick freezing of foods has been expanding rapidly in Britain, particularly
since 1954. The most important products are white fish—some 43,000 tons were
quick-frozen in 1958—and vegetables, about two-thirds being peas. Other products
include fruit, poultry, meat and ready-prepared foods.
Whisky
Scotch whisky, which was first distilled at least as long ago as the fifteenth
century, enjoys world-wide popularity. Whiskies are blends of twenty or more
different kinds, some made from malted barley, some from other grains. Whisky
requires several years to mature, and the 52 million proof gallons (a record)
produced in 1958 will not be on sale for some years. Stocks of whisky amount to
about 240 million proof gallons. Whisky is one of the United Kingdom’s largest
dollar earners; more than half the annual exports, which in 1958 attained the highest
level so far recorded of £56 million, are shipped to the United States. Other valuable
markets are Canada and other Commonwealth countries, and Venezuela.
Gin
Production of gin in the United Kingdom has risen steadily since 1952, and in
1958 amounted to over 7 million proof gallons (an increase of nearly half since 1952),
over one-third of which was exported. The main distilleries are situated in London,
and one group of companies accounts for about half the total output. Although
most of the larger manufacturers also have distilleries overseas, exports have
expanded, and in 1958 were worth £3-8 million, the United States being much the
largest market.
Brewing and Malting
Brewing. There are some 400 separate breweries located throughout the United
Kingdom, of which the main centres are London, south Lancashire, Burton-on-
Trent (Staffordshire), Birmingham, and Edinburgh. In the main, brewers distribute
their beer for consumption within 30 miles of the brewery, but some of the largest
firms send their beer all over the country. Much of the beer is consumed in
draught, but in recent years the demand for bottled beer has increased and is now
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
348
probably as much as two-fifths of total consumption. Bottling is carried out by both
brewers and independent bottling establishments. The industry’s raw materials are
malt (chiefly made from home-grown barley), sugar and hops. Consumption of
beer has declined appreciably from the exceptional levels of the immediate post-war
years; the drop has, however, largely been halted since 1951. Canned beer is becom¬
ing increasingly popular; output in 1958 was estimated at about 100 million cans.
Substantial capital investment, estimated at about £8 million a year, is being
undertaken, together with a similar sum for the installation of bottling equipment.
The excise duty on beer accounts for about two-fifths of the retail price. In the year
ended 31st March, 1959, duty of £253 million was paid on nearly 25 million bulk
barrels. Since the war the industry has maintained a sizable export trade, which in
1958 was valued at £2-8 million.
Malting. There are several hundred malting units in the United Kingdom. Some
of these are operated by brewers who make all or part of their own malt. The
remainder are operated by maltsters whose product is sold principally to brewers at
home and abroad, but some malt is supplied to distillers and vinegar brewers, and
also to the manufacturers of malt extract for use in the baking, confectionery and
textile industries. The popularity of British malt has been established with brewers
throughout the world, and in 1958 malt exports were valued at £1-7 million.
These malting units are mainly situated in the barley-growing areas which lie east
of a line drawn from Edinburgh, through Burton-on-Trent (Staffordshire), to Lyme
Regis (Dorset).
Malting usually takes place in the cooler months following the harvest, but with
the aid of air-conditioning plant and other modern developments some units can
operate throughout the year. Grain is the only raw material used by the industry—
chiefly home-grown barley especially grown for the purpose.
Soft Drinks
The rapid expansion of the soft drinks industry in the years since the second
world war, and especially since 1954, reflects both changes in public taste and
rising standards of living. The industry’s output in 1958 was estimated at 332
million gallons in terms of ready-to-drink liquid, a slight fall, compared with 1957,
duetothewetsummerof 1958, but some 200 million gallons more than the 1938 total.
The industry may be divided into three broad groups: several hundred small
manufacturers; about 150 larger firms supplying a regional market only; and some
20 firms producing widely advertised brands which are marketed on a national
scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by firms in the production of the
various types—e.g., carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes and cordials,
tonic waters and ‘mixers’, and concentrated drinks (in which the whole fruit is
used).
Tobacco
The United Kingdom tobacco industry, which employs some 48,000 people*
manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other tobacco goods sold in the country.
In 1958, personal expenditure on these goods amounted to £1,030 million (of
which over two-thirds was tax revenue) and, in addition, exports worth £22 million
(some 90 per cent of which were cigarettes) were shipped to a large number of
overseas markets. The main centres of production are in and around Bristol,
Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham, Glasgow and Belfast.
The two largest manufacturing groups now account for about 90 per cent of output,
compared with 80 per cent some six years ago.
INDUSTRY
349
The tobacco industry uses over 300 million lb. annually of raw tobacco of all
types, all of which is imported. The main sources are the United States, Rhodesia,
India and Canada, in that order. Most of this tobacco goes to make cigarettes
(nearly seven-eighths) and pipe and cigarette tobaccos; about 12 per cent of
cigarette sales are in the form of filter-tipped brands, with the demand for ‘king-
size’ (i.e. larger) types rising markedly. There is also some production of cigars
and snuff; cigars, chiefly Cuban, Jamaican and Dutch, are also imported.
MISCELLANEOUS INDUSTRIES
This broad heading covers a very wide variety of industries and groups of
industries, from building materials to toys, employing over 1-7 million people at
the end of 1958.
Notes on some of these industries are given below.
Brickmaking
Introduced by the Romans, brickmaking is one of Britain’s oldest industries,
and something like 2,000 different varieties of building bricks are produced in the
United Kingdom today. These are made in some 800 works which range from
small seasonal yards using traditional hand methods to highly mechanised plants.
More than two-fifths of production consists of the Fletton type of brick, demand
for which is steadily increasing and which is made mainly in the Peterborough and
Bedfordshire areas. The chief producer is the largest brick manufacturing company
in the world. As a result of changes in building methods, total output of bricks
(6,500 million a year) has fallen to about 15 per cent below the 1938 quantity.
Refractories
Refractories are essential in the operation of blast furnaces, steel furnaces and
other metallic furnaces and are used extensively in many other industries, including
non-ferrous metals, ceramics, glassware and chemicals, in nuclear energy and jet
propulsion. The chief raw materials required for their manufacture are indigenous
except for magnesite (which is obtained partly from overseas and partly from
production of sea-water magnesia) and chrome ore.
The chief centres of the industry are in the Midlands, west Yorkshire, north¬
east England, Scotland, and Wales. Production has averaged about 2 million tons
a year since 1948, mainly for home use. Exports of refractory construction materials
in 1958 were valued at about £4-2 million, as compared with £2-8 million in 1955.
Domestic Pottery
The domestic pottery industry is one of the oldest craft industries in Britain;
the making of domestic pottery dates back to before the Roman occupation. The
chief raw materials, china clay, ball clay and china stone, come from Devon,
Cornwall and Dorset, where known deposits of high quality are expected to last for
at least 100 years.
The Stoke-on-Trent area in Staffordshire, comprising the six towns of Stoke,
Burslem, Tunstall, Hanley, Fenton and Longton, is the centre of the industry and
95 per cent of production capacity is concentrated in that area. Other important
factories are at Worcester, Derby, Bristol and Poole. The industry employs about
35,000 workers, of whom more than half are engaged in the production of table
and ornamental ware.
Of the £32 million worth of pottery produced in 1958, over £14 million worth
was for export. About three-quarters of bone china exports go to Canada and the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
350
United States, and the largest markets for decorated earthenware are Canada,
Australia and the United States.
The modern industry benefits from a tradition of good design and craftsmanship
(made world-famous by a long line of great British potters) which, with the
excellent technical qualities of its products, is the basis of the large overseas and
domestic demand for its products. Among the famous makes of British pottery are:
Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton and Royal Crown Derby.
Glass
Britain has a large and efficient glass industry, the third largest in the world,
with a wide diversity of products, employing some 75,000 workers. The section of
the industry devoted to the manufacture of plate and sheet glass in their various
forms is organised for quantity production, and the development of modern methods
has enabled the industry to cater for an increasing range of requirements. Glass
can now be supplied in sheets of great size and can be made almost unbreakable.
Its use for internal decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has
greatly increased in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced for
the motor industry. A British firm has developed, at a cost of £4 million, a revolu¬
tionary glass-making process for producing ‘float glass’.
Rapid technical progress has led to the large-scale production of tubular glass,
optical glass and also glass insulators for use in electricity transmission. Glass
fibres, used for insulating purposes and as reinforcement for plastics, are thought
to offer great scope for further development. They are already being used in the
manufacture of travel goods, boats and perambulators. Bottles and jars, table ware
and lamp bulbs are now made by completely automatic machinery and the advance
of the industry is shown by the increase in exports of all glassware (including plate
and sheet glass) from a negligible level in 1938 to a value of £16-8 million in 1958;
this total included £9-7 million worth of plate and sheet glass, of which more
than one-third was exported to North America.
A traditional product is hand-made lead-crystal glassware of very high quality;
a high proportion of output is exported, mostly to Australia, South Africa, New
Zealand, Canada, and the United States.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research Asso¬
ciation, and much research work is also carried on by the Department of Glass
Technology at Sheffield University, the first of its kind in the world.
Cement
The cement industry of the United Kingdom is chiefly concerned with the
manufacture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in 18241
this material and the methods of its production have been the subject of continuous
technical improvement and intensive research. The capacity of the industry, which
employs about 16,000 people, has increased substantially since the war to meet the
growing demands of the building industry. Annual output, which reached 7'7
million tons in 1938, had risen to 12-8 million tons by 1956, falling back to xi-6
million tons in 1958, valued at more than £70 million. One group of companies is
responsible for about two-thirds of total output. In 1958, i-18 million tons (valued
at £6-5 million) were exported, nearly half to West Africa, compared with a peak
total of 2-06 million tons in 1952; the fall reflects the expansion of production
capacity in overseas countries.
Jewellery, Gold and Silver Ware
The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware is an industry in which British
INDUSTRY
351
craftsmen are heirs to a great tradition. The quality of the metal in gold and silver
wares made or sold in the United Kingdom is guaranteed by a ‘hall-mark’. The
law requires that gold and silver plate shall not be sold until it has been hall-marked
at one of the six Assay Offices situated at London, Birmingham, Chester, Sheffield,
Edinburgh, and Glasgow. A departmental committee has recommended, in a
report published in March 1959, that the number of assay offices should be reduced
to four, that hall-marks should also be applied to platinum, and that statutory
regulations should be strengthened.
The importance of maintaining definite standards of fineness for wares of gold
and silver has always been recognised, and the Goldsmiths’ Company in London has
carried out the assay and hall-marking of such wares since 1327 when Edward III
gave the company its first charter.
Toys
The toy industry in Britain, the largest in Europe, has expanded greatly in the
last ten years, and at the end of 1958 it employed about 30,000 persons. There
are over 300 manufacturers, mostly small in size; the dozen largest manufacturers are
responsible for half the output which, in 1958, amounted in value to nearly £36
million. Exports in that year were valued at over £7 million, compared with £0-5
million in 1938; Canada, Australia and the United States are the leading markets.
The industry estimates that annual expenditure in the United Kingdom on toys
averages £5 per child. Current trends are towards increased production of small-
scale precision models of equipment and vehicles and a greater use of plastic
materials, but demand for traditional lines, such as toy soldiers, train sets and
dolls, remains unaffected.
Leather
Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. Tanneries are situated in
most parts of Britain, but there are important concentrations in Lancashire, York¬
shire, the north Midlands and the London area. Many different types of leather
are produced, ranging from the heavy types produced for industrial uses, such as
machinery belting, to all types of high quality leather for footwear and for leather
goods.
At the end of 1958, about 31,000 persons were employed in the leather tanning
and dressing and associated industries, and 23,000 in the leather goods industries.
The United Kingdom is the world’s leading leather exporter, with exports valued
in 1958 at £14-7 million, of which £4'4 rnillion worth went to North America and
£2-1 million worth to Western Germany. Research into tanning processes and the
improvement of the quality of finished leather is undertaken by the British Leather
Manufacturers’ Research Association.
Leather Footwear
The British footwear industry is among the most important in the world, and
factories are located throughout the United Kingdom. Some areas concentrate on
production of particular types, e.g., the Rossendale Valley region of Lancashire for
slippers, Bristol for heavy industrial footwear for miners and agricultural workers,
Northampton for men’s and youths’ footwear, and Leicester for women s and girls
shoes. There are about 600 firms in the industry, producing footwear of all types.
The British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world-wide
reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
At the end of 1958, some 112,000 persons were employed in the manufacture of
footwear (excluding rubber footwear); in that year, output totalled 138 million
352
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pairs, of which 103 million pairs represented boots and shoes made mainly of
leather. The United Kingdom is the world’s second largest exporter of footwear,
and in 1958, 7 million pairs, valued at about £10 million, were exported. The
United States took about one-fifth of these exports and Canada about one-tenth.
Paper and Board
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until 1678,
but records show that some paper was produced as far back as the year 1492.
About two-thirds of the many different materials, totalling some 3-8 million
tons a year, used by the industry come from abroad. The balance consists mainly of
waste paper recovered from domestic sources.
Total production in 1958 of all types of paper and board (including newsprint)
amounted to 3-5 million tons—the highest ever reached—compared with a pre-war
figure of 2-6 million tons. Of this, newsprint accounted for 626,000 tons as against
800,000 tons pre-war, and board for x-o6 million tons; since 1953, output of board
has risen by one-third, mainly as a result of its growing use as packaging material.
Exports for the same period amounted to 217,000 tons, valued at £26-4 million,
including 105,000 tons of newsprint, valued at £6-4 million. The bulk of the export
trade is to sterling area countries, mainly Australia, South Africa, New Zealand,
the Irish Republic, and India.
The industry comprises some 200 mills producing almost every type of paper
and board. There are also many firms engaged in the conversion of paper and
board for various purposes. Considerable interests are held abroad; there are
pulp and paper producing mills in the United States, Canada and other parts of the
Commonwealth, and in the Scandinavian countries.
Domestic Furniture
The domestic furniture industry in Britain consists chiefly of small firms;
in the ten years to 1959, the total number of firms has dropped by about one-third
to under 2,000. London is the largest centre for furniture manufacturing, but nearly
one-tenth of the total output comes from High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire.
Some 80,000 workers are employed. The value of output of firms with over 10
operatives totalled nearly £116 million in 1958. A Furniture Development Council
was established in 1949, under the Development Councils Act of 1947, to improve
the efficiency of the industry. It undertakes research, training and education, provides
a technical information service and publishes statistics.
Printing and Publishing
Printing is essentially an industry of small enterprises. At least two-thirds of the
firms have fewer than 25 employees. The main sections of the industry are concen¬
trated in the larger towns, notably London, although firms engaged in more general
printing are also located in smaller centres. The shortage of skilled workers has
led firms to introduce the latest developments in high-speed printing equipment,
including electronic engraving machines and advanced processes of photographic
reproduction. The annual turnover of the printing, bookbinding and publishing
industries, in which about 245,000 people were employed in 1958, exceeds £300
million. In addition, about 125,000 were engaged in the printing and publishing
of newspapers and periodicals, with an annual turnover of about £280 million.
Book publishing1 is predominantly an industry of small firms, mostly concentrated
in London. Excluding H.M. Stationery Office, only 10 of the several hundred
1 For further information on publishing see p. 229.
INDUSTRY
353
publishing firms bring out more than 200 new titles each year, and a further 13
between 100 and 200. Amalgamations have led to the establishment of larger units
in recent years. Popularity of paper-backed books has increased rapidly, and sales,
some 60 million copies in 1958, have trebled since 1953.
In 1958, total sales of books amounted to about £63-6 million, and the value of
exports reached the record level of £23-8 million. Australia, the United States, and
South Africa are the most important overseas markets.
Rubber
The United Kingdom rubber manufacturing industry is the oldest in the world,
dating from 1819 when Hancock, the inventor of the first method of processing
raw rubber on a commercial scale, set up a factory in London. He afterwards
collaborated with Macintosh, the inventor of waterproof garments, and it was
another Scotsman, Dunlop, who in 1888 devised the pneumatic tyre. At the
present day, tyres and tubes represent more than half the total output of the industry.
More recently, British firms have pioneered cellular rubber and latex foam pro¬
ducts, and they also make a great variety of other rubber manufactures, the most
important being rubber footwear, conveyor belting, cables, hose and thread.
The industry is second in size only to that of the United States. There are some
600 firms located throughout the country, employing about 113,000 people and, in
1958, their consumption of rubber totalled 281,000 tons, including 33,500 tons of
reclaimed rubber. Exports of manufactured goods in the same year were valued at
£37 million, two-thirds in the form of tyres and tubes. This figure does not take
into account the large indirect exports on motor vehicles.
A synthetic rubber plant at Hythe, near Southampton, using raw materials
from the nearby oil refinery at Fawley, started operating in 1958- It has an annual
capacity of about 70,000 tons of styrene-butadiene rubber, about 15,000 tons more
than present United Kingdom consumption, which hitherto has been met from
dollar sources. There are also several smaller plants supplying special-purpose
synthetic rubber.
Although the industry is highly mechanised there is still room for craftsmanship,
as in the building of a tyre, where perfect quality depends on the skill of the
individual. The large manufacturers undertake research on a considerable scale
into new methods and materials and, in addition, advanced research work is
carried out at the Shrewsbury Laboratories of the Research Association of British
Rubber Manufacturers.
X. TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
SHIPPING
About iy-2 per cent of the world’s shipping tonnage of 100 gross tons and over is
registered in the United Kingdom, which has the largest merchant marine in active
employment. If the tonnage in the United States reserve fleet and the tonnage
employed on the Great Lakes is excluded, the United Kingdom’s proportion of
world shipping tonnage is 20*2 per cent. United Kingdom ships are estimated to
carry nearly one-fifth of the world’s international sea-borne passenger and goods
traffic, and ply regularly on the routes linking the countries of the Commonwealth
and also to most of the main ports throughout the world. The amount of the
United Kingdom’s own sea-borne trade carried in British ships is not known
exactly, but it has been estimated that about 60 per cent of its imports and 75 per
cent of its exports, by value, are carried in British registered ships. The United
Kingdom balance of payments figures show that shipping provides one of the
biggest net contributions to the balance of payments; in 1958, it amounted to
£167 million. This figure does not, however, represent the total net overseas
earnings of United Kingdom shipping since it excludes tanker earnings and
includes some of the disbursements of foreign ships in United Kingdom ports and
the payments for the use of foreign ships. The last survey, made in 1952, of the
total net overseas earnings by all types of United Kingdom shipping gave a figure
of £221 million.
THE MERCHANT FLEET
At 30th June, 1958, a total of 20-3 million gross tons of merchant shipping
(steam and motor vessels of 100 gross tons and over) was registered in the United
Kingdom—a tonnage equal to the peak year of 1930.
Recent trends in the composition of the merchant fleet have been the reduction
of tramp tonnage, the growth of tanker tonnage, the increasing size of tankers, and
the commissioning of vessels specially built to carry ore, sugar and other com¬
modities in bulk. Including Admiralty and other tankers, the United Kingdom
accounts for over 5-9 million gross tons or nearly 18 per cent of the world’s total
tanker tonnage.
Propulsion
The amount of coal-fired tonnage continues to fall and now stands at about
three-quarters of a million gross tons. Oil has taken the place of coal in steamships,
while steam has continued to give place to the diesel engine, more than 45 per cent
of all tonnage being diesel-driven in 1958. In recent years, experiments have been
made in the use of gas turbines in ships. In March 1952, the first crossing of the
Atlantic using this form of propulsion was made by the tanker Auris; in 1958, this
ship was equipped with new and improved gas turbines. The first new ocean-going
cargo ship to be powered by free piston engines was launched on Clydeside in
January 1959. Research into the application of nuclear propulsion to merchant
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
355
ships is being undertaken with Government sponsorship and with the co-operation
of the shipowning, shipbuilding and marine engineering industries. Plans for the
building of large nuclear-powered tankers were submitted to the Admiralty in
May 1959 by engineering and shipbuilding groups and the Atomic Energy Authority.
Age and Size
Some 25 per cent of the total gross tonnage is under 5 years old and a further
20 per cent is between 5 and 9 years old. Taking the tanker fleet separately, as
much as 34 per cent is under 5 years old and a further 27 per cent is from 5 to 9
years old. An analysis of the merchant fleet by size is given in Table 23.
TABLE 23
Size Distribution of United Kingdom Merchant Fleet, 1958
Tonnage group
All ships
No. of
ships
Gross tons
Tankers
No. of
ships
Gross tons
100 and under 500 g.t.
500
2,000
6,000
10,000
15,000
25,000
2,000
6,000
10,000
15,000
25,000
30,000
30,000 g.t. and above
Totals
1,833
1,267
667
1,162
358
109
17
4
458,707
1.225.581
2.710.581
8,950,206
4,080,395
2,158,741
466,828
234,737
175
85
37
238
214
65
46,327
82,571
118,503
1,938,828
2,448,609
1,293,728
5,417 20,285,776
814 5,928,566
Source: Lloyd's Register of Shipping.
In 1958, the four ships of 30,000 gross tons and over were the Queen Elizabeth
(83,673 g.t.), the Queen Mary (81,237 g.t.), the Mauretania (35,673 g.t.), and the
Caronia (34,173 g.t.) all operating on transatlantic passenger services. Proposals
made by the Cunard Company in 1959 to replace the two Queens (launched
more than 20 years ago) are under consideration by the Government, which is
being advised by a small committee. The Windsor Castle (38,000 g.t.), built for the
service between the United Kingdom and South Africa, was launched in June 1959.
Two passenger liners of over 30,000 g.t. were on order in June 1959: the Canberra
(45,000 g.t.) and the Oriana (40,000 g.t.); both are being built for the service from
Britain to Australia and across the Pacific to North America.
Employment of Shipping
The 20-3 million gross tons of shipping on the United Kingdom register at June
1958 included 17-2 million gross tons of trading vessels owned and registered in the
United Kingdom1; the usual employment of this fleet has been analysed by the
1 The remaining 3-1 million gross tons included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary
craft, Admiralty vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carriage
of cargo, and 1 -2 million gross tons of shipping registered in the United Kingdom but
owned in other Commonwealth countries; this last figure included nearly half a million
gross tons of tankers.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
356
United Kingdom Chamber of Shipping as follows: 8-6 million gross tons were
employed as ocean-going passenger and cargo liners; 2-8 million gross tons as
ocean-going tramps; 4-6 million gross tons as ocean-going tankers; and 1*2 million
gross tons as coasting and home trade.
SHIPOWNERS
About half of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom consists
of ocean-going passenger-cargo and cargo liners, mostly the latter. Practically all
these ships are owned by large liner companies or groups of liner companies whose
names are known throughout the world. Many of them operate wide networks of
scheduled freight and passenger services which, between them, cover every ocean.
The 2-8 million gross tons of ocean-going tramp ships are operated by a large
number of private owners, some of them having only a small number of ships and
some with only one ship. The cross-Channel and similar services operated by
British Railways are listed on p. 368.
The many world-famous British shipping lines operating services on inter¬
national routes include: the Cunard, to North America; the Royal Mail, to South
America; the Blue Funnel, to Australia and the Far East; the Peninsular and
Oriental (P. and O.) and the British India lines, to India and Australia; the Union
Castle, to South Africa; Elder Dempster, to Africa; Furness Withy, to North
America and the West Indies; the New Zealand line to North America, Australia
and New Zealand; and Shaw Savill and Albion, to Australia.
About two-thirds of the total United Kingdom tanker fleet belongs to the oil
companies, although there are a few important independent United Kingdom
tanker-owning companies. A new type of specialised bulk carrier—the ore-carrier—
is now coming into use on a substantial scale; some of the ore-carriers are partly
owned by companies in the steel industry, but are managed and operated by
shipping companies.
Unlike ship-owning companies in many countries, the United Kingdom ship¬
owners receive no subsidies or other direct financial assistance from the Government.
The Government has, however, recognised that the United Kingdom shipping
industry is faced with severe competition in a world market (especially from ships
sailing under ‘flags of convenience’ with small tax liabilities and with no obligation
to maintain proper standards of employment) and that the industry has found it
increasingly difficult to build up finance for the replacement of obsolete ships.
During the financial years 1956-59, the shipping industry was the only industry
allowed to retain the 20 per cent investment allowance in respect of taxation, which
was withdrawn from industry generally; the allowance was raised to 40 per cent in
1957 for capital expenditure on the construction of new ships.
SHIPPING ORGANISATIONS
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
The Society of Lloyd's
This body, which was founded in the late seventeenth century, is an incorporated
society of underwriters whose main business is marine insurance (see p. 442).
Lloyd's Register of Shipping
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s)
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
357
which surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their safety and
operational efficiency. It will accept responsibility for surveying and giving technical
advice on vessels of all flags from the initial stages of building, at regular intervals
during their service, and after casualties. A satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a
guarantee to an underwriter that he may accept the risk of a vessel, and this forms
a strong link between the Register and the Society of Lloyd’s (see also p. 442).
Shipowners’ Organisations
The representative bodies speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for the
most part, owners of fishing vessels) are the Chamber of Shipping and the Liverpool
Steamship Owners’ Association. The General Council of British Shipping co-ordinates
the views of the shipping industry as a whole on all matters of major policy.
There are a number of local associations of shipowners centred around the main
port areas, for example, the Bristol Steamship Owners’ Association, the London
General Shipowners’ Society, and the North of England Shipowners’ Association.
Others represent companies specialising in a particular trade or type of cargo.
Employers’ Organisations
The Shipping Federation and the Employers’ Association of the Port of Liverpool
are the employers’ organisations concerned with labour relations and the regula¬
tion of employment throughout the Merchant Navy. They are responsible for the
administration of the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme, under which
shipowners engaging crews for ships of 200 gross tons and above engage them
through the Merchant Navy Establishment Administration unless they are prepared
to offer two-year Company Service contracts. The Shipping Federation is also
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the National Sea Training Schools set
up for the purpose of training ratings for the deck and catering departments and
as firemen.
Seafarers’ Organisations
Shipmasters are represented by the Mercantile Marine Service Association; navi¬
gating officers, engineer officers, apprentices, cadets, pursers and ships’ surgeons by
the Merchant Navy and Airline Officers’ Association; and radio officers by the Radio
Officers’ Union. Some uncertificated engineer officers are represented by the
Amalgamated Engineering Union. The interests of the deck, engine-room and
catering ratings are represented by the National Union of Seamen.
The National Maritime Board
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representatives
of the shipowners and seafarers and is responsible for all negotiations of wages and
conditions of service in the Merchant Navy, although, except by special arrange¬
ment, National Maritime Board agreements do not apply to vessels of under 200
gross tons, or to certain other ships, including tugs and salvage vessels. Detailed
working of the board is carried on by a number of ‘panels’ representing the various
interests of those forming the seafarers’ part of the board.
Conferences
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other and
with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a series of
‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates, and to
maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle of a confer¬
ence is the establishment of a common tariff of freight rates or passenger fares from
each port of departure. Each conference meets from time to time to review and
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
358
revise existing rates, or to compile new ones. Some of the conferences may be con¬
nected by rate agreements, or may have joined together to form wider groupings.
The Baltic Exchange
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of
London’s seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world’s largest market for the
chartering of ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’ representatives
meet here to arrange the chartering of ships, or space in ships, for the carriage of all
kinds of goods to and from all parts of the world. Other classes of business trans¬
acted on the Baltic Exchange include the chartering of air transport (see pp. 383-4)
and the purchase and sale of grain and oilseeds.
RELATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation is the Government department
responsible for most matters connected with merchant shipping. Under the
Merchant Shipping Act of 1894 and subsequent legislation it administers many
regulations for marine safety and welfare, for instance: certifying the load-line (or
Plimsoll line) that ensures that a ship is not overloaded; ensuring that standards of
safety are observed in ship construction; ensuring the provision of adequate life¬
saving, fire-fighting and radio equipment ; and dealing with the discipline, pro¬
fessional standards, health and accommodation of seamen. Most of the work which
these responsibilities entail is carried out by the officers of the Marine Survey and
Mercantile Marine at the ports. There is also a Registrar-General of Shipping and
Seamen in whose office at Cardiff a complete record of all British ships and seamen
is kept. The ministry is represented on the Merchant Navy Welfare Board (see
p. 360) and on the Merchant Navy Training Board (see p. 359). The ministry
fosters the development and use of modern navigational aids.
The ministry is responsible for transporting by sea the men and materials of the
armed forces and looks after ships that it owns or has chartered. It is also con¬
cerned with general shipping policy and the strategic implications of the Merchant
Navy.
Abroad, certain parts of the Merchant Shipping Acts, in particular those provi¬
sions dealing with the engagement and discharge of crews outside the United King¬
dom, are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers of the Commonwealth and
Colonial Governments.
The United Kingdom is a party to the International Convention for the Preven¬
tion of the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. The nations
which have ratified this convention agree to prohibit their national fleets from
discharging oil within 50 miles of any coast and also in extensive areas of the
Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea. British ships registered in the United Kingdom
were already prohibited from discharging oil within a wide zone of the sea around
the United Kingdom under the Oil in Navigable Waters Act, 1955, which is
administered by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation. The discharge of
oil from any source into United Kingdom territorial waters and harbours was
first prohibited in 1922.
The United Kingdom is a member of the United Nations Intergovernmental
Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO), whose first assembly was held in
London in January 1959.
Lighthouses, Pilotage and Rescue
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation administers the Coastguard Ser-
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
359
vice. This is primarily a life-saving organisation which keeps watch at danger points
around the coast for vessels in distress and renders assistance either by rocket
life-saving apparatus or by informing other authorities who may be able to give
help. There is close liaison between the Coastguard Service and the Royal National
Lifeboat Institution. The latter maintains lifeboats around the coast of the United
Kingdom; it is supported entirely by voluntary subscriptions, and depends largely
for its operation on voluntary workers. From its foundation in 1824 to the end of
1958, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution rescued 81,859 people. Lifeboats
were launched 714 times in 1958, and rescued 461 people; on nearly 900 occasions
in the twelve months to March 1959, life-saving action was taken by the Coast¬
guard Service.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel Islands
and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received its first Royal
Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a Board of ten Elder
Brethren elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Navy. It is also the chief
pilotage authority in the United Kingdom, having the management of all matters
relating to pilots and pilotage in the London area, the English Channel and certain
other coastal districts of the United Kingdom. Lighthouses in Scotland and Ireland
are the responsibility respectively of the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses
and the Commissioners of Irish Lights. The Ministry of Transport and Civil
Aviation also has certain responsibilities in connection with lighthouses and pilotage.
THE MERCHANT NAVY
The number of masters, officers and men serving in 1958 in British ships on
articles of agreement opened or closed in the United Kingdom was about 150,000.
Training
Nautical training in the United Kingdom has two distinct objectives, first to give
intending entrants into the Merchant Navy an introductory training before going
to sea—this is commonly known as ‘pre-sea training’—and secondly, to prepare
those who have already performed the requisite sea-service, qualifying them for
admission to the examinations, for the various statutory and other certificates
granted by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation. Pre-sea training is not
compulsory for those who go to sea as apprentices or cadets but most shipping
companies will, in practice, accept only those who have undergone such a course.
There are a number of residential and non-residential training establishments.
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies at sea
of apprentices and cadets who are preparing for their examinations for certificates
of competency as second mate.
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation holds examinations for, and issues
certificates of competency to, ships’ officers as master, first mate and second mate
of foreign-going ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as first class
engineer and second class engineer. Officers may not normally serve on board ships
in these grades unless they hold the appropriate, or a higher certificate.
Sea-going engineer officers usually receive their basic training in engineering by
serving a suitable apprenticeship of not less than four years in engineering work¬
shops ashore, although part of this period may be spent at approved courses in
mechanical engineering. An alternative scheme of training has, however, recently
been introduced under which shipping companies themselves select apprentices
for a special course of training copsisting of a two-year diploma course in a techni¬
cal college, followed by eighteen months’ training at sea and finally twelve months’
2 A
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
360
training in an engineering workshop ashore. Sea-going engineer officers are first
employed as junior engineers: they become eligible to take examinations for second and
first class certificates of competency after performing periods of qualifying sea service.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of proficiency in wireless tele¬
graphy issued by the Postmaster General on the results of an open examination.
All boys who wish to join the Merchant Navy as deck or junior catering ratings
must undergo a course of pre-sea training. The majority receive their training at
the National Sea Training Schools but courses are also provided by certain private
organisations and by a number of local education authorities.
A seaman may not be rated as A.B. (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom registered
ships unless he holds a certificate of competency as A.B., granted by the Ministry
of Transport and Civil Aviation, or an equivalent certificate. To obtain this certi¬
ficate a seaman must, among other qualifications, have served three years at sea on
deck, have attained a certificate of proficiency as lifeboatman and have passed a
qualifying examination.
Seamen qualify by seniority for promotion to the rating of petty officer. Service
as a deck rating qualifies for the purpose of admission to the examination for a
second mate’s certificate.
Conditions of Employment and Welfare
Wages and conditions of employment are negotiated by the National Maritime
Board (see p. 357). Minimum wages and holidays with pay are guaranteed for both
officers and ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme,
introduced by the board in 1947, has removed a great deal of the uncertainty
formerly associated with a seafaring life. Officers and men can now take two-year
contracts, not only with individual shipping companies but with the industry as a
whole, and get special benefits, in addition to the normal unemployment insurance
benefit when they are ashore between voyages.
The Merchant Navy Welfare Board, on which are represented officers’ and
seamen’s unions and associations, shipowners, voluntary societies, the Ministries
of Transport and Civil Aviation, Labour and National Service, Pensions and
National Insurance, and the Colonial Office, has been responsible since 1948 for
the control and co-ordination of the welfare services for merchant seamen in the
United Kingdom and of British merchant seamen abroad.
PORTS
There are over 300 ports in the United Kingdom. The eleven largest are shown
in Table 24, which lists them in order of tonnage of shipping arriving and departing
and does not relate to the volume of cargo handled. Most ports, other than those
owned by the British Transport Commission, are represented on the Dock and
Harbour Authorities’ Association, formed in 1917 to represent the common interests
of port authorities in their relations with Government, shipowners and traders.
The Port of London, with 69 miles of waterway, over 4,000 acres of dock estate
and 36 miles of deep-water quays, is the largest port in the Commonwealth, and with
New York and Rotterdam is one of the three largest ports in the world. Goods of
every kind, from meat to marble, from plywood to perfume, pass through the
docks; some 55 million tons of cargo were handled in 1958. Imports are distributed
all over the United Kingdom, though the port supplies, primarily, Greater London
and the home counties. In April 1959, an information service, installed at a cost of
nearly £80,000, was opened at Gravesend to assist ships’ masters entering the
river Thames.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
361
Liverpool—with Manchester, an inland city made into a port by the construction
of the Manchester Ship Canal—serves the industrial Midlands, Lancashire and
Yorkshire. Grain is prominent among the imports of Liverpool, which, including
Birkenhead on the opposite bank of the Mersey, is the second largest milling centre
in the world. Tobacco is another major import and is stored in what is probably the
world’s largest warehouse. Liverpool is also important for transatlantic passenger
traffic and short sea-route and coastal trading. Manchester’s chief imports are raw
cotton and petroleum.
TABLE 24
Port Arrivals and Departures, 1958
(With Cargo and in Ballast)
Thousand tons net
Port
Foreign Trade
Coasting Trade
Total
London
Southampton
Liverpool
Tyne ports . .
Manchester . .
(including Runcorn)
Glasgow
Belfast
Hull ..
Bristol
Swansea
Middlesbrough
Totals
Totals all Ports
56,182
36,540
30,449
7,364
12,582
10,817
2,802
8,560
8,460
6,866
6,572
187,194
253,018
22,197
10,000
7,102
8,223
2,976
4,174
11,686
2,980
2,954
3,030
2,836
78,158
149,972
78,379
46.540
37,551
15,587
15,558
14,991
14,488
11.540
11,414
9,896
9,408
265,352
402,990
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
Southampton, largest of the Channel ports, is the chief port for ocean passenger
traffic. It owes its importance to its double tides and easy access from London.
A considerable volume of oil is handled for the refinery at Fawley.
Newcastle upon Tyne and the other Tyne ports serve the industrial north-east of
England and comprise the most important coal-shipping and largest ship repairing
centre in the country.
Hull, on the Humber estuary, serves particularly the industrial centres of York¬
shire and the Midlands. Middlesbrough imports iron ore for, and exports rolled
steel from, the local steel industry.
Swansea has the largest trade of the group of ports serving South Wales. As
well as coal, Swansea exports the steel and tinplate manufactured in its immediate
neighbourhood, but its rapidly increasing importance derives largely from the oil
which it imports and exports for local refineries.
Bristol and Avonmouth serve the industrial Midlands as well as the city of
Bristol itself, and also have a large coastal trade.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
362
Glasgow, the principal Scottish port, serves as an entrepot centre for the industrial
area of central Scotland.
Grangemouth, also in Scotland, handles oil to and from the local refinery, and
also imports timber, iron ore, cement, paper-making materials and general cargo.
Belfast is the principal port of Northern Ireland and handles the main I rish Sea traffic.
Ownership
The ports, in some cases docks only, previously owned by the main-line railway
companies are now under national ownership and are administered by the British
Transport Commission (see pp. 364-6). The commission owns and manages some
30 per cent of Britain’s dock accommodation with a total of over half a million feet
of quays. A few of the commission’s ports are docks developed by former canal
undertakings, such as the Aire and Calder Navigation which developed Goole. The
rest are those formerly owned by the railways. In some cases—e.g., at Southampton
and Middlesbrough—the railways owned the main docks in ports where the statu¬
tory authority was a harbour board. In other cases—e.g., at Grangemouth, Garston
and Grimsby—the port was largely developed by the railway company which was
itself the statutory harbour authority. Some railway-owned ports were, and still
are, mainly used for the railways’ cross-Channel services: Folkestone, Harwich,
Newhaven, Fishguard, Holyhead, and Heysham are in this category. Among
other ports owned by the commission are Hull, Swansea, Newport, and Cardiff.
In 1958, shipping arrivals and departures at the commission’s docks, harbours and
wharves, at which 14,000 were employed at the end of that year, totalled over
81^ million net tons, and the total cargo handled was about 47J million tons.
Other ports are controlled by a public trust on which are represented users of the
port (such as shippers, importers and shipping companies) and other bodies such
as Government departments and local authorities. Examples are London (con¬
trolled by the Port of London Authority), Liverpool (Mersey Docks and Harbour
Board), Belfast (Belfast Harbour Commissioners) and Glasgow (Clyde Navigation
Trust). The Port of London Authority has 28 members. Ten of the members are
nominated as follows: by the Admiralty (1), the Ministry of Transport and Civil
Aviation (2), the London County Council (4), the Corporation of the City of
London (2), and the Corporation of Trinity House (1). Eighteen of the members
represent various port users: shipowners (8), merchants (8), owners of river craft
(1), and public wharfingers (1). The authority’s duties include the maintenance
of adequate river channels, the regulation of traffic, the provision and upkeep of
moorings and the licensing of wharves and structures in the area under its control.
A few ports—Bristol is the most important example—are owned by the town or
city council and controlled entirely by a committee of the council.
Finally, there are about 100 ports which are privately owned. Manchester is the
only major port so owned—by the Manchester Ship Canal Company—and here
the Manchester City Council exercises considerable control by appointing 11 of the
company’s 21 directors.
The powers and responsibilities of the port authorities are, in the main, set down
in private Acts of Parliament which relate specifically to the ports concerned.
Labour
There are about 150,000 people employed in the operation of ports in the
United Kingdom. Just under half of these are administrative, clerical and technical
staff, and pilots, lightermen and customs officials. Over half are the dock workers (form¬
erly and still popularly called ‘dockers’) who do the physical work of handling cargo.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
363
Shipping arrivals and departures do not all conform to a regular schedule, with
the result that there is sometimes too much work for the dock workers available,
sometimes too little. Dock labour was therefore largely casual labour until 1941,
when war-time schemes were introduced to control the port registers of employers
and workers. The war-time arrangements were superseded in 1947 by a permanent
scheme administered by the National Dock Labour Board, which consists of a
chairman, vice-chairman, and eight members appointed by the Minister of Labour
and National Service, four to represent employers and four to represent employees.
Workers on the board’s registers now receive a guaranteed minimum wage even
when there is no work available. A pension scheme for dockers has been agreed in
principle between the National Association of Port Employers and the trade unions.
Tanker Terminals
Most of the oil tankers coming to the United Kingdom to discharge crude oil
are berthed at special tanker terminals near the oil refineries which are owned
and operated by the oil companies. Existing tanker terminals are at Thameshaven,
Shellhaven, Coryton and the Isle of Grain, all on the Thames estuary; at Fawley
on Southampton Water; at Eastham and Stanlow on the Manchester Ship Canal;
at Heysham, Morecambe Bay, Lancashire; and at Bowling on the river Clyde
and Ardrossan on the Firth of Clyde. A new oil terminal at Finnart, on the Firth of
Clyde, was opened in June 1959. Built at a cost of £2 million, it is the first terminal
in Europe capable of taking 100,000 ton tankers at any stage of the tide. The
Finnart and Bowling terminals on the west coast of Scotland are connected by
pipeline to the oil refinery at Grangemouth on the Firth of Forth, on the east coast
of Scotland. There are other tanker berths on the rivers Tyne, Tees and Humber
on the east coast of England, and in several main ports, such as Swansea.
Several tanker terminals are either under construction or are planned, including
one at Hook on Southampton Water for tankers up to 60,000 deadweight tons; one
at Tranmere, on the river Mersey, for tankers up to 65,000 d.w.t.; and two at
Milford Haven, in south-west Wales, for tankers up to 100,000 d.w.t. Milford
Haven is being developed by the British Petroleugri and Esso oil companies as a
major oil importing centre. A Milford Haven Conservancy Board has been set up
by the Government to exercise general control over navigation in the port area.
The capacity of existing terminals on the Thames and at Southampton is also to
be increased by dredging. As some of the larger existing tanker terminals are unable
to berth fully laden oil tankers of more than 32,000 d.w.t., these new projects have
assumed great importance in meeting the increased size of tankers.
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain1 is carried mainly by road
and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, inland waterways play
an important part in carrying freight, particularly bulk cargoes. Passenger and
freight traffic on the domestic services of British airlines is steadily increasing.
There are in Great Britain some 19,000 route-miles of railways (51,100 track
miles) and just over 190,000 miles of road, of which only about one-quarter may be
classed as main roads. The railway network was developed mainly in the nineteenth
century from 1840 onwards (and there are now more railways per square mile in
Britain than in any other country, except Belgium).
1 For an account of inland transport in Northern Ireland, see pp. 376-7.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
364
In 1958, the number of passenger journeys made by public transport (road and
rail) in Great Britain was 15,100 million, of which 1,100 million were made by
rail. In addition, in the summer of 1958, some 4^ million motorcars and million
motor cycles (including about half a million scooters) were licensed for use on
the roads. The average annual mileage of most of the cars is estimated to be between
five and ten thousand. Journeys by public transport are mainly short and a great
many of them are to and from places of work. The resultant concentration of travel
in the morning and evening ‘rush hours’ constitutes a formidable problem in London
and other large centres of population.
A general picture of the domestic goods transport system in Great Britain is
provided by the results of a sample survey of goods transport by road made in
April 1958 by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, the first such survey
for six years. According to this survey, about three-quarters of the total tonnage
carried in 1958 (estimated at 1,320 million tons) went by road, while in terms of
ton-mileage1 the proportion was about 45 per cent. The railways accounted for
19 per cent of the total tonnage and 35 per cent of the ton-mileage. The proportions
for coastal shipping were 4 per cent and 35 per cent, respectively. Although the
volume of goods transported by the railways in 1958 was reduced considerably by
the fall in demand for coal and iron and steel, the survey observed that it was clear
that, whatever unit of measurement was used, road transport was now the major
means of inland carriage of goods. The 1952 survey had shown that the railways
were responsible in that year for 43 per cent of the ton-mileage and road transport
for 37 per cent.
THE BRITISH TRANSPORT COMMISSION
Today the British Transport Commission has an annual turnover of £730 million
and is the largest single employer of labour in the country, employing some 774,000
men and women. Its present role and structure are the result of a series of Transport
Acts passed since 1947.
•
The Transport Acts of 1947, 1953 and 1956
On 1 st January, 1948, in accordance with the provisions of the Transport Act
of 1947, most of Great Britain’s inland transport system passed into public
ownership. On that date, the railways, all railway-owned steamships, docks, hotel
and road transport interests, most of the country’s canals (including all those owned
by the railways) and the whole of London’s passenger transport system came under
the control of the British Transport Commission, a newly created public authority,
which was given the duty of providing an efficient, adequate and integrated
system of public inland transport and port facilities for passengers and goods.
In addition, the commission was to arrange for the gradual acquisition of privately
owned long-distance road haulage firms. Road passenger transport outside London
was not taken over, but the commission was given power to prepare area schemes
for co-ordinating passenger services by road and rail, including power to acquire
road passenger undertakings for this purpose. A considerable amount of road
haulage, several waterways and many docks were left outside the commission’s
scope.
The Conservative Government which took office in 1951 announced a new policy
for the operation of public transport, including decentralisation of the railway
1 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual distance it
was transported.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
365
administration, greater freedom to adopt normal commercial practice (particularly
in charging), the partial return of long-distance road haulage to private enterprise,
and the revocation of the commission’s power to make schemes for the co-ordina¬
tion of road and rail passenger services. The policy was put into effect by the
Transport Act of 1953, and the actual reorganisation of the British Transport
Commission was completed by 1st January, 1955. A further Act, the Transport
(Disposal of Road Haulage Property) Act, 1956, brought to an end the denationali¬
sation of road haulage.
Today the British Transport Commission resembles in organisation, purpose
and status a large-scale commercial corporation. It is in keen competition with
public and private transport by road, sea and air.
Present Organisation
Under the 1947 Act, the British Transport Commission is responsible to the
Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation who, in turn, is responsible to Parliament.
The minister appoints the members of the commission (with the maximum
membership of 14 members and a chairman) and is empowered to give general
directions to the commission in the national interest and to approve the outline of
programmes of major development and of training, education and research.
The commission itself is a policy-making and not a managing body. It works
through six policy-making committees,1 each dealing with one particular subject
in relation to all the commission’s activities, and through sub-commissions1 which
are not policy-making but each of which takes a special interest in the activities of
one of the seven divisions which carry on the various activities of the commission.
These seven divisions are: British Railways, British Road Services, Tilling (bus)
Group, Scottish Omnibus Group, British Transport Docks, British Waterways,
and British Transport Hotels and Catering Services.
In the London area, road passenger transport and the underground railways are
operated by the London Transport Executive (see pp. 375-6), which was estab¬
lished as an agent of the British Transport Commission by the Transport Act, 1947.
Consultation with coastal shipping operators is provided by the Coastal Shipping
Advisory Committee, which was set up under the 1947 Act to consider, and from
time to time to report to the minister on, all matters jointly affecting the interests
of the British Transport Commission and those of coastal shipping. The 1953 Act
extended the scope of the committee’s work to include road haulage. The members
of this committee are appointed by the minister from the commission and from
among representatives of coastal shipping after consultation with interests con¬
cerned. The commission also consults with the operators of coastal liners on
questions of rates and charges at the Coasting Liner Conference.
Finance
An annual report and statement of accounts is submitted to the minister, who
lays it before Parliament. The British Transport Commission is under obligation
to cover its outgoings, taking one year with another, but during the present period
of railway modernisation it is permitted to carry forward the deficits arising on
British Railways. Its deficit in 1958 amounted to £90-1 million, bringing the
accumulated deficit for the three years 1956-58 to £207 million. The commission
is confident, however, that the various corrective measures that it has in hand,
particularly projects that will be completed early in the railway modernisation
1 These committees and sub-commissions are mainly composed of members of the
British Transport Commission.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
366
programme, will bring the financial position into approximate balance by 1963 or
1964. Meanwhile, in order to meet financial needs during the critical years of
reconstruction, the Government, under the Transport (Railway Finances) Act,
1957, and the Transport (Borrowing Powers) Act, 1959, is making special advances
to the commission up to £400 million to meet the annual revenue deficits for this
limited period. The advances made are liable to interest and will be repaid in
instalments. The commission’s ordinary borrowing powers (i.e. excluding those to
meet deficits) are limited to £1,200 million.
Gross receipts from the commission’s principal carrying activities in 1958 were:
passenger traffic, £278 million; freight traffic, £381 million; and miscellaneous,
£16 million. In addition, gross receipts from other principal activities amounted to
£53 million. Interest on British Transport Stock and other interest charges
amounted to £72 million. Fixed assets at the end of 1958 were valued at £1,728
million, of which £1,518 million related to British Railways.
Transport Tribunal
The Transport Tribunal, set up under the 1947 Act, has jurisdiction over the
charges schemes which govern the maximum charges which the British Transport
Commission may make on British Railways, on the road and rail services provided
by the London Transport Executive, at its docks, and by tolls for the use of inland
waterways. The Transport Tribunal replaced the Railway Rates Tribunal and has
also taken over responsibilities from certain other statutory bodies. Appeals arising
from applications for road haulage (goods vehicles) licences are heard by the tribunal
and it has other duties relating to harbours and canals.
Transport Users’ Consultative Committees
There are eleven Area Transport Users’ Consultative Committees and a Central
Transport Consultative Committee for Great Britain, which were set up, under the
1947 Act, to give transport users an opportunity of putting forward criticisms and
suggestions for improving the commission’s transport services. The members of
these committees are appointed by the minister (after consultation with the various
organisations concerned) to represent commerce, industry, agriculture, labour,
local authorities and the British Transport Commission itself. The area committees
in England report to the central committee, which reports to the commission and
the minister, who may give directives to the commission upon any matter dealt with
as a result of a recommendation of the central committee. Since I953> the Scottish
and Welsh committees also report direct to the minister. Matters dealt with include
the British Transport Commission’s proposals for closing branch railway lines, with¬
drawing passenger train services, closing stations, and complaints by the public
of inadequacy of services or facilities.
RAILWAYS
Britain was the pioneer of railways. The opening of the Stockton to Darlington
Railway in 1825, and the Liverpool and Manchester line in 1830, when George
Stephenson’s famous ‘Rocket’ locomotive was used, began a century of widespread
railway development. The great period of railway building was from 1840 to 1875,
with a short lull following the collapse of the speculative railway boom in 1846.
In the same year, an Act of Parliament prescribed a standard gauge of 4 feet 8 J inches
for all new railway lines except extensions of the Great Western Railway, which then
had a gauge of 7 feet and was not converted to the standard gauge until much
later. The Railway and Canal Traffic Act of 1888 drew up a standard freight
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 367
classification and schedules of maximum freight charges which came into operation
in 1893.
During the first world war, the railways came under centralised Government
direction through a Railway Executive Committee. This experience emphasised
the need for concentration and a reorganisation of the whole rail system. The
Railways Act of 1921 amalgamated 123 private companies into four large groups:
the London, Midland and Scottish; London and North Eastern; Great Western;
and Southern. In the 1920s and 1930s the railways suffered from the prolonged
industrial depression and the growing competition from road transport. The causes of
road competition were twofold: first, motor transport often offered cheaper and better
facilities; secondly, the statutory regulation of the railways’ charging system resulted
in the loss of some lucrative traffic and the forced retention of unprofitable traffic.
In 1938, the railways made proposals for relief from statutory regulation of
charges, but the outbreak of war in 1939 postponed action and the railways again
became controlled by the Government.
Organisation under Public Ownership
The Transport Act of 1947 brought the railways under public ownership as a
single enterprise. British Railways, grouped in six regional sub-divisions, operated
under the overall management of a Railway Executive established as the agent of the
British Transport Commission.
The 1953 Transport Act abolished the Railway Executive and provided for a
reorganisation of the administration. The operation of British Railways is at
present in the hands of six area boards (the areas corresponding with the former
regions), which leave day-to-day management to the general managers of the areas.
Important matters affecting general policy are reserved to the British Transport
Commission and are dealt with by the British Railways Division and the Railways
Sub-Commission.
Statistics of British Railways
Today, the services of British Railways’ Southern Region alone carry annually
almost the same number of passengers as all the Class I railways of the United
States of America, although, of course, the average length of journey is much less.
The urban and suburban passenger commuting services for London, and other
large conurbations carry about 2 | million passengers a day, mainly to and from their
work in brief rush hour periods. These services account for about half the annual
total of 1,100 million passengers on British Railways. The railways are also
indispensable to a great part of the basic freight traffic. Every day, British Railways
haul a total of nearly 59 million ton-miles of freight; the flexibility of their
operations enables them to deal with sudden heavy movements of bulk freight such
as coal, or crops at harvest time. In 1958 British Railways carried a total of 243
million tons of freight.
The following figures summarise the numbers of staff employed and vehicles,
ships and track owned by British Railways at the end of December 1958:
Staff, total number . . • • • • • • • • 550,123
including: Administrative, technical and clerical . . 74,501
Operative . . . . • • • • • • 276,406
Maintenance and construction . . . . 186,266
Pennanent Way (standard gauge)
Railroad mileage (inch electrified)  18,848
Track mileage (inch electrified) . . . • • . 50,914
368 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Locomotives
Steam . . .. .. . . . . 16,108
Electric .. . . .. . . . . 72
Diesel .. .. .. .. .. 242
Diesel-electric .. .. .. . . 958
Gas turbine electric .. . . . . 1
Passenger carriages {a)
Locomotive-hauled . . . . . . 34,325
Diesel multiple-unit stock . . . . 2,417
Electric multiple-unit . . . . .. 5,261
Freight vehicles .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,020,197
Ships (6) .. . . . . . . .. . . . . 121
Net tonnage of ships . . . . .. . . .. 77,405
Road vehicles .. . . . . . . . . . . 45,000
(a) Including rail motor vehicles.
{b) Including 7 jointly owned and 3 operated but not owned. British Railways operate
services on twelve routes to the Continent, including two train-ferry services, Harwich-
Zeebrugge and Dover-Dunkirk. Services are also operated across the Irish Sea, to the
Channel Islands and to the Isle of Wight, and on coastal waters and lakes.
At the end of 1958, the British Transport Hotels and Catering Services owned
refreshment rooms at 378 stations, and also 38 hotels. At 81 of the stations, tenants
operated the refreshment facilities.
Development Plans
By the end of 1958, eleven years after the British Transport Commission came
into operation, capital expenditure on British Railways amounted to about £667
million. Some of this was accounted for by renewals, including arrears inherited
from the past. The difficulties of the 1930s, the strain of the war years and the
numerous post-war claims on national resources had prevented any large schemes
of railway modernisation and the maintenance of an adequate replacement
programme. This past lack of investment is being remedied by a 15-year
modernisation and re-equipment plan, announced by the British Transport
Commission in January 1955, which is designed to transform virtually all the
services offered by British Railways.
The original cost of the plan was estimated at £1,200 million, but it has since
been re-assessed at £1,500 million. In a re-appraisal of the plan, announced in
July 1959, the commission stated that additional items estimated at £160 million
would bring the total cost to £1,660 million. It envisaged a greater concentration
of expenditure, averaging about £190-210 million a year, in the years 1959-63. By
about the end of 1963, a working surplus of between £50 million and £100 million
a year is expected, against which interest charges will amount to about £85 million.
The programme is being financed partly from internal sources and partly by
borrowings.
Major features of the programme include the re-modelling of passenger
operations to ensure fast, clean, regular and frequent services (electric or diesel) in
all the great urban areas, to accelerate inter-city and main-line trains and to
provide economic services on other routes. Freight services are being completely
re-cast to increase efficiency, for example, by means of express freight trains and
special services for export goods between manufacturing centres and the London
docks.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
369
The plan heralds the end of steam traction and aims to carry out as much electri¬
fication as possible within the 15-year period. Electrification is going ahead much
faster than originally expected, chiefly due to the adoption of the 25kV a.c. system
—a revolutionary change. It has been decided to electrify the route from London
(Euston) to Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool by 1964, and later, the route
from London (King’s Cross) to Leeds; to extend electrification from London
(Liverpool Street) as far as Ipswich and Harwich; to complete the electrification
of the Southern Region east of a line from Portsmouth to Reading (a £25 million
scheme which is part of this plan, was completed in June 1959), and to carry out
additional suburban electrification for London and Glasgow.
On other main lines, diesel locomotives are being introduced as rapidly as possible.
Over 100 diesel main-line locomotives were delivered by the end of 1958 and
nearly 400 more were expected to come into service during 1959; about 2,500 such
locomotives are to be in operation by the end of the plan period. It was expected
that some 3,000 multiple-unit diesel vehicles would be operating on branch lines
and stopping services by the end of 1959.
A co-ordinated effort to improve the permanent way is being made in all regions.
Modern signalling equipment, which has already been installed at York, Cowlairs
(Glasgow), Newcastle and St. Pancras (London), is now being provided at many
other places including Manchester (Victoria). Continuous brakes are being fitted
to freight wagons to enable freight trains to operate at higher speeds. Big new
marshalling yards are being constructed, for example, in Fife to serve the new
coalfields, in South Wales for the growing steel industry, and in east London to
cater for recent industrial development. New or modernised freight depots are
being built at Liverpool, Lincoln, Barking and Peterborough. Some existing depots
and marshalling yards and several hundred small stations are being closed.
Passenger coaches of improved design and construction and with a better range
of amenities are being introduced. In 1960* five diesel-electric de luxe trains will
come into operation on routes from London to Manchester, to Birmingham and
Wolverhampton and to Bristol. The plan has allocated some £55 million for
modernising some of the many passenger stations (there are over 5,200 stations in
Great Britain). Banbury, Barrow-in-Furness and Plymouth are examples of
passenger stations that are being rebuilt. New signalling devices (including high-
intensity colour-light signals and automatic warning control) are being introduced
to increase safety on the railways.
ROADS
During the Roman occupation of Britain a military road system was constructed,
but for centuries after the Romans left Britain in a.d. 410, road works were carried
out on a local basis and with little regard to long distance traffic. During the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries a system of road maintenance through
private enterprise in the form of turnpike trusts became widespread. The
maintenance of a length of road was placed in the hands of a trust, made up of
private individuals, empowered to levy tolls at the gates it erected at the limits of
its jurisdiction. The same period was also notable for the major improvements in
road construction carried out by Thomas Telford and John -He Ad am who laid the
foundations of modern road engineering practice. A period of intensive railway
development then intervened and the competition from the railways caused the
collapse of the turnpike trusts. Legislation passed in the latter half of the nine¬
teenth century vested the responsibility for roads with the county, rural district and
urban councils. Construction of new roads was confined almost entirely to the
37°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
expanding towns. The advent of the motor vehicle made it necessary for the
Government to set up a central road authority. Accordingly, the Road Board
was established by the Development and Road Improvement Funds Act of 1909.
In 1919, the board’s responsibilities were taken over by the newly established
Ministry of Transport.
In 1958, Great Britain had 191,146 miles of public highway, over two miles for
every square mile of territory. There were 8,309 miles of trunk roads, 19,706 miles
of Class I roads, 17,603 miles of Class II roads, 48,853 miles of Class III roads,
and 96,675 miles of unclassified roads. Roads are classified according to their traffic
value, those of purely local traffic importance remaining unclassified. On maps and
signposts the trunk and Class I roads can mostly be identified by the letter ‘A’ in
front of a route number, and Class II roads by the letter ‘B\ Trunk roads are the
main arteries of national traffic and the whole cost of their upkeep is met from
Exchequer funds. The Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation is the highway
authority for trunk roads in England and Wales and administers expenditure on
these roads. The highway authority for Class I, II, and III roads is, in general, the
council of the county or county borough in whose area the road lies. The minister
makes grants towards approved expenditure on construction and maintenance of
these roads at the rate of 75, 60, and 50 per cent, severally, according to the class
of road. Other public roads are the responsibility of the local authority. The
Secretary of State for Scotland has the same responsibilities for roads in Scotland.
Development
The heavy demands upon the national economy since the end of the second
world war restricted expenditure on major improvements and new construction.
In the early post-war years, the bulk of expenditure on roads was devoted to
maintenance and repair, but since 1953 there has been an increased emphasis on
new works. Under the Special Roads Act of 1949, the minister has powers to
construct special roads for certain categories of traffic. The building of trunk roads
is carried out mainly by private firms under contract to the local highway
authorities, who act as agents of the ministry.
In the four years 1955-58, an annual average of just under £14 million was spent
on new road construction and major improvements. In 1959, estimated expenditure
totalled £55 million, rising to about £65 million in i960, and is expected to
be some £75 million in 1961. From 1962 onwards, it is planned to spend about
£70 million each year on road works. All these figures include provision for road
works in Scotland but not the complementary expenditure by local authorities.
It is planned first to construct, as quickly as possible, the initial stage of a national
network of modern trunk routes, in many cases confined to motor traffic only;
secondly, to clear away the worst bottlenecks in urban areas and thus to give free
outlets from the big cities and from other main sources of traffic to the trunk
routes; and thirdly, to press forward with the maximum amount of smaller road
works all over the country. Priority is to be given to five major routes: a trunk road
from London to Newcastle, based on the Great North Road, on which works esti¬
mated to cost £23 million are being undertaken in 1959-60; a motor road from
London to Birmingham and Yorkshire; trunk roads from London to the south-east
by-passing the Medway towns, and Maidstone and Ashford; a road from the
industrial Midlands to the South Wales ports; and a road from London westwards
to London Airport, the west of England and South Wales. In Scotland, the pro¬
gramme includes the reconstruction of the Glasgow to Stirling and Glasgow to
Carlisle trunk roads. The motor road from London to Birmingham is Britain’s
first full-length motorway.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
371
Work is in progress on the Ross Spur motorway which will form part of the
link between the South Wales ports and the industrial Midlands, and on the Great
North Road which is being modernised. The Maidstone by-pass on the London to
Folkestone trunk road is due to be completed by mid-1960. The first road to be
built to motorways standard, the Preston by-pass, was opened in December 1958.
Another shorter road, the Lancaster by-pass will be ready early in i960; the first
73 miles of the Yorkshire motorway were completed in October 1959. The
first county motorway, the six-mile-long Stretford-Eccles by-pass, including a
new high-level bridge across the Manchester Ship Canal and the construction of
the third largest steel arch bridge in the world, between Runcorn and Widnes, is
expected to be completed in i960. The £11 million Dartford-Purfleet road tunnel
under the river Thames, begun in 1957, will be ready for traffic by 1962.
In Scotland, the building of the Whiteinch Tunnel under the river Clyde, at a
cost of £6-4 million, began in 1957 and is due to be completed in 1962; the con¬
struction of a new road bridge across the Firth of Forth began in 1958 and is expected
to be completed in 1963, at an estimated cost of £16 million.
ROAD TRANSPORT
In 1958, there were nearly 8 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great Britain’s
roads. Of these, some 4^ million were motor cars, about 1^ million were motor
cycles, including scooters, ij million were goods vehicles and 97,000 were public
road passenger vehicles (i.e. buses, trolleybuses, trams and taxicabs).
The first world war greatly stimulated the development of motor vehicles,
and road transport began to make itself felt as a serious competitor of the railways.
The first step towards Government regulation of public road transport was the
passing of the London Traffic Act of 1924, which gave the Minister of Transport
power to control the number of buses and their journeys in London; this was
followed, in 1933, by the setting up of the London Passenger Transport Board (see
P 375)- ln 1928, a Royal Commission was appointed to examine the problems that
had arisen out of the growth of motor traffic. The recommendations of this
commission led to the introduction of further legislation.
The Road Traffic Act, 1930, removed the old system of the licensing of public
service (i.e. passenger) vehicles by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas, of
which there are now eleven, covering the whole country and each under the control
of three traffic commissioners (except for the London metropolitan area which has
one) appointed by the minister. The commissioners regulate, by means of a licensing
system, all public road passenger transport services, and sanction routes and time¬
tables in order to secure proper co-ordination of services and to eliminate unneces¬
sary competition; they also control fares. Competing operators and local
authorities are entitled to raise objections concerning applications to the com¬
missioners for new licences or the renewal of existing licences.
Organisation of Road Haulage
The Road and Rail Traffic Act, 1933, based upon the recommendations of the
Royal Commission and of an experts’ report (the Salter Report) of 1932, established
a system of licensing for road haulage vehicles, which is still in operation, designed
to restrict vehicle operations to approved needs and to eliminate wasteful competi¬
tion. A licence has to be secured from the licensing authority (who is, in fact,
the chairman of the appropriate body of traffic commissioners) before a goods
vehicle can be used on the road. There are three types of licence. the A licence
for general public haulage; the ‘B’ licence for public haulage limited to certain
372
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
goods, or certain areas and covering also the carriage of the licensee’s own goods;
and the ‘C’ licence for the carriage by traders solely of their own goods. The
holders of ‘A’ and CB’ licences are bound by regulations concerning the fitness and
loading of vehicles, the keeping of records and the pay and hours of their employees.
Applications for ‘A’ and ‘B’ licences are examined by the licensing authorities to
see if they are necessary in view of existing transport services already available,
and competitors may raise objections. There is a right of appeal to the Transport
Tribunal against the decision of the licensing authorities. The ‘C’ licence is granted
on application, as of right, but the holder is bound to keep records, to observe
statutory driving hours, and to fulfil certain other conditions.
Under the Transport Act of 1947, the British Transport Commission took over
‘A’ and ‘B’ hauliers predominantly engaged on long-distance haulage. Vehicles
operating under ‘C’ licences and those used for carrying certain specialised traffic
were not affected by the Act. After the change of Government in 1951, the Transport
Act of 1953 required the commission to dispose of the bulk of its road haulage
undertaking. In 1956, this process was halted by the Transport (Disposal of
Road Haulage Property) Act, which enabled the commission to retain under its
control more vehicles than were permitted under the 1953 Act. Altogether, the
commission disposed of 20,000 vehicles. Since September 1956, British Road Ser¬
vices (BRS) have been conducting their business through the medium of five com¬
panies which together own about 14,300 vehicles: British Road Services Ltd. (general
haulage); BRS (Pickfords) Ltd. (special traffic and some contracts) ; BRS (Con¬
tracts) Ltd.; BRS (Parcels) Ltd.; and BRS (Meat Haulage) Ltd. The shares of all
these companies are owned by the British Transport Commission; those of BRS
(Parcels) Ltd. and BRS (Meat Haulage) Ltd. are still subject to disposal at some
later date. All the commission’s vehicles are subject to the licensing system.
At the end of 1958, 1,290,000 goods vehicles were authorised under carriers’
licences, consisting of 118,000 under ‘A’, or contract ‘A’, licences; 73,000 under
‘B’ licences; and 1,099,000 under ‘C’ licences. The number of road haulage vehicles
licensed has more than doubled since 1938, and the net ton-mileage performed by
road goods vehicles is now greater than that of the railways. Many of the big
industrial centres and the major ports, particularly London, now rely to a great
extent on motor goods transport. The number of ‘C’ licence vehicles has increased
threefold since 1938. This class includes a large number of small vehicles used
locally in the delivery of groceries and other goods. Other vehicles in this class
are engaged in long-distance haulage of the traders’ own goods, particularly food,
special machinery and equipment, fragile goods, and milk, oil, chemicals and
cement in special tanker lorries.
Public Passenger Transport by Road 1
There are over ninety separate urban bus systems (excluding that of London1)
owned and operated by local authorities. The largest of these is in Glasgow, where
494 trams and 1,030 buses and trolleybuses carried some 570 million passengers in
1958. Birmingham city transport system carried 458 million passengers in 1958
and the Manchester system about 387 million.
The bus services throughout the country are operated by some 4,500 local
concerns, nearly all of which belong to three main groups—British Electric
Traction, the Tilling Group, and Scottish Omnibuses. Tilling’s and Scottish
Omnibuses are owned by the British Transport Commission; British Electric
Traction is a private concern; the commission has substantial shareholdings in a
1 Public passenger transport by road in London is described in the section on London
Transport (see pp. 375-6).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
373
number of companies in this group, but no controlling interest. There are also
some 100 operators of express long-distance day and night coach services, many
of which are also under the control of one of the three major groups. In 1958,
4,764 million passenger journeys were made on the buses and coaches operated by
local authorities and 7,450 million passenger journeys on those belonging to other
operators. London Transport Executive’s operations are described on pp. 375-6.
Road Safety Measures
With nearly 8 million motor vehicles on its roads, Britain has the highest density
of traffic in the world, giving rise to pressing problems of road safety. In 1958, 5,970
people were killed on the roads and 293,797 injured. This compares with 7,343
persons killed and 231,603 injured in 1934, when there were only 2^ million
motor vehicles on the roads—an indication that the problem has, to some extent,
been alleviated by road safety measures introduced under the Road Traffic Acts of
1934 and 1956. Among these are a speed limit of 30 miles an hour in built up areas,
modified later by the introduction of a 40-mile-an-hour limit on certain main
roads on the outskirts of London; the requirement, introduced in 1935, that all
new drivers must pass a driving test (see below), the provision of pedestrian
crossings, including some illuminated by flashing beacons and marked with con¬
spicuous white stripes—hence the name ‘zebra crossings’, and the prohibition of
overtaking and parking on sections of trunk roads marked in the centre by parallel
continuous and intermittent white lines, when the continuous line is nearest to the
driver. Special safety regulations are being applied to the new motorways.
All drivers of motor vehicles—including motor cycles, motor scooters and
powered pedal cycles—have to pass a driving test before being granted a sub¬
stantive licence to drive; until they pass the test they must obtain a ‘provisional’
licence which necessitates their displaying ‘L’ (Learner) plates and, in all cases
where vehicles are constructed to carry passengers, other than pillion passengers,
learner drivers must be accompanied by a qualified driver. Private motor cars,
motor-cycles and light goods vehicles which are ten years old or more will come
within the scheme for periodic vehicle tests under the Road Traffic Act, 1956.
In addition, vigorous road safety campaigns are conducted by local authorities
with the aid of Government grants. The Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents, which acts as the Government’s agent in this connection, assists and
co-ordinates these campaigns. The police and education authorities are actively
at work in the cause of road safety. The standard of conduct for all road users—
pedestrians and drivers—is set out in the Highway Code. A failure to observe the
code does not of itself render a person liable to criminal proceedings but may be
taken into account in any such proceedings.
Many cities in Britain are planning measures to alleviate traffic congestion. In
London, and in some other local authority areas, parking meters have been intro¬
duced to regulate the length of time vehicles are parked; and increased off-street
parking facilities are being provided. Several extensive schemes for the improve¬
ment of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion are being undertaken: these
include ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads from cities; and, as an
experiment, the designation of certain stretches of four trunk roads as ‘clearways’,
on which waiting on the carriageway is (with certain exceptions) prohibited.
INLAND WATERWAYS
In 1761, James Brindley completed the Bridgewater Canal to take coal from the
collieries owned by the Duke of Bridgewater at Worsley to Manchester. This
374
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
marked the beginning of canal building in modem Britain which played an impor¬
tant part in promoting the industrial and commercial expansion of the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. As railway competition developed, about one-third
of the canal mileage passed to the control of the railways. During the first world
war, Government control of railways included railway-owned canals and, under
the Transport Act, 1947, most of the country’s canals passed from Government
control, which had been re-established in the second world war, to that of the
British Transport Commission in January 1948.
The System
There are some 2,600 miles of navigable inland waterways in Great Britain,
some 1,900 miles of which now belong to the British Transport Commission; the
remainder is still in the hands of local authorities or private companies. About
1,000 miles of the commission’s canals are narrow waterways which can generally
be used only by boats not exceeding 7 feet in width, capable of carrying a load
varying from 25 to 30 tons; the remainder are broad waterways and canalised
rivers which can be used by craft of up to 400 tons capacity. The canals in Scotland
are all broad waterways.
Of the 2,170 miles of inland waterways which originally came under the control
of the British Transport Commission, 283 miles have been closed to navigation or
abandoned, leaving 1,887 miles still open, of which 1,416 miles are in commercial
use. Since 1955, the canals have been managed separately by the waterways
division of the commission, known as British Waterways. For administrative
purposes the canals in England and Wales are grouped into four divisions, based
on the main navigable river estuaries, each group under a divisional manager. In
Scotland, the Caledonian Canal and the Crinan Canal each have a separate manager,
and the Forth and Clyde, Monkland and Union Canals are grouped together
under another manager.
In 1958, total traffic on British Waterways amounted to 9-3 million tons, of
which 4-1 million tons were coal, 2*1 million tons liquids in bulk and 3-1 million
tons general cargo. Some three-quarters of the total traffic is carried on 325 miles
of the broad waterways, which are mainly canalised rivers (see below).
Although British Waterways is the largest single operator, most of the traffic is
handled by independent carriers, or by traders in their own craft. The British
Transport Commission, at the end of 1958, owned 21 tugs and 1,137 carrying craft |
with a carrying capacity of 47,726 tons, including 200 power-driven craft with a
carrying capacity of 9,657 tons.
Development
Since assuming control, the British Transport Commission has strengthened
the commercial organisation; it has improved dredging methods and equipment,
brought better types of craft into service, established a research organisation and
undertaken various development works. Following the report, issued in 1955, by a
specially appointed Board of Survey, a comprehensive five-year development plan
was begun in 1956. Under this plan, nearly £6 million is being invested in the
improvement of navigation and the provision of modern equipment on the seven j
major waterways that carry most of the traffic—the Aire and Calder Navigation,
the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation, the Trent Navigation, the river Lee,
the river Severn, the river Weaver, and the Grand Union Canal (on the stretch
below Berkhamsted). In addition, since 1955, British Waterways have spent
approximately £750,000 in extending and improving warehousing and terminal
facilities, on the building of new traffic craft and the modernisation of existing
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 375
vessels. Annual maintenance expenditure on the other canals of commercial
importance has increased from £582,000 in 1954 to over £870,000 in 1958.
In July 1958, the report was published of the Committee of Inquiry into Inland
Waterways appointed by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation in 1956 to
examine the future of the country’s system of inland waterways and, in February
1959, the Government outlined its views on the main recommendations expressed
in the report. It proposes to apply measures on an experimental basis for two years;
it is hoped that the experience gained during this period will be of value in framing
future legislation.
The development of those waterways designated by the committee as Class A
(about 380 miles, which can earn a surplus from commercial operations) will con¬
tinue to be the main point of effort, and the British Transport Commission has
already spent about £2 million on their improvement. Class B waterways (about 930
miles, which operate at a loss but are still of commercial value) are not thought to
justify the spending of substantial sums in improvements. For the third category,
Class C waterways (considered by the committee to have no further value for com¬
mercial navigation), the Government has set up an Inland Waterways Redevelop¬
ment Advisory Committee to consider and assist in the promotion of redevelopment
schemes. For Scotland, the committee recommended that the Caledonian and
Crinan canals should be kept in being as navigation canals and that the Crinan
canal should be improved; these proposals are still under consideration.
LONDON TRANSPORT
London is, with Tokyo and New York, one of the world’s three largest cities.
The area known as Greater London, within a radius of about 15 miles from Charing
Cross, contains over 8 million people.
London’s passenger transport system, in its modern sense, began in 1829 when
the first omnibus, horse-drawn, appeared in the London streets. The first regular
tram service, also horse-drawn, began in 1870. In 1863, the first underground steam
railway, the Metropolitan, was built by digging a great trench for the line and
roofing it over. In 1870, the world’s first tube railway, the Tower Subway, was
constructed under the river Thames; it was cable-operated and ran for only a few
months. In 1890, the first electric tube railway in the world was opened, the City
and South London line, and this was followed in 1900 by the Central London
Railway, then followed the electrification of the steam-operated underground lines.
Meanwhile, horse-drawn buses and trams were being replaced by motor buses and
electric trams.
Until 1933, there were many separate undertakings providing passenger transport
facilities in London, but in that year these were all vested in a single public corpora¬
tion, the London Passenger Transport Board. In 1948, with the establishment of
the British Transport Commission, the London Transport Executive took over
control.
The London Transport Executive
The London Transport Executive, which consists of a chairman, vice-chairman,
three full-time members and three part-time members, operates and manages, on
behalf of the British Transport Commission, all bus, coach and underground rail¬
way services in the London area in conjunction with British Railways, which
provide the main-line and suburban railway services. (Some 6,000 taxicabs that
ply for hire in the streets are privately operated by companies or owner-drivers
and are licensed annually by the metropolitan police.) London Transport s opera-
2 B
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
376
tions extend beyond Greater London to cover an area of 2,000 square miles (known
as the London Passenger Transport Area) with a radius of about 25 miles from
Charing Cross and with a population of some 10 million. In 1958, 3,176 million
passenger journeys were made on the London Transport system.
London Transport’s railway network stretches 18 miles from north to south,
32 miles from east to west, and 49 miles from north-west to east. The total length
of the railway over which London Transport trains operate is 259 miles, of which
90 miles are underground, including the longest tube tunnel in the world, 17^ miles
long. London Transport trains serve 280 stations.
At the end of 1958, London Transport’s diesel buses and coaches travelled over
2,819 miles of roads, and trolleybuses (which are operated by electricity) over
253 miles.
To carry traffic over all this area, the London Transport Executive in December
1958 owned 4,037 railway cars, 7,363 buses and coaches and 1,536 trolleybuses.
The total staff employed at the end of 1958 was 81,252, of whom 10,978 were
women.
Since 1945, all tramcars have been replaced by buses, and now most of the
trolleybuses are being replaced, after 20 years continuous service, by diesel buses.
The underground railways have been extended, and a new combined interchange
station linking three lines at Netting Hill Gate was opened in March 1959. Since
the beginning of 1958, the London Transport Executive has placed orders worth
over £20 million for new rolling stock, to be completed by 1962 at the latest, and
has undertaken £5 million worth of further track improvement schemes, which
should also be completed by 1962. These are part of a general modernisation
scheme for the Underground, on which over £30 million, including replacement
of rolling stock, is expected to be spent in the four years to 1963. Proposals are
under consideration for a new tube railway, estimated to cost £55 million, between
Victoria Station and Walthamstow, in north-east London.
PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN NORTHERN IRELAND
With the exception of passenger transport in Belfast, which is provided by the
city corporation, public road passenger and freight transport and rail services
within Northern Ireland are provided by the Ulster Transport Authority, a public
body which was established under the Transport Act (Northern Ireland), 1948.
The road passenger section of the authority’s undertaking operates a wide
network of omnibus services and an extensive programme of coach tours. The
road freight section provides a comprehensive service for the carriage of merchandise
of all descriptions (including heavy indivisible loads and livestock) and can supply
vehicles under contract for the exclusive use of traders. A chain of hotels is also
owned by the authority.
Since October 1958, when the authority took over the Northern Ireland section
of the Great Northern Railway, the authority has operated 336 route miles of
railway.
The following figures relate to the authority’s undertaking during the year
ended 30th September, 1958; they do not cover the additional 169 route miles of
the Great Northern Railway system nor the traffic on that system.
Permanent way (open for operation) . . . . 167 miles
Locomotives . . . . . . . . . . 45
Diesel rail cars and trailers . . . . . . 73
Railway coaching vehicles . . . . . . 252
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
377
Railway freight vehicles
Road route mileage (omnibus)
Omnibuses and coaches
Goods motor vehicles and trailers
Passengers carried during year (rail and road)
Merchandise carried during year (rail and road)
Livestock carried during year (rail and road)
2,315
2,660 miles
982
1,440
91,492,030
1,529,019 tons
932,824 head
Roads
There are 13,735 miles of public roads in Northern Ireland, comprising 347 miles
of trunk roads, 961 miles of Class I roads, 1,757 miles of Class II roads, 2,867 miles
of Class III roads and 7,803 miles of unclassified roads. The Ministry of Commerce
is responsible for the maintenance and improvement of the trunk roads and makes
grants from the Road Fund (which is derived from such sources as the proceeds of
taxation of mechanically propelled vehicles registered in Northern Ireland and from
driving licence fees) to help the local authorities who are responsible for the other
roads. During the year ended 31st March, 1958, a total of million was spent
on work on all types of roads in Northern Ireland.
CIVIL AVIATION
United Kingdom civil air services are provided by the two public corporations
British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) and British European Airways
(BEA) and by some twenty independent air transport companies. Most of the
regular scheduled air services operated from the United Kingdom are reserved to
BOAC and BEA. The independent companies are permitted to operate certain
scheduled services as associates of the two corporations, but by far the greater part
of their operations consists of charter work, including the carrying of troops. The
corporations may also undertake charter work, though they do not maintain
aircraft specially for this purpose.
The development of United Kingdom civil air services since 1947 is shown in
Table 25.
Growth of Air Services
British airmen were among the first to carry mails (at the time of the Coronation
of H.M. King George V in 1911) and among the first to operate regular mail and
passenger services. The actual inauguration of British civil air transport came on
25th August, 1919, when a daily passenger service was opened between London
(Hounslow) and Paris (Le Bourget). The year 1919 was also marked by notable
pioneer flights including the crossing of the Atlantic by John Alcock and Arthur
Whitten Brown in June (both were later knighted for their achievement) and the
first flight between England and Australia by Captain (later Sir) Ross Smith and
his crew.
In April 1924, four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited, which received a Government grant of £1 million spread over the next ten
years. As a substantial shareholder the Government was represented on the board
of directors.
Imperial Airways Limited pioneered the commercial development of inter¬
continental air routes (including the organisation of ground services), following up,
in many cases, the exploratory work of the Royal Air Force. By 1929, there was a
through service from England to India. In 1931, the first service was established
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
378
to Central Africa. The first mail service to Australia started in December 1934,
followed by a passenger service in 1935. During a part of 1939, Imperial Airways
operated an experimental transatlantic service for mail.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation was established by the British
Overseas Airways Act, 1939, and took over the undertakings of Imperial Airways
Limited and British Airways Limited in 1940. During the second world war,
BOAC operated essential overseas air services in support of the war effort. By the
end of the war, it was carrying more than twice as many passengers as in 1939 and
more than three times as much freight. The routes, moreover, had efficient radio
and radar systems which had been installed for war purposes and which were
adapted for civilian use.
TABLE 25
United Kingdom Airways Operations on Scheduled Services
Domestic Services
Calendar Years
BEA
Passengers
Carried
’000
Total Load
Short
Ton-Miles
’000
Independent Companies
Passengers
Carried
’000
Total Load
Short
Ton-Miles
’000
1947 (a)
1949 (a)
1952 ..
1955 ..
1958 ..
342
453
669
1,212
1,164
4,252
6,971
11,087
21,694
24,338
61
70
220
304
481
907
3,186
4,592
International Services
Calendar Years
BEA & BOAC
Passengers
Carried
’000
Total Load
Short
Ton-Miles
’000
Independent Companies
Passengers
Carried
’000
Total Load
Short
Ton-Miles
’000
1947 (a)
1949 (a)
1952 ..
1955 ..
1958 . .
244
468
1,064
1,782
2,061
61,879
87,734
164,203
222,924
278,097
11
52
275
455
293
2,370
17,030
22,540
Source: Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation.
(a) Figures for international services in these years include the operations of British
South American Airways, which was merged with BOAC in 1949.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
379
After the war, British European Airways was established, under the Civil
Aviation Act of 1946, as a separate public corporation to cover the United Kingdom
and Europe.
The one serious obstacle to a continued expansion of British civil air transport
after the war was the absence of any new British civil aircraft to take the place
of the pre-war types. The British aircraft industry throughout the war had
concentrated entirely on the production of fighters and bombers for the Allied
Forces, leaving the production of all transport aircraft to the United States.
Although this was a period of rapid expansion for the two corporations, it was not
until the entry into service of the first gas turbine powered aircraft, and particu¬
larly the turbo-prop Viscount, that civil aviation in the United Kingdom was able
to make the fullest use of its potentialities. The turbo-prop Britannia and the return
to regular service of the turbo-jet Comet have further enhanced the reputation of the
United Kingdom aircraft industry (see pp. 336-7) and British airlines.
The Role of the Government
Responsibility for the general development and supervision of United Kingdom
civil aviation rests with the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation. The Civil
Aviation Act of 1949, gives the minister the duty of ‘organising, carrying out and
encouraging measures for the development of civil aviation, for the designing,
development and production of civil aircraft, for the promotion of safety and
efficiency in the use thereof, and for research into questions relating to air navigation’.
The supervision of design, development and production of civil aircraft has been
delegated to the Ministry of Supply, which is also responsible for the provision of
all Service aircraft and carries on an extensive programme of research and
development to meet civil and Service needs.
In the international sphere, the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation is
responsible for participation in the work of the International Civil Aviation
Organisation (ICAO) of the United Nations Organisation and, with the Foreign
Office and the Commonwealth Relations Office, for dealings with other countries
relating to civil aviation. He also advises the Colonial Office on civil aviation matters.
The Government’s relations with the air corporations and with the independent
operators are described on pp. 380-81. Three special bodies advise the minister in
the exercise of certain of his responsibilities: the Air Transport Advisory Council,
the Air Registration Board and the Air Safety Board.
The Air Transport Advisory Council (ATAC). The ATAC was established by
the Civil Aviation Act of 1946, and its main function is to consider applications from
independent companies to operate scheduled services and to make recommendations
on them to the minister.
The Air Registration Board. The board was set up in 1937, and consists of
18 members, of whom 16 represent the interests concerned with civil aviation and
two are appointed by the minister. It is an independent, non-profit-making limited
company to which the minister has delegated certain functions relating to the design,
construction and maintenance of civil aircraft. The work of the board includes
the investigation, by its surveyors, of aircraft and associated equipment for the
purpose of making recommendations to the minister concerning the issue
and renewal of certificates of airworthiness. It also undertakes the technical
examination of aircraft maintenance engineers, flight engineers and commercial
pilots in relation to the issue of appropriate licences.
The Air Safety Board. The board is a standing advisory body of experts respon¬
sible to the minister for keeping under continuous review the needs of safety in
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
380
British civil aviation. It recommends measures to increase safety and efficiency in
the operation of British civil aircraft throughout the world and in the system of
ground facilities provided for all civil aircraft operating over the United Kingdom.
In exercising his responsibility for safety, the minister, advised by the board,
regulates the operation of aircraft, the conditions under which passengers and
cargo may be carried, the licensing of flight crews, the effectiveness of air traffic
control and of navigational aids (see below and p. 385).
The Corporations: Powers and Constitutions
The existing powers and constitutions of BOAC and BEA are laid down by the
Air Corporations Acts, 1949 to 1956. Each corporation consists of a chairman,
deputy-chairman and from 5 to 11 members, all of whom are appointed by the
minister. In the case of BOAC, the minister may, if he wishes, appoint two deputy-
chairmen.
The annual reports and statements of accounts of the two corporations are laid
before Parliament by the minister. In addition, each corporation must submit,
before the beginning of every planning period (of three years), a programme of the
services it proposes to provide and of any other activities it intends to undertake,
as well as an estimate of its receipts and expenditure on revenue and capital account
during the period.
Finance. Each corporation may, with Treasury consent, borrow either by raising
temporary loans or by issuing stock carrying a Treasury guarantee. In addition, the
Finance Act, 1956, permitted the corporations to raise money by means of interest-
bearing redeemable loans from the Exchequer, and these powers have been renewed
each year under the annual Finance Act. Under the Air Corporations Act, 1956,
the borrowing powers of BOAC and BEA are limited to £160 million and £60
million respectively. This Act also provides that BOAC may, with the consent of
the Treasury, borrow from the International Bank and the Export-Import Bank of
Washington in order to buy aircraft and spares manufactured in the United States
of America.
Ministerial Control. Although the minister is empowered to give general
directions on matters affecting the national interest, for example, the placing of
orders for aircraft, these powers are very seldom used. The corporations
function as commercial undertakings, and contact with the ministry is by means of
frequent but informal exchanges of views. The minister also keeps in touch with the
corporations regarding plans for new aircraft and new routes, since he has to
negotiate the necessary rights with foreign governments. He also provides most of
the aerodromes in the United Kingdom from which the corporations operate, and
the necessary navigational aids and communications.
Labour Relations. In 1946, the National Joint Council for Civil Air Transport
was set up as the body through which terms and conditions of service between the
corporations and the various trade unions, representing the employees, are
negotiated, and matters affecting safety, health, welfare and efficiency are discussed.
Independent Airline Companies: Government Policy
The policy of the Government is to achieve a fair and reasonable balance between
the airways corporations and the independent operators. Charter work has been the
main province of the independent companies, but, since 1948, they have been
permitted to operate scheduled services under associate agreements with the
corporations. In 1952, the independent companies became eligible, as are the
corporations, to apply for permission to develop new routes and new types of
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
381
scheduled services. The ATAC advises the minister on applications designed to
develop new services without materially diverting traffic from the existing services.
The ATAC’s terms of reference reserve to the corporations the right to provide
both first and second (or tourist) class services on their existing international
networks.
The ATAC publishes applications and, after hearing evidence from interested
parties, makes recommendations to the minister. Approval of the regular scheduled
services (but not the seasonal scheduled services) of independent companies,
operating as associates of the corporations, is now normally given for seven years,
with extension to ten years in special circumstances, for example, where the
purchase of new aircraft is involved. In this way, it is intended to give independent
companies sufficient long-term security to justify capital outlay and expansion.
Operations
The services, fleets and results of the two corporations and the activities of the
independent companies at mid-June 1959 are summarised below.
British Overseas Airways Corporation
BOAC operates scheduled services to the Middle and Far East and to Australia,
with terminals at Sydney, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore, Karachi, Bahrain,
Kuwait, Doha, Tehran, and Aden; to Africa, with terminals at Johannesburg,
Nairobi, Accra and Lagos; to North America and the Caribbean with terminals
at New York, Chicago, San Francisco, Montreal, and Jamaica; and to Caracas in
South America. There are regional services between New York and Bermuda,
Nassau and Jamaica; these services operate as extensions of the London—New York
route. In January i960, a route down the east coast of South America is to be
opened. The routes to Central and South Africa are operated in pool-partnership
with Central African Airways and South African Airways. Services to West Africa
and East Africa are similarly operated in pool-partnership with Ghana Airways,
Nigerian Airways, and the East African Airways Corporation. Services to Sydney
via the Middle and Far East continue to be operated in pool-partnership with
Qantas Empire Airways of Australia. In August i959> BOAC inaugurated its first
commercial round-the-world air service using turbine-powered aircraft, linking,
among other places, New York, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Rome and London.
This network of services is supplemented by the activities of subsidiary and
associated enterprises overseas in which BOAC participates financially or with
which it has technical or management agreements.
BOAC has a controlling financial interest in airlines operating in the southern
Red Sea area, the Caribbean and the Persian Gulf. It is associated, either financially
or through advisory and other agreements, with airlines providing services in
East, West and Central Africa, Malaya, the Far East, Borneo, Turkey, the Middle
East, and the Bahamas.
BOAC has introduced tourist services on many routes and, on transatlantic
services, an ‘economy’ class service with fares 20 per cent below the existing
tourist rates. In 1958—59, tourist and economy class passengers accounted for
69 per cent of those who travelled by BOAC’s transatlantic services; on its other
services, tourist class passengers made up 62 per cent of the total.
BOAC’s operational fleet in June 1959 consisted of: 13 Mark 4 Comets-,
15 medium-range Mark 102 Britannias] 17 long-range Mark 312 Britannias;
3 Argonauts and 10 DC yCs. Orders for the following British aircraft were
outstanding: 6 Mark 4 Comets and 35 Vickers VC 10s. In addition, orders had
been placed in the United States of America for 15 Boeing 707 jet aircraft.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
382
The Britannia 102 was introduced on BOAC’s eastern hemisphere services
during 1957. On 19th December, 1957, a Britannia 312 of BOAC’s fleet inaugurated
the world’s first gas turbine scheduled passenger transatlantic service, from London
to New York. The Mark 4 Comet turbo-jet airliners came into service on BOAC’s
North Atlantic route in the autumn of 1958 and on the eastern hemisphere services
at the beginning of 1959.
On all its services in the calendar year 1958, BOAC carried 465,263 passengers,
8,548 short tons of freight and 4,065 short tons of mail, compared with 117,627
passengers, 3,475 short tons of freight and 1,974 short tons of mail in 1948.
In 1951-52, BOAC for the first time made a net profit of £275,000, after payment
of interest on capital and before crediting the Exchequer grant in that year of
£1-5 million. Since 1952-53, BOAC has operated without Exchequer grant. From
1953-54 to 1956-57, the annual profit varied from £1 million to £117,000. In
i957~58, a loss of £2-8 million was incurred, and this increased to £4-75 million
in 1958-59. Adverse factors which gave rise to the setback included greatly increased
capital charges, losses suffered by associated airlines, a strike at London Airport
in the autumn of 1958, the cost of the change-over in fleets, and difficult trading
conditions generally.
From 1947-48 to 1958-59, the capacity on BOAC services increased from 89-5
million to 364 million capacity ton-miles, operating revenue increased from £14-6
million to £57-6 million, and operating costs were reduced from 57-7 pence per
capacity ton-mile to 36-3 pence.
British European Airways
BEA is the seventh largest airline in the world and the largest in Europe, judged
by the annual number of passengers carried—2,760,000 in the calendar year 1958. In
that year it operated on its own behalf, in conjunction with its associated companies
and subsidiaries, a network of services covering 39,916 unduplicated route miles,
serving 82 airports in the United Kingdom, Europe, North Africa, and the Persian
Gulf, within a periphery on which the farthest points to the north, south, west and
east are Bergen, Doha, Lisbon and Moscow. Its services within the United
Kingdom include a number which cannot be operated commercially but which
meet a vital social need; these include services to the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland. Tourist fares have been introduced on all BEA’s routes. BEA maintains
a close working relationship with BOAC, whose aircraft, by agreement, use a number
of European stopping points. BEA also co-operates with other airlines in order to
create ‘through travel’ facilities.
BEA’s operational fleet in June 1959 comprised 24 Viscount 701s, 21 Viscount
802s, 19 Viscount 806s, 34 Pionairs, 7 Pionair Leopard freighters, 2 Herons, 3 Rapides
and 5 helicopters. At that date 20 Vanguards, 6 Mark 4B Comets and 24 DH 121s
were on order.
The Viscount V 701 ‘Discovery’ class was brought into regular scheduled
service in April 1953, on the routes to Istanbul and Cyprus, thus inaugurating the
world’s first commercial operations with propeller-turbine aircraft. A larger
version, the Viscount 802, was brought into service in February 1957 between
London and Paris. Since September 1958, practically all BEA’s international
services have been operated by Viscounts. On the Moscow route, which opened in
May 1959, the Viscount 806 is used. In i960, BEA will be taking delivery of the
larger and more powerful turbo-propeller Vanguard. In the same year, it will also
inaugurate its first turbo-jet service with the 500 m.p.h. Comet 4B\ this will pave
the way for the 600 m.p.h. DH 121 jet airliners which have been ordered by BEA
for delivery between 1963 and 1966.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
383
From 1950 to 1956, BEA operated various experimental scheduled services
with helicopters in order to obtain experience in their civil operation. This
experience can be used to assist the design and production of a commercial British
helicopter that can be operated economically, and also the development of
navigational aids and ground facilities. Two British helicopters are being
developed—the Westland Westminster and the Fairey Rotodyne—which may prove
suitable for airline service within the next few years.
In addition to 2,760,000 passengers, BEA carried 30,450 short tons of freight and
7,600 short tons of mail in the year 1958. The figures in 1948 were 511,522
passengers, 2,610 short tons of freight and 1,558 short tons of mail.
Over the period 1947-48 to 1958-59, BEA’s capacity increased from 22 million
to 180 million capacity ton-miles, operating revenue from £4 million to £32 million,
and total costs were reduced from 83-6 pence per capacity ton-mile to 40-2 pence.
BEA is faced with the problem of securing adequate revenue from short-haul
routes aggravated by a marked seasonal variation in its traffic.
In 1954-55, BEA achieved its first net profit of £63,000. In i955-56, it earned a
net profit of £603,614 which was sufficient to wipe out its accumulated deficit
and leave a surplus of £64,528. In 1958-59, despite losses caused by the exception¬
ally bad flying weather of the winter, BEA made a profit of £233>000"
hidependent Airline Companies
Because the air corporations were already operating services on all the major
international routes in 1952, most of the opportunities for the independent
companies to undertake scheduled services have been in the operation of secondary
routes and the provision of special types of services. The secondary routes on which
the independent companies provide passenger services consist mainly of domestic
routes and routes from United Kingdom provincial centres to Europe and the
Channel Islands. They also operate third-class services (known as colonial coach
class services) to points in the Colonies, and tourist class services to Ghana and
Tunis. The coach class services are provided along routes already covered by the
scheduled services of BOAC, but the independent companies operate with fewer
passenger amenities and older types of aircraft. Other special services are vehicle
ferry services from the United Kingdom to Europe, inclusive holiday tour services
to Europe and to Africa, and all-freight services, also to Europe and Africa. Some
of the larger companies operate subsidiaries in overseas countries and, in some cases,
also provide management services for foreign airlines.
Passenger traffic on the independent companies’ scheduled services has nsen
from 122,000 in 1952 to 938,000 in 1958. The number of cars carried on the vehicle
ferry services has risen from 6,797 in 1952 to 63,591 in 1958.
Charter Services. The greater part of the independent companies’ operations still
consist of general charter work, notably air trooping which accounts for more than
half the total passenger miles flown by independent airlines on all operations, both
scheduled and charter. Other charter work includes the carrying of ships crews to
and from overseas ports; transporting the staff of public or private concerns
operating overseas; taking parties to football matches and race meetings in the
British Isles; carrying livestock, machinery, foodstuffs, flowers and other valuable,
fragile or perishable cargo. There are also several firms that specialise in
other aerial activities, notably aerial survey and pest control. Most of the companies
are members of the British Independent Air Transport Association.
Much charter business is now arranged through the air section of the Baltic
Exchange, the London market for shipping space (see p. 358), where business from
any part of the world is handled between brokers representing the owners of
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
384
aircraft available for hire and the prospective shippers of cargo or organisers of
passenger trips. Inquiries for the charter of aircraft were first received on the
Baltic Exchange as long ago as 1925, but it was not until 1947 that an air section
was formed. The Airbrokers Association, formed in February 1949, operates, in
London, a world market for chartering aircraft to carry cargo and passengers.
Aerodromes
The Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation is authorised to establish and
maintain civil aerodromes, and so may local authorities, subject to his approval;
there are also privately owned aerodromes. All aerodromes, not operated by the
Government, used for commercial operations are subject to the minister’s licensing,
inspection and regulation.
There are approximately no civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom and, in
addition, about 56 Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those under civil
control include 26 directly controlled by the ministry, 3 in the Channel Islands
and 1 in the Isle of Man (administered by the local island governments) and 25
aerodromes licensed for public use, of which 16 are owned by municipalities.
Customs facilities are provided at 14 of the ministry’s aerodromes and at 9 others.
The main airports used by international scheduled services in 1958-59 were:
for European services: London, Manchester (Ringway), Renfrew, and
Birmingham (Elmdon);
for North Atlantic services: London, Manchester (Ringway), and Prestwick;
for Middle East, African and Far East services: London.
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal aerodromes continue to
increase. In 1958, all United Kingdom civil aerodromes handled 7-1 million pas¬
sengers. Of this total, London Airport dealt with 3-56 million, and Gatwick, 186,000.
Outside the London area, Manchester (Ringway) handled the largest number,
505,000; followed by Glasgow (Renfrew), 443,500; Belfast (Nutt’s Corner), 270,000;
Ferryfield (Kent), 223,000; Prestwick, 218,500; and Isle of Man (Ronaldsway),
196,000. The number of movements of aircraft engaged on commercial transport
operations in 1958 was 339,853 for all United Kingdom aerodromes.
Development
London Airport, already the largest and busiest airport in Western Europe,
will be strained to capacity within the next few years owing both to the increasing
number of passengers and to the increased size of the new jet aircraft that many
international airlines are bringing into service. The recommendations of a special
committee, set up in 1957, to consider the future of London Airport have been
accepted by the Government as the framework of the airport’s development. Most
of the European short-haul services are now handled at the new passenger buildings
in the central terminal area opened in April 1955. Another passenger building,
for the long-haul operators, at present handled at the north terminal, is to be
built in the central terminal, to be followed by other buildings; additional aircraft
stands are also being constructed. The new airport at Gatwick, 25 miles south of
London, which was opened by H.M. the Queen in June 1958, has been developed
as the second airport for London. Initially it is being used as the main bad weather
alternate to London Airport, and for services to the Channel Islands by BEA and
some of the independent operators; eventually many more European services are
expected to operate from this airport. Built alongside the main London to Brighton
railway, it is the first airport in the world to contain road, rail and air transport in
one unit. A privately owned helicopter terminal (or ‘heliport’) was opened in
London, on the south bank of the Thames, in April 1959.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
385
Prestwick (near Ayr, in Scotland), the second international airport in the United
Kingdom, is to be developed so that it can accommodate the new large jet aircraft.
The runways at Ringway Airport, near Manchester, have been lengthened and a new
terminal building is being built.
Air Traffic Control and Navigation Services
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation is responsible for providing
efficient navigation and traffic control services for all civil aircraft flying over or
near the United Kingdom. Meteorological information is provided by the Air
Ministry. The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation’s Air Traffic Control
Service is responsible for the safe, orderly and expeditious movement of all civil
airliners flying into the United Kingdom along the corridors of controlled airspace
called airways. ... • rp. re¬
in July 1959, the Government announced its intention to set up an Air Traffic
Control Board to formulate policy covering both civil and military aircraft and to
co-ordinate the work of all United Kingdom authorities concerned with air traffic
control. The board, to consist of senior representatives of the ministries concerned
under an independent chairman, will be assisted by an air traffic control executive
and will be responsible jointly to the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation and
the Secretary of State for Air.
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation introduced a system of airways
covering the main traffic routes and associated with controlled zones around the
major airports in i95°- During 1957 and 1958 a revised and extended airways
system was brought into use. There are three main air traffic control centres,
operated jointly by the ministry’s Air Traffic Control Service and by the Royal
Air Force, at London Airport for southern England, at Preston for the north of
England and Wales, and at Prestwick for Scotland and the Atlantic. The Southern
Air Traffic Control Centre, situated on the boundary of London Airport, is one of
the most advanced control centres in the world.
In order to provide the means by which the air traffic control system can accept
the increasingly heavy load of air traffic, the ministry has provided a variety of
radar installations and equipment. The United Kingdom was the first country to
use radar for the control of civil air traffic. The radar approach system known as
Ground Controlled Approach (GCA) is now in use at all major airports in the
United Kingdom, in addition to the Instrument Landing System (ILS). A series of
long-range radar stations that is being set up will extend radar coverage very widely.
The ministry has provided a number of radio navigational aids, many of them
operating on very high frequency (VHF), to help aircraft to remain safely within
the controlled airspace and to make accurate estimates of their time of arrival. In
addition, the ministry supports the Decca Air and Marine Navigator System now
operating over a wide area of the United Kingdom and northern Europe which
can be used, by arrangement with the Decca Company, by any aircraft fitted with
the appropriate receiving equipment. Research is in progress into new landing
aids for use in bad weather. A unit of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, at Bedford,
is developing an automatic landing system which is expected to be in use within the
next few years. Consideration is also being given to the employment of the fog
dispersal apparatus (FIDO) at London Airport to enable aircraft to land and take
off in dense fog.
Radio stations maintained by the ministry provide air to ground communications
for the use of the Air Traffic Control Service. There is also a network of communi¬
cations between ground stations in the United Kingdom and between United
Kingdom and overseas ground stations.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
386
On routes outside the United Kingdom, British airline operators rely upon
ground organisation provided by the countries over which they fly. In January
1947, the airways corporations took the initiative in forming a company, registered
in the United Kingdom, called International Aeradio Limited (IAL), for the purpose
of helping countries in need of assistance by providing radio communications, air
traffic control and navigational facilities for civil aviation. Airlines of other countries
have accepted invitations to become shareholders, and the membership is broadly
representative of international civil aviation. IAL operates by entering into con¬
tracts with Governments to provide whatever degree of assistance is required to
enable States or Administrations to fulfil their international obligations under the
Chicago Convention on Civil Aviation for the provision and maintenance of ground
facilities for civil aviation. In 1959, International Aeradio Ltd. was operating,
either directly or through subsidiary or associated companies, in 26 countries.
It has over 40 overseas stations all over the world as w7ell as at Yeadon (Yorkshire),
Cranfield (Bedfordshire) and London in the United Kingdom. In all overseas areas,
IAL trains locally engaged staff up to the standards required for the services it
provides; this policy has been so successful that more than 85 per cent of overseas
staff are locally recruited. At Southall, Middlesex, IAL has established a School of
Air Traffic Control to train its own air traffic control officers as well as those from
other interested organisations.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office with its staff of some 371,000 is a Government department.
It is also the oldest of Britain’s State undertakings. In 1657, under the Protectorate
of Cromwell, an Act of Parliament was passed which declared that ‘there shall be
one general post-office and one officer, styled the Postmaster General of England
and Comptroller of the Post Office’.1
The ministerial head of the Post Office is the Postmaster General who, with the
Assistant Postmaster General, is responsible to Parliament for his department.
Under the Postmaster General, the permanent head of the Post Office is the
Director General, who is supported by three Deputy Directors General, one of
whom is the Comptroller and Accountant General, and an Engineer-in-Chief.
At the next level there are eight departmental directors and a Public Relations
Officer. The Post Office headquarters is in St. Martin’s-le-Grand in the City of
London.
Six of the main divisions of work at headquarters are carried down into the
organisation of three directorates—Scotland, Wales and Border Counties, and
Northern Ireland—each under the control of a director of the Post Office, and, in
England, seven regions, each under the control of a regional director; London
has two regional directors, one for postal services and one for telecommunications.
In the United Kingdom there are 472 head post offices, nearly 24,500 subordinate
post offices, and 56 telephone areas.
The staff at headquarters and in the directorates and regions is divided into two
main groups: general Civil Service grades (administrative, executive and clerical)
and special grades recruited directly by the Post Office for its engineering and
operational activities.
The Postmaster General normally presides over meetings of the Post Office
1 Charles II declared all Cromwellian Acts null and void at the Restoration, but his
Parliament passed a similar Act in 1660.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
387
Advisory Council, on which the principal users of the Post Office services are
represented. In addition, there are about 190 local Post Office Advisory Com¬
mittees, on which are represented local authorities, chambers of commerce,
women's organisations, the press and other local interests, these committees are
formed on the initiative of, and are maintained by, the local interests, and are not
organs of the Post Office.
The work of the Post Office falls into two main categories: (1) direct services—
mail services, telecommunications, remittance and savings bank business; (2)
agency services—broadcasting services and business undertaken on behalf of other
Government departments.
Although a Government department, the Post Office is also a trading concern,
and is required to ensure that its income is sufficient to meet its expenditure, taking
one year with another. Except for the periods 1933-40 and from 1956 onwards, any
surplus of income over expenditure was handed over to the Exchequer. Since
1956, the Post Office has been required to contribute £5 million a year to the
Exchequer—this being broadly the amount which it would pay in general taxation
but for its exemption. Any remaining surplus or deficit is carried to a general reserve
account.
Mail Services
The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from the
time when horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modern airmail
transport. There was a great expansion in the postal services in the eighteenth
century with the introduction of mail-coaches in 1784. In the first half of the
nineteenth century, the Post Office was quick to take advantage of Britain’s early
lead in engineering and railway development, and the first dispatch of mails by
train was made in 1830 between Liverpool and Manchester.
The heavy charges, based upon the actual distance a letter was carried, were
among the factors which inspired Rowland Hill in his great work of postal reform
that led to the establishment of a uniform postage rate. In 1840, a uniform inland
rate of postage of one penny per half-ounce payable in advance came into operation,
prepayment to be made by means of adhesive postage stamps. Since the business
world found cheap postage a boon and since it proved ultimately a great financial
success, it was imitated by almost every country in the world.
The inauguration of the penny post (the rate remained unchanged until iQiS)1
was followed by a rapid extension of the scope of the postal services, beginning in
1841 with the introduction of the registered post to ensure additional safety for
valuable mail. The money order system, which had operated as a private venture
from 1792 to 1838, was supplemented in 1881 by the issue of postal orders for
fixed amounts. Letterboxes had been instituted in London in 1855 to facilitate the
increased postal traffic, and in 1883 the parcel post was introduced. By the end of
the nineteenth century a regular delivery of letters was assured to every house in
Britain. In the twenty years from 1938-39 to 1957-58, the parcel post increased
from 185 million items a year to 247 million, registered postal traffic from 62
million to 102 million and other postal correspondence from 8,240 million to 9,600
million. Every day the Post Office handles about 27 million letters and parcels.
Each year the Post Office deals with an ever-increasing volume of Christmas mail;
during the Christmas-New Year season, 1958-59, more than 864 million letters
and cards were posted.
The Post Office’s services have been developed to match the needs of the traffic.
1 The minimum postage rate for inland letters is now 3d. for one ounce.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
388
Improvements include the provision of motor mail vans1 and electrical trucks for
parcel deliveries, controlled by walking postmen, postal-sorting carriages on the
railways, special mail trains on certain routes and the ingenious apparatus by which
bags of mail are delivered and collected by trains running at express speed. For
quick transmission of mails within the central area of London, the Post Office has
for 30 years operated an automatically controlled underground railway that runs
for 6+ miles connecting Paddington in the west with Whitechapel in the east and
serving six intermediate stations; a seventh station is under construction.
The Post Office Research Station at Dollis Hill, London, has developed a partly
electronic letter-sorting machine (ELSIE). Twenty prototype machines are being
tested at busy centres, and at Norwich all the sorting of small letters is being
mechanised. Following a survey conducted to find out if members of the public
would be prepared to use postal codes in addresses on mail, to facilitate sorting by
electronic machines, an experimental scheme, described as being in advance of
anything of its kind in the world, was launched in Norwich in July 1959. A parcel¬
sorting machine has been developed, and new parcel offices being erected in
London, Leeds and Manchester are designed to accommodate units. Field experi¬
ments are being carried out with machines for separating letters and packets, and
for automatic ‘letter-facing’ (ALF), i.e. stacking letters with all the stamps in the
same corner. Experiments are being undertaken with machines for selling postal
orders. The main post offices are being equipped with machines for issuing parcel
post labels printed with the appropriate value, and the date and name of the office,
thus avoiding the use of stamps and eliminating the operation of cancelling the
stamps.
Airmail Services
Railways and motor vans as means of transport for mails are supplemented by
ships and aeroplanes. Each year about 3,000 tons of mail are carried by air within
the United Kingdom. Special night air services for mails are run between Great
Britain, Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. In the year ended March 1958,
total overseas correspondence amounted to 503 million items, 51 per cent of which
travelled by air. First-class mail to all European countries is sent by air or by surface
transport, whichever offers earlier delivery, without payment of any air surcharge.
The Post Office dispatches about 32 tons of letter mail a week to European destina¬
tions by this ‘all-up’ service, mainly in aircraft of British European Airways, whose
network of services enables many of the letters posted in London for Europe to be
delivered the following day. The air parcel service now operates to all countries in
Europe except Roumania, and about 10 tons of parcel mail are dispatched weekly
to Europe by air.
First-class mail and second-class mail are dispatched by air to countries outside
Europe upon payment of special airmail rates of postage. Light-weight air letters
costing 6d. each are popular, and air parcel services are also available to 158
countries outside Europe.
Telegraphs
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of the
Postmaster General in 1870. Teleprinter-working for the transmission of inland
telegrams was introduced generally in 1928 and conversion to the present automatic
switching system was completed in mid-1954. It is now one of the most up-to-date
1 In 1919, the Post Office inaugurated its own motor transport fleet with 48 vehicles;
this fleet now numbers over 37,500, of which about 14,500 are red mail vans, and 19,000
are green engineering vans.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
389
systems in the world and gives direct connection between any of the 500 larger
telegraph offices. The Post Office accepted 15 million inland telegrams in 1957-58,
and the average time between handing in an inland telegram and its receipt at the
delivery office was 20 minutes.
Telex
The Telex Service provides communication between subscribers with the speed
of the telephone and the authority of the printed word. The printed copy of the
message is produced on the teleprinters at both the sending and receiving sub¬
scribers’ installations. Calls may be made between telex subscribers in the United
Kingdom (over 5,250 by mid-1959) and between them and some 100,000
subscribers in many countries overseas. The service is available day and
night except on a few routes outside Europe; messages may be transmitted to a
subscriber even though his teleprinter is unattended, and thus are available for
attention when his office reopens. Use of the telex service is expanding rapidly;
in 1957-58, total traffic increased by 27 per cent over the previous year.
The United Kingdom is divided into 50 charging areas, each with its telex centre.
Calls are connected at telex exchanges, most of which are staffed at present by
telegraphists; but in 1958 the first automatic telex exchanges were opened, and a
completely automatic service will be achieved by the end of i960, when subscribers
will be able to dial all calls within the United Kingdom. Charges for calls connected
by operators are based on the distance (measured in a straight line) between the
telex centres; the minimum chargeable period is three minutes. Charges for calls
dialled direct by subscribers are based on time and distance and there is no three
minute minimum.
Inland and overseas telegrams may be sent to the Post Office by telex; no charge
is made for the calls, and the telegrams are charged for at normal rates. Arrange¬
ments can also be made for incoming telegrams to be received by telex.
Telephones
When the Post Office bought the property of the National Telephone Company
in 1912, it became the owner of almost the whole telephone service in the country.
Local authorities wishing to operate their own telephone services were permitted
to do so under licence from the Postmaster General, but the only municipal system
now in existence is that provided by the Corporation of Hull. Local telephone
service in the Channel Islands is provided, also under licence, by their Govern¬
ments’ telephone departments. The Hull and Channel Islands local systems,
although operated independently of the Post Office system, are connected to the
Post Office trunk network.
At the end of March 1958, there were 6,000 telephone exchanges in the United
Kingdom. There were some 7-36 million telephones, including 72,000 telephone
call offices for public use. Four-fifths of the telephones are connected to automatic
exchanges. The number of applicants waiting for telephones has been reuuced
from 233,000 to 60,000 within the last three years. In January 1958, a scheme of
simplified charges was introduced as a first step towards the goal of a fully automatic
telephone service. A system of national telephone numbers is planned, which will
make it possible to dial trunk calls. Trunk dialling by subscribers began in Bristol
in December 1958; by the end of i960, about forty other towns will have similar
equipment and, by 1970, it is hoped that three-quarters of all trunk calls will be
dialled by subscribers. The introduction of this new group routing and charging
equipment (GRACE) will bring the advantages of quicker service, automatic
accounting and cheap long distance calls of short duration, and will constitute the
390
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
most radical reform of the telephone service since the Post Office assumed national
responsibility for it.
The number of trunk calls made has trebled since 1939; in the year ended
31st March, 1958, the Post Office handled a total of 327 million, of which about
a quarter were at the cheap night rate, available from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m., and on
Sundays from 2 p.m. The number of local calls handled during the year ended
31st March, 1958, was 3,671 million, an increase of 73 per cent compared with
I938-39-
There are several specialised services available by telephone. Well over 90 per
cent of subscribers connected to automatic exchanges can use the ‘999’ emergency
dialling service, which enables them to be connected as quickly as possible to
the police, ambulance or fire brigade, and in certain coastal districts to lifeboat and
coastguard stations. The automatic time service gives over 3 million callers access
to the correct time when they dial the three-letter code TIM or a figure code which
connects them to a speaking clock. A telephone weather forecast service is available
in eight cities. In London, a telephone information service provides details in
English, French and German of important events being held in and around the
capital on the day of the call.
Overseas Telecommunications
All the overseas telephone services from the United Kingdom have for a great
many years been developed and operated by the Post Office. The overseas telegraph
services, on the other hand, were shared until 1950 between the Post Office and
Cable and Wireless Ltd. This company was brought into public ownership in
1947; the Post Office acquired the United Kingdom services, and operates all
overseas telecommunications services from the United Kingdom, except for those
offered by foreign telegraph companies. Cable and Wireless Ltd., now a Govern¬
ment agency, continues to operate its cable and wireless services in many colonial
and foreign territories.
The overseas telegraph, telex and telephone services are operated from inter¬
national centres in London under the general title of Post Office Cable and Wireless
Services.
Telegraphs. Telegraph services to overseas countries are operated from Electra
House, Victoria Embankment, London. In the year ended 31st March, 1958,
11.5 million messages were transmitted from London, and a similar number
received.
Telex. The International Telex Exchange provides a teleprinter service to 40
countries abroad. In 1957-58, i-6 million outgoing international calls were
made, and a similar number received from abroad. Early in 1961, facilities
will be extended enabling subscribers in the United Kingdom to dial direct
to many European countries.
Telephones. Telephone service to European countries is through the Continental
Exchange in London, from which some 653 direct telephone circuits radiate
to 20 continental countries. These circuits, over which calls can be connected
to almost every country in Europe, are also used to send and receive pictures,
and special circuits are used for broadcast transmissions. In 1957-58,
2-25 million outgoing calls were made. Automatic dialling by operators to sub¬
scribers in certain European countries has been introduced on a small scale,
and will be developed progressively. Radio circuits which provide service with
most countries outside Europe and with many of the larger liners at sea are
connected through the International Exchange (also in London).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
391
On 25th September, 1956, the first transatlantic telephone cable—also the first
long-distance submarine telephone system in the world—was inaugurated. The
cable provides 43 telephone circuits with the United States and 13 with Canada.
Nine circuits are used to provide direct telephone communication between the
United States and eight continental countries. In addition to the telephone circuits,
the cable carries 24 telegraph channels to Canada, thereby supplementing the
existing telegraph cables and improving communications with Australia and New
Zealand via Canada. The system provides a secure service that is dependable day
and night and quite free from the uncertainties, distortions and fadeouts that affect
the transatlantic radiotelephone circuits. The whole project was undertaken jointly
by the United Kingdom Post Office, the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company and the Canadian Overseas Telecommunication Corporation, which
jointly maintain it. Before the cable was used, the weekly averages of radio calls
between Uondon and Canada and between Uondon and the United States were
530 and 2,320, respectively. By the end of 1958, traffic had risen to weekly averages
of 2,000 and 5,500.
Another transatlantic cable is to be laid by the Post Office cable ship HMTS
Monarch, between Scotland and Newfoundland, by 1961, Rt a cost of £9 million,
and will provide capacity for at least 60 simultaneous telephone conversations.
It will form part of the projected round-the-world Commonwealth telephone
cable agreed in principle at the Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference
held in Montreal in 1958. The first telephone cable between the United Kingdom
and Sweden is to be laid in i960, and one between Scotland, the Faroe Islands and
Iceland in 1961; later, this will link with a cable from Iceland via Greenland to
Canada.
A new cable ship of 4,000 tons is to be built for the Post Office, at a cost of about
£1-5 million. It will be used mainly for the maintenance of cables in the north
Atlantic.
The United Kingdom is a member of the International Telecommunication
Union, which is the co-ordinating body for telecommunications throughout the
world, and has its headquarters at Geneva.
Ship-to-Shore Radio Communications
In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post Office
has 11 coast radio stations in the United Kingdom. These stations provide for
radiotelegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea at ranges of
up to some 300 miles. There is also the long-distance radiotelegraph station at
Burnham-on-Sea, which communicates with ships in all parts of the world.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with safety
of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radiotelegraph and
radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or aircraft and take immediate
action to obtain assistance for any vessel in distress. During 1958, the stations
handled 252 urgent and SOS calls from ships and aircraft.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange radio-
telegrams with ships, connect radiotelephone calls between telephone subscribers
ashore and suitably equipped ships, broadcast navigational warnings and weather
bulletins, and operate direction-finding services for ships.
The stations also operate a free medical advice service whereby the Master of a
ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropriate medical authorities on
the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard ship. During 1958*
the stations dealt with 385 medical inquiries in this service.
2 c
392
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Post Office Counter: Agency and Direct Services
At the post office counter the citizen can draw his pension and his family
allowance, buy a licence for his gun, dog, sound radio or television receiving set,
renew his car licence and buy national insurance stamps and premium bonds. In
most of these and many similar transactions the Post Office is an agent for other
Government departments or local authorities. Largely as a result of the extension
of social legislation and the widening scope of the social services, the volume of
work measured on a time basis at post office counters has increased greatly com¬
pared with the total for 1938-39. In the twenty years to 1957-58, the value of
transactions with the public increased from just over £1,000 million to £5,099
million. In 1957-58, the Post Office paid out 38 million postal drafts in payment
of benefits under the National Insurance Scheme, and sold £57 million worth of
premium bonds.1
Counter sales include also an increasing volume of direct Post Office business:
during the year ended 31st March, 1958, about 671 million postal orders were
issued by post offices. The work of the Post Office Savings Bank is described in
Chapter XII (Finance) on pp. 437-8.
1 Post Office engineers were responsible for the development of ERNIE, the electronic
random number indicating equipment used for selecting winning premium bond numbers.
XI. LABOUR
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at end-June 1959 was about
24 million, some 48 per cent of the total population, and included about 72 per cent
of persons of normal working age (15 years to 59 years for women, 15 years to 64
years for men). In fact, about 95 per cent of British men of working age are today
in or seeking gainful work. The remaining 5 per cent consist mainly of those con¬
tinuing their education, of the severely disabled and of some persons of private
means. The proportion of women of working age in or seeking gainful work is
much lower, about 48 per cent, as many housewives have no wish to take employ¬
ment outside the home, or if they have, are prevented by household duties from
doing so. Besides those of normal working age, there are nearly ij million older
men and women still at work. The great majority of the working population work
for a wage or salary, but between 1J and if million are employers or self-employed.
The situation is markedly different in Northern Ireland, where the ratio of
working to total population is under 40 per cent, and farmers and smallholders
working their own holdings account for about an eighth of the working population.
Northern Ireland, however, has under 3 per cent of the United Kingdom popula¬
tion, so that the figures for Great Britain are broadly representative of the position
in the United Kingdom as a whole.
During the present century, decreases in both birth and death rates have had the
effect of increasing the proportion of both the total population and the working
population over the age of 35 years. Changes in social habits have also had their effect.
The minimum working age has been raised to 15 years. The proportion of those
over the normal working age who are occupied has declined (though the great
increase in the number of older persons has meant that the actual number who are
working has increased). The proportion of men aged 20 to 64 who are at work has
remained high and fairly uniform. Among women, on the other hand, there has
been a steady increase during the century in the proportions employed in the age
groups 15 to 59, but this has been offset by the raising of the minimum working age
and by a decrease in the proportion of women employed above the age of 59- There
has been a considerable increase in the employment of married women during this
century, most noticeably in the last twenty years.
The proportion of women at work is generally higher for single than for married
women of the same age and for younger as compared with older women of the same
marital status. Thus in 1951 only 16 per cent of married women aged 55 to 59 were
at work compared with 37 per cent of married women aged 20 to 24. About one-half
of the female labour force is under 35 years of age, though an increasing number of
middle-aged women have recently been taking work, including part-time work.
The total working population (including men and women in the armed forces)
rose considerably during the second world war when housewives, including mothers
of young children, manned war factories at great personal inconvenience, while men
served in the armed forces. From the end of the war until mid-i947> the size of the
working population declined as women left industry and the growth of the popula¬
tion of working age slowed down, largely because of the low birth rates of the 1930s.
However, after remaining fairly steady from mid-1948 to mid-1949* the total
393
394
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
working population tended to rise until the autumn of 1957, but has since fallen
slightly. Owing to the high birth rate in the years 1944-49, a fairly rapid increase
in the population of working age, and therefore in the working population, is
expected in the next five years.
The broad changes in the manpower position in Great Britain between mid-1948
and mid-1959 are shown in Table 26. Figures for mid-1959 are provisional.
TABLE 26
General Manpower Position in Great Britain
Thousands
End-
June 1948
End-
June 1958
End-
June 1959
Total Working Population: (a)
Men . .
Women
Totals
15,651
7,123
22,780
16,160
7,910
24,070
16,063
7,905
23,968
H.M. Forces (including Women’s
Services):
Men . .
Women
Totals
Registered Unemployed: (6)
Wholly unemployed
Temporarily stopped (c)
Number in Civil Employment:
Men . .
Women
Totals
807
39
846
273
9
14,549
7,020
21,569
600
14
614
370
62
15,288
7,792
23,080
550
15
565
379
24
15,234
7,786
23,020
Source: Ministry of Labour and National Service.
(a) The total working population represents the estimated total number of persons aged
15 and over who work for pay or gain, or register themselves as available for such work.
The total comprises the armed forces, men and women on release leave not yet in employ¬
ment, all persons—employers and workers on their own account as well as employees—in
civil employment (including persons temporarily laid off but still on the employers’ pay¬
rolls) and wholly unemployed persons registered for employment. Part-time workers are
counted as full units. The number of persons on release leave is not shown separately as
it has been small in recent years.
(b) The unemployment figures are end-month estimates.
(c) The figures for the ‘temporarily stopped’ have been excluded from the computation
of the total working population, as they are already included in civil employment.
Deployment of Labour
Nearly 43 per cent of those in civil employment are employed in the mining and
manufacturing industries and only about 42 per cent in agriculture and fisheries,
LABOUR
395
even at the height of summer. Over half of those in manufacturing are in the
metals, engineering, vehicles and chemicals groups of industries, in which the total
labour force has approximately doubled in the last 25 years.
Most industries employ women as well as men, but there are jobs, such as under¬
ground work in coal mines, which are forbidden to women. The industrial groups
in which women are chiefly employed are in the metal-using industries, in the
manufacture of textiles and clothing, in the food, drink and tobacco industries,
and in the distributive trades and professional and miscellaneous services.
An analysis of the total number in civil employment by broad industrial groups is
given in Table 27. Figures for mid-1959 are provisional.
TABLE 27
Analysis of Civil Employment in Great Britain
Thousands
Industry or Service
Agriculture and fisheries
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing industries:
Chemical and allied trades . .
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures . .
Totals in manufacturing industries
Building and contracting
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Professional, financial and miscellane¬
ous services
Central Government Service
Local Government Service . .
Totals in Civil Employment ..
End-
June 1948
1,178
876
441
3,944
931
649
750
1,422
8,137
1,450
321
1,787
2,484
3,954
682
700
21,569
End-
June 1958
1,009
854
537
4,604
871
642
925
1,568
9,147
1,492
375
1,705
2,939
4,258
529
772
23,080
End-
June 1959
1,000
824
539
4,574
850
637
932
1,578
9,110
1,506
373
1,673
2,955
4,278
520
781
23,020
Source: Ministry of Labour and National Service.
The figures in Table 27 include those engaged on administrative and clerical
work, so that the numbers engaged on productive processes are smaller than those
given for the industries as a whole. The I951 Censuses of Population showed that
less than a third of men at work and less than a quarter of women at work were
employed in manual occupations in mining or manufacturing industry. On the other
hand, there were in Great Britain at the time of the 1951 Censuses of Population
over 1,400,000 women clerical workers (including typists), over 800,000 in retail
trade, over one million women domestic workers or charwomen (including those in
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
396
hotels, institutions and offices), 500,000 women in various other forms of personal
service (including catering), nearly a quarter of a million nurses, and 220,000
women teachers.
Considerable changes in the distribution of persons between various industries
and occupations have taken place during the twentieth century. Some short-term
changes were brought about by the two world wars and by the severe trade recession
and unemployment of the inter-war years, but the following appear to be the main
long-term trends:
1. A continuance at a decreasing rate of the decline in agricultural employment
which was rapid at the end of the nineteenth century.
2. A general increase in administrative and clerical employment, including
public administration, and a very large increase in the employment of
women in clerical work, including typing.
3. A decline in employment in certain large old-established industries, notably
coalmining and cotton textiles.
4. A very large increase in employment in the metals, engineering and vehicles
group of industries and the chemicals group of industries. Employment in
these industries approximately doubled between 1931 and 1951. Expansion
has been most marked in those sections of the industries making relatively
new types of products, e.g., cars, aircraft, electrical and electronic apparatus
and plastics. The rate of increase in certain branches of these industries was
accelerated during both world wars.
5. A decline in indoor private domestic service in which the number of women
employed fell by about a million between 1901 and 1951.
6. A considerable increase in the numbers employed in the distributive trades.
This long-term trend was reversed only during the two world wars.
Unemployment and Labour Demand
Since the end of the second world war, unemployment in all parts of Great
Britain has been very much less than in the period between the two world wars, when
the general rate ranged between 9 and 22 per cent. From 1945 to 1957* the
unemployment rate in Great Britain (the ratio of the number of unemployed to
the total number of employees) ranged between 1 and 2 per cent, except during
January and February 1947 when, because coal supplies failed, the unemployment
rate reached the temporary peak of over 11 per cent (although the average rate for
the year was about 2I per cent), and during the textile slump in the second quarter
of 1952 when it was 2-3 per cent. Since the autumn of 1957, the unemployment
rate has been on average somewhat higher, but it has never reached 3 per cent.
Unemployment has been mainly short-term, although, since the autumn of 1957,
there has been some increase in the numbers unemployed for longer periods;
but even during the winter of 1958-59, when unemployment rose to a peak of
621,000, nearly half the unemployed had been out of work for less than eight weeks,
and less than a quarter had been out for more than six months. Two-thirds of the
long-term unemployed were over forty years of age.
The decline in unemployment compared with pre-war is due partly to specific
measures taken by the Government (see pp. 253-4) but, in the main, to changes
in the general economic situation. The general demand for labour has been high,
the number of vacancies on the registers of employment exchanges usually exceed¬
ing the number of unemployed, while the demand for certain types of skilled crafts¬
men has far exceeded the supply. The expansion and technological advance of
industry in Britain has also increased the need for scientists, engineers and
LABOUR
397
technicians. Facilities for scientific and technical education are accordingly being
expanded (see pp. 167-70 and 203-4).
Towards the end of 1957, however, there was a slackening in the general demand
for labour (partly due to Government measures to combat inflation and to reduce
capital expenditure) and shortages of skilled engineering workers became less
pronounced. The general unemployment rate rose from 1-5 per cent in mid-
December 1957, to about 2 per cent during the summer of 1958 and reached a
peak of 2-8 per cent early in 1959. It has since been falling and was i-8 per cent at
mid-July 1959. The diagram below shows the annual unemployment rates in
Great Britain from 1922 to 1958.
Unemployment is unevenly distributed, and is relatively severe in Scotland, in
Wales, in most of Cornwall and in certain other areas, mainly coastal, in England.
To help alleviate the situation in these areas, the Distribution of Industry (Industrial
Finance) Act was passed in July 1958- The Act empowers the Treasury to give
financial assistance to non-industrial as well as industrial undertakings in districts
where there is a persistently high rate of unemployment (see p. 254)- By August
1959, loans and grants totalling about £5 million had been offered to 83 successful
applicants: this assistance was expected to provide over 5>37° additional jobs in
the areas concerned.
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (Great Britain)
UNEMPLOYED AS PERCENTAGE
OF INSURED EMPLOYEES
Northern Ireland
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed, but excluding certain unpaid helpers—was about 527,000 in June
1958 (359,000 males and 168,000 females). The largest industries are agiiculture
and textiles. Most of the agricultural work in Northern Ireland is done by small
farmers and their families without hired help. The total manpower in agriculture,
forestry and fisheries was 81,000 in mid-1958, according to the official estimates of
the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance of the Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment, and was considerably larger according to other estimates which include
unpaid helpers, but the number of insured employees in these industries was
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
398
only 19,000. The textile industry, traditionally concerned with linen, employs about
60,000 people and nowmakes extensive use of man-made fibres as well as natural fibres.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in
England, Wales or Scotland. Inmid-July 1959 it was about 7-3 per cent of the insured
employees and, since 1945, has rarely fallen below 6 per cent. The Ministry of
Commerce of the Northern Ireland Government has wide powers (similar to those
of the Board of Trade in development areas in Great Britain) to assist the develop¬
ment and diversification of industry. It is using these powers vigorously in an
attempt to improve the situation (see p. 254).
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICES
The provision of employment services in Great Britain has been one of the prin¬
cipal functions of the Ministry of Labour and National Service since its inception in
1916. Northern Ireland has its own legislation in these matters which embodies the
main principles of the corresponding legislation in Great Britain, but owing to the
much smaller area of administration and the less favourable employment situation,
the facilities available are not so comprehensive in their scope as is the case in Great
Britain, and administrative arrangements are in some respects on different lines.
The responsible department is the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance.
The following account, therefore, of services in Great Britain applies in general
to Northern Ireland except where otherwise stated. The scope of the services in
Great Britain has gradually been extended to include the provision of advice on
employment and, in suitable cases, of vocational training. The Employment and
Training Act, 1948, provided a permanent legislative basis for these wider services.
The main services are provided through the country-wide network of some 900
local employment and branch employment offices, which act as employment
exchanges. Local employment committees, composed of representatives of em¬
ployers, workers and other local interests serving all areas, are attached to certain
employment exchanges as advisory bodies to secure for the department the full
benefit of local knowledge and the close co-operation of employers and workers.
There are additional services intended to meet the needs of men and women who are
qualified, or who are likely to qualify, for professional, administrative, managerial,
senior executive and higher technical and scientific posts at home and overseas.
These are operated in Great Britain as follows:
1. The Technical and Scientific Register, kept centrally in London, which
deals with qualified scientists, engineers, architects and surveyors.
2. Regional Nursing Appointments Offices (10) and Nursing Appointments
Offices (164), which deal with recruitment for training and employment
in nursing, midwifery, radiography, physiotherapy, occupational therapy
and similar professions and medical laboratory technical work.
3. The Professional and Executive Register held at certain of the larger
employment exchanges of the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
At these exchanges a service is maintained for all other persons qualified
for professional and senior executive posts; ex-regular officers of the armed
forces; and young men and women suitable for training for management
in industry and commerce. Information about this service can be obtained
from any local office of the ministry.
General Services for Adults
All the offices referred to above accept on their registers both employed and
unemployed persons seeking employment. Their primary function is to introduce
LABOUR
399
suitable persons seeking employment to employers requiring employees, thus pro¬
viding an efficient service to employers and job-seekers and meeting the needs ot
the national economy. ^ ^
The employment exchanges holding the Professional and Executive Register
are also ready to give information about the professions and allied occupations to
young men and women aged x 8 years and over who have not already established
themselves in a profession or in the business world, and to older people who wish
to change their careers. Information about this service can also be obtained from
any local office of the ministry. , ,
The reduction in the armed forces as a result of the Government s plans tor the
reorganisation of defence has made necessary a special service to help the many
regular officers and other ranks returning to civilian life. A Regular Forces Resettle¬
ment Service, assisted by an advisory board representative of employers and trade
unions, was started within the Ministry of Labour and National Service in 1957.
The success of this service is indicated by the fact that the number of ex-regulars
registered as unemployed rose only from 641 officers and 991 other ranks in July
1957 to 1,116 officers and 2,245 other ranks in March 1959, although in this period
nearly 11,000 officers and 120,000 other ranks left the Services. By the end ot
June 1959 only 957 officers and 1,406 other ranks remained unemployed.
A special responsibility of the local employment offices is recruitment under the
vocational training scheme. In Britain, the main responsibility for vocational
training for employment below professional level rests on the industries and trades
directly concerned. The main purpose of the ministry’s scheme is to assist certain
classes of people in special need of help to fit themselves for suitable employment,
although the ministry is also concerned in helping industry to overcome shortages
of labour in industries which are of special importance to national prosperity. In
practice, the majority of trainees under the scheme are disabled persons and most
of the remainder are men and women seeking employment after voluntary service
in the regular armed forces. . .
The training is normally provided at one of the 14 Government Training
Centres situated near the main industrial areas, but training under the scheme
can in some cases be arranged at technical and commercial colleges, private training
schools or employers’ establishments. There are also four Residential Training
Centres for the severely disabled. .
A disabled person can be trained under the scheme in any occupation which
offers a reasonable prospect of resettlement. A more limited range of trades is
open to those leaving the regular armed forces. Other able-bodied men and women,
particularly those who are unemployed and are finding special difficulty in resettle¬
ment, can be considered for training at Government Training Centres; for them
a fairly wide range of trades is available if they are suitable for training. Such
training is open not only to unskilled workers but also to a skilled worker whose
prospects of employment in his or her existing trade is poor.
Courses vary in length according to the trade; most last for six months. Schemes
of training for particular trades have been drawn up in consultation with repre¬
sentatives of the employers and workers concerned who have agreed that trainees
should be accepted in industry for work which makes full use of the knowledge
acquired during the course. Allowances are paid to trainees during training to
maintain them and their dependants. These allowances are higher than the rate
for unemployment benefit. Over 5,000 people were trained under the scheme in
1958 and nearly 90 per cent of them were subsequently employed in the trade for
which they had been trained. .
In recent years, it has been the Government’s policy, in view of the increasing
400
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
numbers of older persons in the population (see pp. 11-12) and the strong general
demand for manpower, to promote the employment of older men and women by
persuading employers to change their approach to the problem and to alter the
existing rules and procedures which made it difficult for the elderly to get and
keep work. In 1952, the Minister of Labour and National Service appointed the
National Advisory Committee on the Employment of Older Men and Women to
advise and assist him in carrying out this policy. The committee’s first report,
published in October 1953 {Cmd. 8963), recommended that the test for engagement
should be capacity and not age and that all who can give effective service should
have the chance to continue in work if they so wish; and it made suggestions for
overcoming any difficulties that might prevent these principles from being applied.
These recommendations which were accepted by the National Joint Advisory
Council (see p. 409), have been put into practice by the Government and by many
other leading employers, and have had a favourable influence upon employers and
upon public opinion in general. The committee issued its second report (Cmd.
9628) in December 1955, in which it reviewed developments. In November 1958,
the committee was disbanded as it was considered that further work in this field
could now best be carried on through the ordinary means of consultation with
industry.
Special Training Services
The Ministry of Labour and National Service provides a service to industry
through its scheme of Training Within Industry for Supervisors. The four pro¬
grammes of instruction which comprise the TWI scheme are: job relations, the
fostering of good working relationships; job instruction, the technique of instructing
or directing staff; job methods, the steps taken in planning the best way of doing a
job; and job safety, which seeks to arouse safety consciousness and to train super¬
visors to detect dangers and deal with them.
The ministry employs a small staff of TWI officers, whose work is mainly
directed to the training of firms’ TWI instructors, who then train the supervisors in
their own organisations by the group discussion method. The ministry is prepared
to extend a measure of these services to overseas branches of British firms. It is
prepared also to train suitable persons to develop the scheme in their own terri¬
tories. The arrangements may be made by the Government of the country
concerned or (where appropriate) by the International Labour Organisation.
In addition, the ministry’s Technical Staff College at Letchworth, Hertfordshire,
provides two-week courses in teaching methods for persons responsible for the
training of apprentices and other workers. These courses have been made available
to all firms and to overseas countries for the training of suitable persons to under¬
take the instruction of skilled workers in their own territories.
Services for Foreigners
Foreigners are admitted to the United Kingdom to take up employment with a
particular employer, provided they are in possession of a permit issued to the
prospective employer by the Ministry of Labour and National Service (the Ministry
of Labour and National Insurance for Northern Ireland if the proposed employ¬
ment is in Northern Ireland). Employment is limited to a maximum of one year in
the first instance but may be extended on application by the employer. In certain
circumstances, permission may be given by the Home Office for foreigners who
landed as visitors or students to take employment approved by the ministry.
Approval is subject to the same conditions and requirements as are applied to the
issue of permits to foreigners while still abroad.
LABOUR
401
Before a permit is issued, the ministry must be satisfied that there is a bona fide
job, that no suitable British or foreign worker already resident in Britain for a long
period is available, and that the wages and conditions of employment are not less
favourable than those enjoyed by British workers. These conditions are waived for
student employees who are admitted for limited periods in order to improve their
English and to gain a wider knowledge of their occupations.
A foreigner permitted to take employment in the United Kingdom may not
change his employment, unless his prospective employer has obtained prior ap¬
proval from the ministry to employ the foreigner. About 40,000 permits are issued
each year to bring in individual foreigners to work in Britain. Of these, approxi¬
mately one-half are for domestic workers in hospitals, schools, other institutions
and private households, and one-eighth for student employees.
The permit system applies to individual foreigners. In addition, after the second
world war, far greater numbers were admitted under various schemes organised by
the Ministry of Labour and National Service, notably the resettlement of members
of the Polish Forces who felt themselves unable to return to post-war Poland, and
the recruitment of European volunteer workers from the displaced persons camps
in Germany, Austria and Denmark. More recently, the United Kingdom Govern¬
ment has admitted many Hungarian refugees who fled from their country following
the uprising in October 1956 (see p. 13), and there is a current scheme whereby
the ministry assists in the bulk recruitment of Italian workers. Special arrangements
are made to dispense with the need for individual permits in these cases.
The United Kingdom, as a member of the Western European Union, participates
in the arrangements for assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain
employment in other member countries.
It must be stressed that these controls over entry and employment apply only to
citizens of foreign countries. Except as regards employment in Northern Ireland,
there are no such controls over persons from Commonwealth countries and
territories overseas and citizens of the Irish Republic. There are no current records
of the numbers now resident or in employment, but information about the numbers
of such persons resident in 1951 is available from the population censuses (see
p. 14).
Youth Employment Service
The Ministry of Labour and National Service is also responsible in Great Britain
for two specialised employment services: the Youth Employment Service and the
Disablement Resettlement Service.
The purpose of the Youth Employment Service is to help young people leaving
school and young workers under 18 years of age at the start of their working life.
The service is under the general direction of the Central Youth Employment
Executive, staffed by officers of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, the
Ministry of Education and the Scottish Education Department. This joint executive
is appointed by the Minister of Labour and National Service, who is responsible to
Parliament for the Youth Employment Service as a whole. The minister has
appointed a National Youth Employment Council and separate advisory com¬
mittees for Scotland and for Wales to advise him on questions relating to the service.
Locally the service is operated in most areas through Youth Employment Offices
established by local education authorities (in Scotland by education authorities)
in accordance with the schemes submitted by them to the Minister of Labour and
National Service and approved by him. In those areas where such schemes are not
in operation, the service is operated by the local office of the Ministry of Labour
and National Service.
402
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The main functions of the service are to collect and disseminate information on
careers, provide talks in schools, give vocational guidance, help to find suitable
employment and keep contact with young workers to assist them in settling down.
A further function is to assist employers in filling vacancies for young people. Local
youth employment committees, made up of teachers, employers, workers and other
appropriate interests, assist the service in an advisory capacity.
In Northern Ireland, a Youth Employment Service of more limited scope is
operated by the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance, and in co-operation
with this service, one local education authority provides a Vocational Guidance
Service. A comprehensive Youth Employment Service similar in scope to that
operating in Great Britain is now being set up.
Disablement Resettlement Service
The Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, 1944, on which all the ministry’s work
for disabled persons is based, declares that its purpose is ‘to make further and better
provision for enabling persons handicapped by disablement to secure employment
or work on their own account’, and the Disablement Resettlement Service is
designed to help disabled persons to get and keep suitable work. The service is
available to all persons over school-leaving age who are substantially handicapped
as a result of injury, disease or congenital deformity.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service is responsible for the administra¬
tion of the service. At each of its local offices a disablement resettlement officer,
working under the direction of the manager and in co-operation with other officers,
has the duty of advising and assisting disabled persons in obtaining suitable employ¬
ment. This officer is in touch with all the hospitals in his area and visits any patient
who wishes to discuss the question of future employment. His work involves close
co-operation with doctors, local authorities and voluntary welfare agencies.
The help given by the service falls under four main headings:
1. Vocational Guidance. This is given at local offices by disablement resettlement
officers in consultation, as necessary, with the local disablement advisory com¬
mittees, hospital resettlement clinics and medical interviewing committees, and
also by vocational psychologists in the industrial rehabilitation units (see
paragraph 3).
2. Placing in Ordinary Competitive Employment. On the basis of a disabled
person’s qualifications and aptitude, and with medical guidance, the disablement
resettlement officer endeavours to find the work most suited to each person, either
immediately, or after a course of industrial rehabilitation or vocational training. To
a limited extent this is facilitated by the main provision of the Disabled Persons
Employment Act, 1944, namely, that all employers of 20 or more persons are
required to employ a quota (at present 3 per cent for all industries except shipping,
in respect of the manning of ships) of registered disabled persons. Registration is
voluntary. The number of disabled persons registered in April 1959 was 715,825.
At the same date 59,671 registered disabled were unemployed, 55,470 being con¬
sidered capable of ordinary employment. This latter figure is 7-7 per cent of the
total number of registered disabled persons. Many persons so severely disabled as
to be classed as incapable of ordinary employment are nevertheless being found
work in unsubsidised competitive undertakings by careful selective placement.
3. Industrial Rehabilitation and Vocational Training. Industrial rehabilitation is
provided at residential and non-residential units run by the Ministry of Labour and
LABOUR
403
National Service where physical and mental toning-up is given and, for those who
need it, vocational guidance as to the best kind of employment to take up.
There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government Training
Centres, educational institutions and employers’ establishments. For the more
seriously disabled there are special residential training colleges run by voluntary
organisations with the financial assistance and technical help of the Ministry ot
Labour and National Service. There are also arrangements for the training ot
special categories of disabled persons such as the blind, and for providing disabled
persons (including the blind), who are of the appropriate educational standard,
with grants to undertake study and training for the purpose of acquiring professional
qualifications.
4. Sheltered Employment. Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company,
with no share capital, was established in Great Britain in accordance with the pro¬
visions of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, 1944- !ts objects are to provide
training and employment facilities for registered disabled persons who are unlikely
to obtain work except under special conditions. Its powers are wide enough to cover
the provision of special factories and workshops, hostel accommodation and facilities
for home workers. The directors are appointed by the Minister of Labour and
National Service; funds for capital development and to meet operational costs are
provided by loans and grants under the Ministry of Labour Vote. At the end of
1958, Remploy Ltd. operated 90 factories and employed 6,100 severely disable
men and women, including approximately 100 homeworkers
Facilities for the employment of blind persons are provided by loca authorities
directly or through voluntary bodies, with the financial assistance of the Ministry
of Labour and National Service. At end-December 1958, there were 68 workshops
for the blind in which there were 267 blind persons in training and 3,760 in employ¬
ment. The ministry also helped to finance the provision of training or employment
for 936 severely disabled sighted persons in 42 workshops provided by 35 vo untary
undertakings or local authorities. Some 1,200 blind persons were also working a
home under homeworkers’ schemes.
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, industrial workers lacked legitimate
means of defending their standards of living or of ameliorating their working condi¬
tions. The traditional methods of fixing wages had become obsolete, trade unions
were regarded as criminal conspiracies, and there was no protective legislation
setting minimum standards of safety, health and welfare in places of work
The first attempt at protective legislation was the Health and Morals of Appren¬
tices Act, 1802, but the first effective Factory Act was that of 1833 which created an
inspectorate employed and paid by the central Government to enforce its provisions.
Since that date, legislation extending, strengthening, adapting and consolidating t ie
statutory protection for employees has been passed at an accelerating ra e. re
progress in standards has owed much to the recommendations of strengthened
inspectorates, much to the example of progressive employers and much to the
persistent pressure of trade unions and disinterested reformers.
Trade unions ceased to be actionable conspiracies in 1824 but their status as legal
entities was not properly established until 1871. This latter step had been made
acceptable to public opinion by the leaders of certain craft unions, who had aban¬
doned the revolutionary and financially unsound policies of earlier trade unions to
1 For an account of medical rehabilitation of the disabled, see pp. 150-1.
4°4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pursue a limited practical objective, i.e. the improvement of their members’ wages
and conditions through skilful and honest negotiation from positions of financial
strength.
After 1880, the organisation of unskilled workers became more extensive and
effective and the whole tone of trade unionism became more militant and political.
At the same time, many employers were still hostile to trade unionism and were
unwilling to negotiate with trade unions or to recognise agreements made on an
industry-wide basis. Partly as a result of continuing antagonisms and of the changing
and difficult economic situation, much of the first thirty years of the twentieth
century was marked by widespread and prolonged strikes. Since 1932, however,
the strike rate (in terms of man-days lost) has, in most years, been very much lower,
and arrangements for the negotiation of terms of service and the peaceful settlement
of disputes have become general and are on the whole satisfactory.
Today, minimum standards have been established by statute or collective agree¬
ment for both the terms and conditions of employment and the working conditions
of most British workers. Terms and conditions of employment of the majority
of workers are usually settled by collective agreements between employers’
associations and trade unions, and the fixing by statute of minimum wages is
confined to those trades or industries where the organisation of employers or
workers or both is inadequate to negotiate collective agreements and to ensure
their observance.
Standards for working conditions are laid down by statute, e.g., the Factories
Acts, and it is the duty of Government inspectors and local authority inspectors
to enforce their provisions. The various Acts of Parliament, and statutory regulations
made thereunder, prescribe standards of safety, health and welfare for a large
proportion of workers, and regulate the hours of work for women and young persons.
Health, safety or welfare requirements, additional to these statutory requirements,
have, in some cases, been the subject of collective agreement.
Many employers provide working conditions superior to those prescribed by
statute or agreement, and various Government departments and voluntary bodies
advise and assist in improving these standards.
LABOUR RELATIONS
The structure of labour relations in Britain is established mainly on a voluntary
basis, and rests on the organisation of employers and workers into employers’
associations and trade unions. These organisations1 discuss and negotiate terms and
conditions of employment and other matters affecting the workpeople at their work.
In some industries these negotiations are conducted simply by ad hoc meetings,
which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary joint machinery has been
established on a permanent basis. Normally these arrangements for collective
bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is often made
for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to independent arbitration.
In certain trades where wages cannot be effectively controlled by voluntary
agreement owing to the inadequate organisation of employers or workers, provision
has also been made by the State for statutory regulation under the Wages Councils
Acts, 1945 to 1959, the Agricultural Wages Act, 1948, and the Agricultural Wages
(Scotland) Act, 1949.
1 A few employers, including the central Government and the public corporations
operating the nationalised industries, negotiate directly with the trade unions representing
their different types of employees.
LABOUR
405
Employers’ Organisations
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ associations, some
of which have their origins in the nineteenth century. They are generally organised
on an ‘industry basis’, some being purely local in character and dealing with a
section of an industry only, while others have a national scope and concern them¬
selves with the whole of an industry. In some cases the local associations are
organised into district or national federations. Many of the associations are con¬
cerned with industrial and trade matters as well as labour matters (see pp. 257-8).
The central organ of employers’ associations is the British Employers Confedera¬
tion, to which the majority of employers’ associations and federations in the princi¬
pal industries are affiliated. It deals with matters affecting the interests of organised
employers in their relations with their workpeople, and is recognised by the
Government as the channel of consultation between Government departments
and representatives of private employers as a whole on all such matters.
The confederation acts for its member organisations in an advisory and con¬
sultative capacity, providing them with information and statistics, ascertaining and
acting upon their collective views and representing these nationally to the Govern¬
ment and the public, and internationally to such bodies as the International Labour
Organisation, the International Organisation of Employers, and the Council of
European Industrial Federations. c A-
While the main function of employers’ organisations consists in the safeguarding
of the interests of their members, a number consider that this purpose can be
furthered by the provision of advice and assistance to member firms and by such
special services as the organisation of general training courses and special courses
on, for example, work study and its application. Where employers’ organisations
do not themselves provide such services they make arrangements for putting their
members in touch with the appropriate specialist agency.
Trade Unions
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up gradually
and independently over a great many years, and consequently their form and
organisation vary considerably. Trade unions started more than two hundred years
ago among the skilled craftsmen and spread later to the general labouring and
unskilled classes. More recently trade unionism has increased among clerical,
supervisory, technical and administrative workers. A number of associations of
professional workers, formed primarily for the preservation and improvement of
professional standards, have also come to exercise many of the functions of trade
unions, including negotiations on salary and fee scales, and are legally trade unions.
The qualification for membership of some unions is occupational, e.g., they may
recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed, while in others the qualification is
industrial, i.e. they seek to recruit all persons in an industry, whatever their occu¬
pation. In a number of unions, recruitment is based on a combination of these
principles. A few large unions recruit members in a number of different occupations
and industries. .
At the end of 1957, the total membership of British trade unions was about
9,700,000 (but it probably fell by 200,000 in 1958). There were 647 trade unions,
but about two-thirds of all trade unionists were in the 17 largest unions.
The basic unit of organisation in most British trade unions is the local branc or
lodge. Every member of the union belongs to a branch or lodge. He may attend its
meetings, put forward suggestions about terms and conditions of employment,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
406
discuss the work and policy of the union, and take part in the election of branch
officers. The branch takes action on certain matters considered to be entirely, or
mainly, of local interest but refers wider issues to the union’s national or regional bodies.
Many unions also have shop stewards or other representatives at the place of
work to enrol members and collect dues, to report any encroachment on agreed
or customary conditions of work, and, in some cases, to act as representatives of
members at their place of work for the settlement of grievances.
In most large unions the central organisation is along the following lines. Elected
officials, including a general secretary assisted by clerical and specialist staff, are
in charge of the work of the head office and are responsible to a national executive
council or committee which may be part-time or full-time, and which is usually
elected by, and responsible to, annual or biennial conferences of delegates from
the branches.
Executive committees or councils play an important part in the government of
the unions; between conferences they are the highest authorities and carry out
policy decisions made by delegates.
Most unions also have some kind of regional, district or area organisation, while
in large unions there is usually also a system of regional, district or area committees
or councils.
Trade unions may affiliate to one or more federations or confederations whose
main purpose in most cases is to represent all or most of the trade unions in an
industry in negotiation with employers. The scope and authority of these federa¬
tions and confederations vary greatly in different circumstances.
Nearly all trade unions of any size and importance are affiliated to the Trades
Union Congress (TUC), the national centre of the British trade union movement.
The main exceptions are the National and Local Government Officers Association
(NALGO), the National Union of Teachers (NUT), and certain Civil Service
staff associations, all of them professional or quasi-professional bodies. The objects
of the TUC are to promote the interests of all its affiliated organisations and generally
to improve the economic and social conditions of the workers. Its membership com¬
prises 186 organisations, of which about a dozen are federations of some 150 separate
unions; approximately 350 unions in all are affiliated directly or indirectly. These
represent over 8 million workpeople. The TUC deals with all general questions
which concern trade unions both nationally and internationally and gives assistance
on questions relating to particular trades or industries at the request of the trade
union concerned. The congress of delegates, which constitutes the TUC proper,
meets for a week every year to discuss matters of general interest to trade unionists
and to employees generally.
It elects annually a General Council which represents it during the remaining
51 weeks of the year. The General Council is responsible for carrying out congress
decisions, for watching economic and social developments, and for providing
educational and advisory services. It is also empowered in certain circumstances to
mediate in inter-union disputes.
Both the TUC and a number of affiliated trade unions have in recent years paid
increasing attention to the education of their members, not only in general economic
questions and trade union practice, but also in production and management subjects,
including work study and costing. The educational work of the TUC is being con¬
siderably expanded. Its headquarters, Congress House, in London, includes a
training college, which aims each year to give some 1,000 trade unionists courses
lasting one or two weeks on general trade union subjects, on production and
management techniques, on industrial finance, on industrial relations and on social
insurance.
LABOUR
407
The TUC also organises summer schools, open to members of any affiliated
union, usually by nomination from the union, and week-end schools attended by
nominees of trades councils. A number of the larger unions hold similar courses.
In addition, arrangements are made for union officials to attend courses on produc¬
tion and management at technical colleges. Some unions also make use of industrial
consultants for this purpose.
The TUC is recognised by the Government as the channel of consultation
between the Government departments and representatives of organised workers on
matters affecting the interests of employees generally.
There is also a separate Scottish Trades Union Congress, to which trade unions
may affiliate in respect of their membership in Scotland.
The TUC is a non-political body, but individual trade unions can, by a ballot
vote of members, decide to set up a political fund, financed by a separate levy,
which any member can refuse to pay without loss of his normal trade union rights
and benefits. About 80 separate trade union organisations, including most of the
largest trade unions, have such a fund and, in almost every case, it is used to support
the Labour Party (or the Co-operative Party).
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local trades
council which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common interest
and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year. There are
more than 500 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped together in
22 federations.
Voluntary Joint Negotiating Machinery
At National Level. While in some industries all matters affecting terms and
conditions of employment are discussed on an ad hoc basis between the employers
organisations and the trade unions concerned, in other industries there are standard
procedures for dealing with such matters by joint discussion at a national level. In
many industries there are, for this purpose, bodies composed of representatives of
both sides of the industry with, in some cases, an independent chairman. These are
known generally as Joint Industrial Councils, of which there are about 200. The
functions of these bodies vary considerably, some being simply negotiating bodies,
while others deal with a wide range of subjects affecting the interests of the industry
concerned. Provision is sometimes made in the constitution of such bodies that,
where it is not found possible to reach agreed terms of settlement in a particular
dispute, the matter should be referred to some form of conciliation or arbitration
by independent persons, including the methods provided under the Conciliation
Act, 1896, or the Industrial Courts Act, 1919-
Collective agreements between employers’ associations and trade unions are not
civil contracts between particular employers and employees, and are not, therefore,
in themselves enforceable at law. Observance of agreed terms and conditions is
based mainly on the good faith of employers and the mutual respect and vigilance
of trade unions and employers’ associations, but can be secured in particular
instances through reference to the Industrial Court (see p. 408).
At District and Factory Level. Arrangements for negotiation and discussion also
exist at district and factory level in many industries, where matters are discussed
either between the appropriate representatives of the two sides on an ad hoc basis,
or through regular machinery provided by District Joint Industrial Councils or
similar bodies and Works Councils. Such bodies discuss how agreements reached
at a national level may be applied to their district or factory, but as a rule have no
power to alter the terms of such national agreements. They also discuss new
2D
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
408
problems which may arise, and if no solution can be found at factory or district
level the matter may be referred to the national body.
Statutory Wage-Regulating Machinery
In certain industries in which, owing to the lack of organisation among employers
and workers, voluntary negotiating arrangements do not exist for the effective
settlement of terms and conditions of employment or are inadequate to secure their
observance by voluntary methods throughout the industry, statutory bodies known
as Wages Councils and Agricultural Wages Boards have been set up. These are
composed of equal numbers of representatives of employers and workers in the
respective industries, with the addition of certain independent members. Wages
Councils are empowered to submit proposals for the fixing of minimum remunera¬
tion and of holidays with pay to the Minister of Labour and National Service, who
is then required by the Acts concerned to make orders giving statutory force to
such proposals, subject only to his right to return them as a whole to the council
for further consideration.
Orders relating to employment in agriculture are made by the appropriate Agri¬
cultural Wages Board (England and Wales or Scotland). Such orders are effective
only in the county agricultural wages committee area in respect of which they have
been made, but there is a national minimum enforceable in England and Wales
and also one for Scotland.
State Provision for Conciliation, Arbitration and Investigation
Matters which prove difficult to settle by negotiation are sometimes referred by
agreement to independent conciliators or arbitrators, and one way in which the
parties can find such persons is by invoking the help of the Minister of Labour and
National Service. Under authority derived from the Conciliation Act, 1896, and
the Industrial Courts Act, 1919, the minister has certain powers to assist industry
to settle disputes which it is not found possible to resolve through an industry’s own
machinery and procedure. These powers are all intended to supplement and not to
supersede the industry’s own machinery.
To assist conciliation in industry, a staff of conciliation officers forms part of the
Ministry of Labour and National Service. The duties of these officers are to keep
in touch with the course of relations between employers and workers at national,
district, and, in some cases, factory level, and to assist them, if requested, to settle
their problems by joint discussion and negotiation.
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both parties,
be referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, or an ad hoc
Board of Arbitration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent tribunal established
under the Industrial Courts Act. The court normally consists of three members—
the president, one member representing employers and one representing workpeople.
Like collective agreements, arbitration awards are not in themselves enforceable
at law, but, under the Terms and Conditions of Employment Act, 1959, reports may
be made, to the Minister of Labour and National Service, by organisations which
are truly representative of the employers or workers in the trade or industry
concerned, that a particular employer in that trade or industry is not observing the
recognised (i.e. agreed or awarded) terms and conditions of employment. If the
matter is not otherwise settled, the minister must refer it to the Industrial Court
which, after hearing the case, may issue an award requiring the employer to observe
the recognised terms and conditions. Such an award becomes an implied term of
the contract of employment. This procedure, established under the 1959 Act,
replaced an earlier one of similar intention and effect.
LABOUR
409.
The Minister of Labour and National Service is also empowered to appoint a
Court of Inquiry or Committee of Investigation into a dispute, whether existing
or apprehended. These procedures are primarily means of informing public opinion
of the facts of a dispute and are not means of arbitration. The report of a Court of
Inquiry has to be laid before Parliament. Although the recommendations contained
in the reports of such bodies are not binding on the parties, they usually provide
the basis of a settlement of the difference.
The machinery for negotiation and conciliation of disputes has helped to reduce
the amount of time lost in strikes and lockouts, which has been much less in the
past twenty-five years than formerly. In spite of some serious stoppages of work
in the past three years, the average time lost per year from 1932 to 1959 is only
2i million man-days, or about a tenth of a day per worker per year, compared with
an average of 21 million man-days in the 23 years 1910-32. The reduction has been
in the size and duration of strikes and not in their number.
Liaison between the Government and Industry
The Government is in contact with representatives of employers and workers at
all levels on matters affecting their common interests. At local and district level the
conciliation officers of the Ministry of Labour and National Service keep in touch
with the representatives of both sides of industry, while, at national level, officers
of the department are requested by many Joint Industrial Councils to attend their
meetings as liaison officers. Standing arrangements also exist for consultation
between the Government, the British Employers’ Confederation and the Trades
Union Congress through the National Joint Advisory Council, which was set up in
1939 to advise the Government on matters in which employers and workers have a
common interest. It meets quarterly under the chairmanship of the Minister of
Labour and National Service. Its membership consists of representatives of the
British Employers’ Confederation and the Trades Union Congress, together wit
representatives of the managements of nationalised industries. Among the subjects
which it has considered in recent years are the machinery for settling industrial
disputes, joint consultation in industry, industrial training and recruitment,,
double-day-shift working, and the economic situation with special reference to
production, wages and prices, and the efficient use of manpower.
Joint Consultation at Factory Level
In addition to the arrangements already described, the purpose of which is
mainly but not exclusively the discussion and settlement of terms and conditions of
employment, many factories and other establishments provide for joint consultation
between management and employees through formally constituted works councils
(see pp. 422-3). In many of the larger industries, national agreements recommend
such consultation, and in some they even prescribe model rules for its conduct.
Labour Relations of Public Authorities
While labour relations in Government service and in the nationalised industries
are, in general, organised on the same principles as in private industry, there are
some special features. ,
Non-industrial employees in central Government service, where salaries and
conditions of service are under the direct control of the Treasury, are permitted and
encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service staff associations (trade unions)
and there is a highly developed system of negotiation and joint consultation by
means of the National and Departmental Whitley Councils (see p. 67), corre¬
sponding to the Joint Industrial Councils in industry. The two sides of the National
4io
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Whitley Council are parties to a Civil Service Arbitration Agreement which, sub¬
ject to certain limitations, provides that if there is failure to reach agreement by
negotiation a department or association may report the dispute to the Minister
of Labour and National Service for reference to the Civil Service Arbitration
Tribunal. The tribunal is an independent one appointed by the minister by virtue
of his powers under the Industrial Courts Act, 1919. Industrial employees of the
central Government, however, are organised by trades and not by departments;
negotiations regarding their wages and conditions of employment take place on
Trade Joint Councils and Departmental Joint Councils.
In local government services there are separate National Joint Councils for
the main grades of employees (e.g., manual, clerical and technical employees, and
road-menders, see p. 75) which deal with wages and conditions of service as well
as other matters. There are corresponding regional and district councils.
In the nationalised industries, the main corporations, though not subject to
detailed governmental control, have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory
arrangements for collective bargaining in their industries and for joint consultation
with their employees; but in carrying out these duties they are free to choose the
arrangements that suit them. In nearly every case a complex system which already
existed before nationalisation has been taken over and modified. The arrangements,
therefore, as in industry generally, vary substantially. The main difference from
private industry is that the corporations are not members of employers’ associations.
In some industries they are sole or main employers, but even where part of the
industry is in private hands, as for example in air or road transport, the corporations
are separately and directly represented on wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally
settled by negotiation between representatives of managements and trade unions
at the national level; in most cases there are also regional and local bodies,
similarly representative, charged with the duty of applying these agreements and
dealing with any difficulties or differences which may arise. Most of the industries
use the facilities for arbitration offered to industry generally by the Ministry of
Labour and National Service, but coalmining and rail transport have their own
special arrangements.
The machinery for negotiation and conciliation in the United Kingdom is usually
based on the industry as a whole and not on the individual establishment or firm.
Accordingly, those industries, such as electricity and gas supply, where there are
several corporations which act as employers, are covered by a single set of arrange¬
ments, and the duty of seeing that the arrangements are made falls on the central
authorities, e.g., the Gas Council and the Electricity Council. In civil aviation, there
is a single joint council at national level on which both the air corporations and the
private operators are represented. Where a single public corporation engages in
various activities, these may be treated as separate industries and organised
separately. For example, the National Coal Board’s coke and by-products plants
have arrangements quite distinct from the coalmines, and the British Transport
Commission’s rail, road and water transport have their different methods based on
individual traditions, which existed before nationalisation. In road transport
(unlike civil aviation) the arrangements cover only the commission’s employees;
there is separate machinery for the employees of municipal and private under¬
takings.
Some of the nationalised industries have felt that joint consultation was best
carried out by their negotiating bodies; others have established separate and
specially constituted joint committees at all levels. In general, where consultation
and negotiation are conducted through the same machinery, separate committees
LABOUR
411
exist for different groups or grades of employees; where the consultative and
negotiating arrangements are kept apart, a single consultative committee serves all
grades.
Northern Ireland
The system of labour relations in Northern Ireland is based on the same prin¬
ciples as that of Great Britain and, in these matters, the Minister of Labour and
National Insurance has powers and duties broadly similar to those of the Minister
of Labour and National Service in Great Britain. About 90 per cent of trade
unionists in Northern Ireland are members of trade unions whose headquarters
are in Great Britain.
WORKING CONDITIONS: THE LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND
Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their employees
and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards
each other. In addition, minimum required standards of safety, health and welfare
are laid down in a number of statutes.
The principal Acts involving enforcement of standards of safety, health or welfare
are: the Public Health Acts; the Employment of Women, Young Persons and
Children Act, 1920; the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933; the Employment
of Women and Young Persons Act, 1936; the Young Persons (Employment) Act,
1938; the Factories Acts, 1937, 1948, and 1959; *e Mines and Quarries Act, 1954;
the Shops Acts, 1950; and the Agriculture (Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions)
Act, 1956. There are a number of other Acts dealing with particular requirements
or particular occupations.
Powers of Local Authorities
Local authorities, under the Public Health Acts, have power to regulate the
provision of suitable sanitary accommodation in houses and at places of work an
to treat workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded as nuisances
whose abatement can be enforced. They have also wide powers under the Children
and Young Persons Act, 1933, as modified by the Education Acts, 1944 to 1948, to
regulate hours and conditions of employment of children in their areas within the
limits laid down by national legislation. Apart from this, national legislation forbids
the employment of children under 13 years of age, and forbids the employment of
children between the ages of 13 and 15 during school hours, or before 6 a.m. or
after 8 p.m. on any day, or for more than two hours on schooldays or on Sundays.
The employment of children in any industrial undertaking before they reach the
age of 15 is prohibited.
Shops .
The Shops Act, 1950, requires local authorities to ensure that shops in their area
observe the requirements of the Act with regard to closing hours and the working
conditions of employees, which include special requirements about the hours of
work of young persons. The Act provides that, with certain exceptions shops
must be closed on weekdays by 8 p.m. (9 P-m. on one late day) except on the early
closing day when they must be closed by 1 p.m., and all day on Sundays, but it
enables local authorities to make orders modifying these and other provisions of
the Act as far as their own areas are concerned. The hours of work of emp oyees
under 16 years of age are normally restricted to 44 a week, and those of employees
412
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
between 16 and 18 years of age to 48 a week with limited provision for overtime.
All shop assistants must be given a half-holiday (half a day) every week and, in
addition, every Sunday off or another day off instead. Local authorities also have
powers to ensure reasonable minimum standards of ventilation, temperature,
lighting, sanitary accommodation and washing facilities in shops.
Industrial Premises
Nearly a quarter of a million industrial premises (factories, workshops, slaughter¬
houses, shipyards, docks and warehouses) and about 25,000 building and civil
engineering sites come under the Factories Acts, which are administered by the
Ministry of Labour and National Service and enforced by H.M. Inspectorate of
Factories, which forms part of the ministry. Any person intending to use premises
as a factory has to notify the Inspector of Factories of his intention not less than
one month before he begins to occupy them.
Under the Acts, every accident causing more than three days’ incapacity must be
reported to the factory inspectors; provision is also made for compulsory
notification and investigation of certain industrial poisonings and diseases, and, in
addition, a number of general and specific requirements for safety, health and
welfare are laid down.
Safety requirements include provisions concerning the fencing of prime movers,,
transmission machinery and dangerous parts of other machinery; the sale, hire or use
of power-driven machinery without effective guards of certain parts; the cleaning of
machinery in motion; the training and supervision of young persons employed at
certain machines; the examination of hoists and lifting equipment, steam boilers
and steam and air receivers; the construction of floors; precautions against falls,
against gassing, and against explosions of inflammable dust or gas; fire prevention,
firefighting, fire alarms and means of escape in case of fire; the protection of the
eyes; the handling of dangerous substances; and the lifting of heavy weights.
There are also general requirements with regard to health, including cleanliness
of workrooms, the provision and maintenance of proper accommodation and venti¬
lation and of suitable temperatures and lighting, the avoidance of over-crowding
and the provision of sanitary accommodation; and with regard to welfare, including
the provision of washing facilities, lockers or other accommodation for outdoor
clothing, drinking water, first aid and adequate seating arrangements.
All young persons under 18 years of age must, on entry to employment in
factories, at docks, or on building operations, be medically examined by doctors
appointed by the Chief Inspector of Factories and known as Appointed Factory
Doctors (see p. 420), and they must be re-examined annually until they reach the
age of 18. Women and young persons are also prohibited from working in certain
specified processes concerned with lead compounds. The hours permitted to be
worked by women and young persons between the ages of 16 and 18 are generally
limited to 48 in a week and 9 in a day, although some overtime is allowed (up to-
six hours a week but not more than 100 hours a year nor in more than 25 weeks in
a year). Young persons under 16 years of age are limited to 44 hours a week.
Adequate intervals for meals must be arranged for women and young persons and
the employment of women and girls at night is, in general, prohibited. The Minister
of Labour and National Service, however, has discretionary powers to grant
applications for relaxations of the rules of the working hours if, after consulting the
appropriate organisations and employers and workers, he decides that it is clearly
in the public interest. Moreover, such relaxations must be published.
The general requirements for safety, health and welfare are supplemented or
modified by regulations providing for safeguards against special risks to health or
LABOUR
413
safety. The regulations cover particular industries, processes, and types of machi¬
nery, and they include provision for the compulsory periodic medical examination
of workers in certain specified industrial processes.
In addition to regulatory functions, the Minister of Labour and National Service
has been given the duty, under the Factories Act, 1959, to promote safety, health
and welfare by the collection and dissemination of information and by investigating
safety, health and welfare problems. The Act thus provides a specific statutory
basis for activities which have long been an important part of the ministry s wor
(see pp. 419-21).
Mines and Quarries
The safety, health and welfare of workers in mines and quarries are the subject
of comprehensive legislation. Protective legislation in mines began with an Act oi
1842, which forbade the employment of women underground; successive measures
laid down detailed requirements for the safe conduct of operations and dealt wi
such matters as ventilation, dust suppression, support of workings, the sate use ot
electricity, rescue and first aid. The latest stage was reached when the Mines and
Quarries Act was passed in i954- This Act established the basic modern principles
of safety, health and welfare, leaving the details to be dealt with in statutory
regulations; it both consolidates the previous law and brings it up to date Apar
from technical matters, it also covers such subjects as the general responsibilities o
owners and managements, the appointment and duties of officials, training, wel are,
the powers of official inspectors, statutory qualifications of managers and under¬
managers, employment of women and young persons, and inspections on behalt
The Ministry of Power is generally responsible for the administration ot £
enactments, while the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate, which is part of the
Ministry of Power, is directly responsible for their enforcement.
Agriculture
Two Acts provide for the protection of agricultural workers by means of
regulations made by the ministers concerned with agriculture m Great Britain.
The special risks involved in the use of chemicals are dealt with in the Agricu ture
(Poisonous Substances) Act, 1952; general safety is covered by the Agricu ure
(Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions) Act, 1956.
Transport
The general safety legislation covering the main forms of transport protects
transport workers as well as members of the public against accidents involving
m<Thfc^Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation is responsible for the administra¬
tion of the Merchant Shipping Acts, which cover m great detail the question of
marine safety, including navigational procedures, the strength and design of hulls
the safety of machinery, the safety and design of living quarters, life-saving
appliances, measures for protection against fire, and the carriage of special cargoes
and dangerous goods. . . r . r.
The Air Navigation Order and Regulations provide for the registration of aircraft
and for the issue of certificates of airworthiness and of competency certificates an
licences for aircrew, lay down requirements for safety equipment and for safety
procedures during take-off, flight and landing, and prescribe maintenance schedules
for public transport aircraft. The minister delegates most of his powers in respect
of airworthiness to the Air Registration Board (see p. 379)-
414
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation exercises technical supervision of
the safety aspects of railway construction and operation through an inspectorate,
whose main functions are statutory approval of new works on railways carrying
passenger traffic; accident investigation, including the holding of formal inquiries;
and technical advice to the minister on general railway matters.
In the interests of road safety, the hours of driving and the rest periods of drivers
of buses and goods vehicles are regulated by the Road Traffic Acts. In certain cases,
the driver must be accompanied by a second person.
In addition to general safety legislation, there are certain statutory provisions
concerned entirely, or mainly, with the safety, health and welfare of employees; for
example, railway employees are protected by the Railway Employment (Prevention
of Accidents) Act, 1900, and the statutory rules and orders made under it, which
sanction the appointment of railway employment inspectors to inquire into the
more serious accidents to railway employees and enable the Ministry of Transport
and Civil Aviation to require the use of safe plant and appliances, to forbid what is
unsafe, and to make rules for safe railway operation. Similarly, the far-reaching
and detailed requirements of the Merchant Shipping Acts and the regulations
made thereunder include specific provisions for the protection of merchant seamen
covering such matters as the engagement and discharge of seamen, limitations on
the employment of young persons at sea, standards of crew accommodation, scales
of provisions, medicines and medical stores, and the care and repatriation of
seamen left behind at ports abroad.
Employment of Young Persons
The Young Persons (Employment) Act, 1938, imposes restrictions on the hours
of work of young persons (48 a week under 18 years and 44 a week under 16 years)
in certain occupations not covered by the Factories Acts, the Mines and Quarries
Act, 1954, or the Shops Act, 1950.
Northern Ireland
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been the
subject of legislation which, with certain exceptions, is similar to that in Great
Britain and is embodied in separate statutes to meet the special requirements of
Northern Ireland. Provision for the safety, health and welfare of workers in
factories, workshops, ship and building yards and certain other working premises
is embodied in the Northern Ireland Factories Acts. The Minister of Labour and
National Insurance is responsible for the administration of these Acts and for their
enforcement by a factory inspectorate, which forms part of his department.
WORKING CONDITIONS IN PRACTICE
Earnings
Minimum or standard time rates for most British manual workers, as determined
by agreements or wages orders, vary between 3s. id. and 4s. 3d. an hour for men
and between 2s. id. and 3s. id. for women. Actual earnings are usually higher.
Higher rates are sometimes paid, and piece rates, shift rates and overtime rates
raise the level of average earnings. The Ministry of Labour and National Service
conducts a six-monthly survey of earnings and hours of work of manual workers in
manufacturing industries and in some of the principal non-manufacturing industries
in Great Britain. The survey made in April 1959 covered just under 7 million
LABOUR
415
workers and showed the average hourly earnings in all the industries covered to
be as follows:
Men 21 years and over
Youths and boys under 21 years
Women 18 years and over
Girls under 18 years . .
All workers
Average weekly earnings were:
Men
Youths . .
Women . .
Girls
All workers
5s. 5-5d.
2s. 6-7d.
3s. 3-6d.
2s. 0-8d.
4s. 9-6d.
262s. lid.
114s. Od.
137s. Od.
87s. 4d.
222s. 6d.
The principal industries not covered by this survey of earnings were agriculture,
where the average weekly earnings for regular adult male workers were 193s- 92d.
in the half year October 1958 to March i9S9; coalmining, where according to
information collected by the National Coal Board, the average weekly cash earnings
for men were 312s. 6d„ plus 18s. Sd. in kind, in April 1959; railway services in
which average weekly earnings in March 1958 were 235s. for men in the workshop
and other wage-earning grades, and 147s. for women; and dock labour, in which
average weekly earnings of dock workers employed by the National Dock Labou
Board for January to March 1959 were 292s. 8d. , , , 0 „ .
Since 1947, average weekly wage rates have increased by about 80 per cent and
average weekly earnings by about 115 per cent. Most of the increase in wa^e rates
has been offset by a rise in the cost of living. The trends of manual workers
earnings, and of wage rates and retail prices from 1948 to 1958, compared with 1947,
are shown in the diagram on p. 416. . . , ^ ,
The difference between men’s and women’s earnings in industry is due ma y
to the fact that women are for the most part engaged on different tasks from men
and are paid less than men on the grounds that these tasks are unskilled or semi¬
skilled. In the relatively few instances in the field of manual employment w ere
men and women are employed on the same work, collective agreements frequently
provide for equal remuneration. „ , f
There are no similarly detailed and comprehensive figures for the rates of pay
and earnings of non-manual workers, as these are often h*sed°ynd™d™[™-
tracts, except in the public service, teaching and retail distribution. The rather
limited evidence suggests that the majority of male non-manual workers the
clerks and shop-assistants—have average earnings little different in range from
those of manual workers, but the earnings of women in these occupations are some¬
what higher than in manual occupations. The pay of shop-assistants is °n scales
prescribing weekly minima from about £6 15s. to £9 3S- for men and £4 ^s. 6d.
to £6 12s. 6d. for women. The Office Management Association makes periodical
surveys of clerical salaries. The latest survey, of March 1958, which covers 968
establishments, employing 89,977 clerks, shows that the average weekly salaries
for young inexperienced clerks ranged mainly from 71s. 4^ to 101s gd. for youths
and from 61s. 6d. to 88s. 6d. for girls, while average salaries for adult male clerks
ranged from £9 4s. 8d. for the lowest grade of skill and responsibility to £15 14s. 5^.
for the highest. Corresponding women’s salaries were 25 to 30 per cent less.
416 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The starting salaries in many professional and technical careers are often in the
range of £400 to £650 a year, though they may be lower for trainees starting work
in their teens and higher for some graduates entering industry and the Civil Service;
such posts offer increments and opportunities for promotion, but it may be noted
that, in 1954-55, when the average level of earnings was about 20 per cent lower than
in 1958-59, only about o-8 per cent of all employees were earning over £2,000 a
year, only about 0-3 per cent over £3,000 and less than o-i per cent over £6,000.
Additional information about the spread of incomes in different occupations is
available from unofficial sources; for example, the national sample surveys of
personal incomes and savings made in the spring of 1952 by H. F. Lydall and in the
spring of 1954 by T. P. Hall. Table 28 is based on their surveys.
These surveys illustrate the extent of the overlap in the ranges of earnings of
different kinds of occupation, even if the actual earnings are greatly below present
levels.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service are in
the range of £1,200 to £5,000 a year. The posts with salaries of £5,000 to £12,000
a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, chairmen and some other members of
the boards of nationalised industries, judges of the High Court and Court of Appeal,
and Lords of Appeal, the Permanent Secretaries of Government departments, the
clerks of the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers, a few
LABOUR
417
TABLE 28
Income from Employment by Occupation (a)
percentage distributions
Employment
income of
income unit (6)
Analysis for 1952 by
occupation of head of income unit
CO
Nil
£1- £99
£100— £199
£200— £299
£300— £399
£400— £499
£500— £599
£600— £699
£700— £799
£800— £999
£1,000—£1,499
£1,500—£1,999
£2,000 and over
Totals
Number in
sample
Average Income:
Arithmetic
mean (in £s)
of those em¬
ployed
Standard devia¬
tion (in £s) . .
62
8
19
5
2
1
1
*
1
100
230
202
206
<u G
5P
o
G <u
a -*-*
^ G
*
2
4
9
14
15
17
15
11
7
6
T3 cs
0) 3
Fg c
^ 2
cc £
^ 73
rG G
Gd G
^ cc
c s
£
"G Td
G 2
173 ‘a
-G G
u o
All
income
units in
1952
All
income
units in
1954
100
259
933
934
3
17
18
23
16
11
4
4
2
2
100
330
383
220
1
6
13
29
25
14
7
3
2
#
100
807
420
159
7
14
25
32
12
6
3
1
69
13
10
5
1
1
100
388
315
149
100
571
168
204
19-0
5-2
10-1
12- 7
19-5
13- 8
8-4
4-5
2-6
2-1
1-2
0-5
0-4
100
2,598 (c)
404
351
18-5
5-7
8-2
9.9
13- 9
14- 2
12-0
7-2
4.4
3-6
2-5
100
2,463
444
(a) Employment income includes income from wages, salaries pensions from employers,
casual earnings of non-professional workers, bonuses, tips, etc.
(b) The income unit is defined as follows: (1) all single persons of 18 years of age or over
whether livine alone or with other members of their family, are regarded as separate
Some unhs if they have dependent children of their own (of under 18 years), as may
happen in the case of widows and divorced and separated people, their form
pano? their income unit; (z) married couples living together ^
incomes and each couple is counted as a single unit, and their children of under years
are also included in their income unit.
(c) Includes 13 income units in which the occupation of the head was not discovered.
* = less than half of one per cent.
n-a. = not available.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
418
persons outstanding in their professions and in the higher managerial posts in
industry, commerce and banking. A few persons in business draw still higher
salaries, while the earnings of star entertainers and some very successful people in
other professions exceed £25,000 a year.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices, admini¬
strative posts and professions. They are paid the same salary for doing the same
work in medicine, dentistry, physiotherapy, radiography, university teaching,
journalism, broadcasting and architecture, and as Ministers of the Crown, members
of Parliament, salaried magistrates and solicitors, pharmacists working in hospitals,
and administrative, professional and technical workers in local government. Women
in independent professions are not expected to charge lower fees than men. In
most other occupations, however, a woman in Britain doing the same job as a man
is at present paid less for doing it, although the position is changing. The Govern¬
ment has stated that it accepts the principle of equal pay, and steps are being taken
to put it into effect by stages in the public services. In January 1955, the Chancellor
of the Exchequer announced Government acceptance of a scheme for progressive
increases in the salary scales of non-industrial women civil servants to make these
identical with men’s scales by 1961; in April 1955, the Minister of Education
announced approval of similar proposals by the Burnham Committee (the advisory
body concerned with teachers’ salaries) for equal pay for women teachers; and in
the same month it was decided that equal pay for all women in administrative
departments of local authorities should also be introduced by stages. Since then
similar proposals have been agreed for certain other salaried workers, including
the staffs of the National Health Service and of the electricity and gas authorities
and of the British Transport Commission. Women’s salaries outside the public
service are being similarly adjusted in some cases.
Hours of Work
While, as already stated, the hours of work of women and young persons between
the ages of 16 and 18 in factories and in certain occupations are limited by law
to 48 a week and those of young persons under 16 years to 44 a week, normal hours
of work for all ages and both sexes are usually shorter. Agreed weekly hours are
mainly from 42 to 46 hours, averaging between 44 and 45, and may be worked as
either a five-day or a five-and-a-half-day week according to the industry and the
rule of the particular establishment. Hours actually worked by men are somewhat
longer owing to overtime working. The survey conducted by the Ministry of Labour
and National Service in April 1959 into earnings and hours of manual workers
showed that average weekly hours actually worked were as follows:
Men
Youths and boys
Women
Girls
All workers
48-0 hours
44-6 hours
41- 5 hours
42- 3 hours
46-3 hours
Holidays with Pay
With a few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in industries
covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays of twelve
days or two weeks. Moreover, payment is made for bank or statutory public holidays,
which are as follows: in addition to Good Friday and Christmas Day, there are
Bank Holidays in England, Wales, and the Channel Islands on Easter Monday,
Whit-Monday, the first Monday in August and the first weekday after Christmas
LABOUR
419
(Boxing Day), and in Scotland on New Year’s Day, the first Monday m May and
the first Monday in August. Northern Ireland observes all the English holidays
and, in addition, has a Bank Holiday on St. Patricks Day .7* March and a
statutory public holiday on 12th July (commemorating the Battle of the Boy ,
1690); Easter Tuesday is also a customary holiday for industry and trade. Many
agreements provide that payment should also be made for specially proclaimed
holidays.
Safety
Safety depends in practice at least as much on the education and voluntary efforts
of the employers and of the workers as upon safety regulations. There am °ver a
quarter of a million workplaces in Great Britain subject to the Factories Acts. The
total strength of the Factory Inspectorate including medical and other specialists
was 411 in June i959 and its authorised strength is 450- In June 1959 there were
1 596 mines (including 768 main coal mines) and 4,668 quarries, including 3 3
opencast coal sites; the total strength of the mines and quarries inspectorate was 151.
Except in coal mines, prevention of accidents by frequent inspection is impracticable
The concern of both trade unions and employers associations with safety help
to maintain safety standards, and the requirements about accident notification (see
p. 412) help inspectors to examine the means of prevention with employers, machin¬
ery manufacturers and interested organisations. But the voluntary co-operation o
managements and employees in individual workplaces is essential to the safety
drive The Accident Prevention Movement, a voluntary educational campaign is
strongly supported by the Factory and the Mines and Quarries Inspectorates
Inspectors inquire into safety aspects of machine design and specification, circulate
expert advice by personal exhortation, lectures and literature, and encourage
appointment of safety officers and the formation of works safety committees.
PMost large and many small firms have such committees and in many areas,
firms have organised safety groups, whose members meet monthly for the exchange
of information, discussion, lectures and films on safety measures
Training for safety is an important facet of the safety drive and, to help in this
work, the Ministry of Labour and National Service has rece^^Corf °rate^ *
safety course in the Training Within Industry for Supervisors (TWI) scheme (see
p 400). An industrial health and safety centre in London is also maintain y
the Ministry of Labour and National Service. The industrial safety ^ainmg centre
in Birmingham is run by the Birmingham and District Industrial Safety Group
and training centres for building and civil engineering foremen have recentiy be
set up with the assistance of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, by the
London Building and Engineering Contractors’ Accident Prevention Group ^id
by the Merseyside Area Industrial Accident Prevention Group. The Royal Society
for the Prevention of Accidents helps the Accident Prevention Movement by pro¬
viding publicity and by organising conferences and courses for safety office
Organisations in industry are now concerning themselves to an increasing exten
with the promotion of safety at work and the provision of information and advisory
services to their members. They participate also in joint standing and advisory
committees established by the Chief Inspector of Factories. Representatives of the
Trades Union Congress, the British Employers’ Confederation, the nationalised
Lustries and the Ministry of Labour and National Service meet on ffielnffustrial
Safety Sub-Committee of the National Joint Advisory Council. The Munster of
Labour and National Service has established a joint advisory committee, repre¬
sentative of employers and workers in the building and civil engineering industries,
to examine the problems associated with safety and health in these industries.
420
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Both transport operators and the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation give
high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every endeavour
is made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic densities, by
improvement in the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment, by traffic
regulation and control of standards of maintenance and by the training of crews in
competency and safety awareness. The detailed regulations and instructions issued
by the ministry and its agents form the basis of elaborate safety procedures laid
down by the operators themselves and by the makers of vehicles, equipment and
works. The radio industry and the transport services co-operate in the development
and application of radar systems and other safety devices (see pp. 385-6).
Fatal and serious industrial accidents have tended to diminish during the
twentieth century. They rose somewhat in factories during the early years of the
second world war. Since then, however, there has been a further decline, and
Britain’s fatal industrial accident rate (per thousand man-years) is among the
lowest in the world. Accidents sufficiently serious to cause more than three days’
absence still happen, however, to 2-5 per cent of male factory employees every year
and about 1 per cent of female factory employees. Most of these accidents are due
to quite ordinary causes—the handling of goods, the use of hand-tools, or falls—and
only a sixth are caused by power-driven machinery. Fatal accidents reported in
1958 in factories and other places of employment subject to the Factories Acts
numbered 665. Fatal accidents in mines and quarries numbered 388. The total of
fatal industrial accidents in factories, mines and quarries and railways, and in
trading and fishing vessels numbered 1,382.
Health and Welfare
Employers frequently achieve health and welfare standards considerably higher
than those prescribed by law. They are helped to do this by the inspectorates, by
Government departments and agencies, by employers’ associations and trade
unions and by expert voluntary bodies.
An increasing number of firms in Britain provide a whole-time or part-time
doctor, an industrial nurse, and a canteen with hot meals, pay part or all of the
cost of clubs and sports grounds, operate retirement and sickness insurance schemes
supplementing the State insurance schemes, and afford training and educational
facilities. Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes.
Periodic medical examinations are compulsory in factories for all young workers
under 18 years of age and for adults in certain dangerous occupations where such
examinations are of preventive value. These are carried out by some 2,200 Appointed
Factory Doctors, most of whom are engaged on a part-time basis. In addition, a
number of employers maintain medical services for their employees, and it is
estimated that there are altogether about 1,500 doctors, including about 400
full-time doctors and several thousand nurses and assistant nurses, in the industrial
health services. Increasing numbers of doctors and nurses are taking up this
work, which aims to provide occupational health facilities of a specialised preventive
character which do not duplicate the personal services already provided by the
National Health Service.
The big employers, including the State and the boards of nationalised industries,
have naturally taken the lead in this expansion, and a number of smaller factories
are also covered, either because of special risks or because of their progressive
outlook. There are, however, difficult problems to be solved in connection with
the further development of industrial health services, and in 1955 the Minister of
Labour and National Service appointed a Standing Industrial Health Advisory
Committee, of which he is the chairman, to advise him on this subject. The
LABOUR
421
membership of this committee includes persons nominated by the British
Employers’ Confederation, the Trades Union Congress, the nationahsed mdustri ,
the Medical Research Council, the British Medical Association, the Royal College
of Nursing and other organisations and bodies closely concerned with the promotion
oHndu trial health. This committee has given considerable attention to the need
for further work to determine more precisely the situation concerning industrial
health services With its advice two pilot surveys have been undertaken, one
particularTocality and one of a Particu,ar
detailed factual information on the situation. In the I'll . . , . ,
"ahons the committee is examining the best ways of developing industrial
b' Prompt’ and TffeSve'action in the field of industrial health depends, among
he^d^^rcTsoclafmedidne'o/the urdversi^s'i'and iay «he res:“ch depa— of
various'industries and large industrial concerns. Co-ordination is provided by a
number of general and special committees. , rpu„
Weifere standards vary considerably from one factory to another. The
^oT ;=ro?t='ra^Z^”rynmen
Progressive firms are careful to find out what their employees want, and welfare
policy is often decided in consultation with the workers, whether through regula
“"Durin^^XLc^dthTd'war, the provision of meals for workers a,
Ttt esd "hTotr n
are borne by the firms.
HUMAN RELATIONS IN INDUSTRY
The establishment of good working conditions is assisted by the organisation of
1 he estaDiisnmeiii g „rrf,npements for negotiation and settlement of
employers and workpeople by arrangement > Thi institutional
differences, and by ‘“Je s work and working
framework, “rm^7tr^tItaSn7 “foteration of management and workers,
“fr^nff shared effort and aeb,vemen, wf
Nor will good wages and hours, hlgh s^d i u^s and responses; their
employee services necessardy bring abn^ ^ good Nations between individ-
achievement depends rather on the buiicung up g
SSSsSSSSsriHrS
organisations'of’workers^This'has’leci t"wiSpreaTattention being given
422
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to all aspects of personnel management and to the establishment of more personnel
departments.
Practically all large industrial firms and many small ones now have a personnel
department staffed by one or more specialist officers. While the form of organisation
of personnel departments varies, the personnel officer is generally responsible for
advising all levels of management on every aspect of labour relations. This officer
also has particular duties with regard to recruitment, selection, education and
training, transfer of labour, the application of wage agreements, the promotion of
joint consultation and the supervision of working conditions and employee services.
Both voluntary and official organisations have been concerned with the promotion
of better human relationships in industry. The voluntary organisations include
bodies which deal with management problems and provide a service to subscribing
firms, professional associations linking individuals who have a common interest in
particular functions of management and administration, and bodies which provide
specialist services, usually on a fee-paying basis.
In 1945, the Ministry of Labour and National Service established a Personnel
Management Advisory Service which has done much to promote good personnel
management and to assist firms by discussing problems of personnel policy.
The service is staffed by a team of experienced personnel officers recruited from
industry.
Recruitment and promotion policies are matters which each undertaking decides
for itself, although in some industries the decisions may be limited by collective
agreements or by trade practices. Great importance has recently been attached to
selection; and courses for training personnel officers in modern interviewing tech¬
niques, including the use of test procedures, are now well attended. Selection of
applicants for jobs is assisted by the Government Employment Services (see
pp. 398-403).
Since the end of the second world war, there has been an intensification of the
educational and training activities arranged by industry. Short-term training is
almost entirely the responsibility of individual firms, but in over no sections of
industry and commerce, employers and trade unions have agreed national or
regional schemes of apprenticeship and other long-term training. Further expansion
and improvement of training facilities have been urged in the report of a sub¬
committee of the National Joint Advisory Council. This report, published in
February 1958 under the title Training for Skill, stressed that the increase in the
number of young people leaving school in the next few years afforded a great
opportunity to increase the supply of skilled workers and technicians, and proposed
that a council should be formed by industry to follow up its various recommendations.
This led to the establishment, in July 1958, of the Industrial Training Council,
composed of representatives of the British Employers’ Confederation, the Trades
Union Congress and the nationalised industries. The Government has announced
its intention to make a grant of up to £75>000 to the council to further the appoint¬
ment of training development officers, provided that industry contributes at least
an equivalent amount.
The realisation that the co-operation of workpeople depends largely on their
proper understanding of management’s aims and plans has focused attention on
the means of conveying information to workers. Methods used include posters,
wall information sheets, production charts, displays of photographs, the production
of news-sheets and house journals, discussions and lectures, film shows and
exhibitions. It is increasingly held, however, that, although these media have their
use, it is more important to improve communications down the normal chain of
responsibility to workshop level (a matter which depends on personal relations and
LABOUR
423
on the adequacy of supervisor training) and ,0 establish means for join, consul,a-
‘‘ThrrtreS^^ fruitfully discuss is wWe and
* 1 ties hours of work (within the framework of agreements), safety, health, effi
:ht *md“rogduct.onyand the firm’s prospects, -«"^1
““ of
employment, and other matters covered by negotiation between organisations
e,The Govemmenthas assisted these developments by advice on techniques, by the
of T abour and National Service are often approached by firms seeking aa
1 ettabhshment of works councils or on ways in which their activities can be
"TheTovetment has sought ,0 extend by research the availrtileJknowkdge of
the factors influencing human relations in industry and human etoncy. Res
m r 1\/T^rlirnl Research Council have worked on these problems ror ma y
T„ *e AdvLory Council on Scientific Policy se, up a committee on
COInUMarch ,953, the Department of Scientific and Industrial R<=s<=arch and the
hurnan'factorl^industryl't^^^^mitte^^^^umarrRelations^in pn^ects
^ThtTommittee on Human Relations approved a number of projects for research
SSKSHSSgSS
S“r^^dr^^S“s^^er persons and
maTt clZinee on Individual Efficiency concerned -If whh research into such
*-h-
niques, and training methods in industry. Committees have been dis-
are continuing research into cognate problems.
2E
XII. FINANCE
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities (i.e. the central
Government and local authorities) finance their activities—how their expenditure
is decided upon and how their revenue is obtained.
Money administered by public authorities1 can be roughly divided into two
categories:
1. The funds of the central Government, raised mainly by taxation, but also
in part by borrowing, and paid into and out of the Exchequer2 in accordance
with the proposals of the Government, as approved by Parliament (princi¬
pally the House of Commons).
There are also funds administered for special purposes by central Govern¬
ment departments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts which
do not come from the Exchequer. The only important one is the National
Insurance Fund, administered by the Minister of Pensions and National
Insurance, used for the payment of benefits under the National Insurance
Scheme.
2. The funds of local authorities, obtained partly from rates (local taxes on
dwelling houses and other real estate) and income from property and trading
receipts, partly from grants and loans from the Exchequer, and partly from
loans raised in the open market.
The following broad account of Government finance will be concerned mainly
with the Exchequer and only incidentally with local government3 and other public
funds.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law,
parliamentary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the principle
that taxation by the Crown required parliamentary consent was gradually evolved.
The principle was established, at the end of the constitutional struggles of the
Stuart period, by the Bill of Rights, 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once the King
was granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free to spend it as he
chose. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House of Commons gradually
developed the modem system of controlling expenditure through the device of
Appropriation, which was embodied in the Exchequer and Audit Departments Act,
1866.
From the very early days of Parliament it had been established that such financial
control as Parliament possessed should be exercised by the House of Commons.
This control became effective, as regards taxation, in the seventeenth century, but
as regards expenditure it was not effective until the nineteenth century. The con-
1 For an account of public finance in Northern Ireland and its relationship to that of the
United Kingdom, see pp. 434-5.
2 The term ‘Exchequer’ took its name from the ‘chess-board’, or table with chequered
cloth, round which the King’s financial officials sat for accounting purposes in the twelfth
century.
3 For further information on local government finance, see pp. 75-77.
424
FINANCE
425
trolling power of the House of Commons is acknowledged today in the SP^ech fro
the Throne at the opening of a new session of Parliament, which is addressed to
both Houses but contains a special paragraph addressed to the Commons al .
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no powe
modify financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions; thus to mini¬
mise the chance of rejection, the practice was started in 1861 of embodying the main
financial provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill. Since the passing o
Parliament Act, 1911, however, the assent of the House of Lords is no longer needed
for a Bill certified by the Speaker to be a Money Bill (see pp. 36 and 37 8).
Todiy, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all expen-
diture by the central Government itself and for the raising of revenue by taxatio
or borrowing. All Government revenue is paid into the Government accoun w
the Bank of England—known as the Exchequer Account or the Consolidated Fun .
with certain exceptions (the mam one, as previously stated, being National In¬
surance benefits), all payments by the Government come out °f a“°U ^
The following sections outline the machinery by which expenditure and revenue
are authorised and controlled, the purposes on which public money is spent and
sources from which revenue is obtained.
ESTIMATES AND EXPENDITURE
Classification of Expenditure
Central Government expenditure falls into two main groups:
1 Expenditure which is specifically authorised by Act of Parliament without
' limitation to any particular year. This expenditure includes the interest
sinking funds and cost of management of the National Debt, the financia
provision made for members of the royal family, and salaries and pensions
of judges and certain high officers whose independence of the Government
is thought to be better guaranteed by permanent grant than by annual vo .
These Consolidated Fund Services represent a permanent charge on the
Consolidated Fund.
2 All other Government expenditure, which is authorised from year to year
’ and which includes all expenditure on defence, on the S(;cial service^and 01J
the general administration of the country. These are called SuPPly Semces
because the House of Commons, when voting money, is granting to the
Crown ‘such aids or supplies as are required to satisfy . . . the pecuniary
necessities of the Government’. It should be noted that s°me of tffis expe -
diture may also depend on legislation, such as the National Health Service
Acts, which relates to a specific object of expenditure.
Authorisation of Expenditure r „
The Estimates for these Supply Services are considered by the Hou8® °f Com¬
mons in Committee of Supply (that is, in Committee °f the »ho e T ,ee
Chairman of Committees, instead of the Speaker, in the Chair), ^he comm
usually discusses public policy relevant to the Estimates though any Estimate co
be examined in detail if members wished and if time allowed 8ee a'8° P'39^ are
Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginn g P d
submitted to the Treasury by each department in the ,
December Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called Votes
which are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of C°™m8
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed in the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
426
Appropriation Act; this Act appropriates the money to specific Votes. Inside each
Vote, a ‘virement’, the spending of money on one subhead instead of on another,
is permissible so far as Parliament is concerned, but only with Treasury consent.
Departments are free to distribute expenditure within subheads as they please
subject to Treasury approval of the type of expenditure involved.
An excess of expenditure, or a new service not covered by the Vote, or a virement
of a magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should be brought to the
attention of Parliament, requires a Supplementary Estimate. The Treasury exercises
the same power of scrutiny over this as over the ordinary Estimates.
Scrutiny of Expenditure
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller and
Auditor General, by the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons
and by the Select Committee on Estimates.
The Treasury
The power of the Treasury to control expenditure derives from the responsibility
of the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the financial policy of the Government.
A central function of the Treasury is to present the Civil Estimates to the House
of Commons. In considering the Estimates submitted by departments, the Treasury
has to weigh the advantages of administrative proposals against the monetary and
economic cost, taking into account current Government policy, to decide the rela¬
tive merits of expenditure proposed by different departments and to eliminate any
overlapping, uneconomic or wasteful expenditure where this has escaped the net of
departmental financial control. Quite apart from the scrutiny of Estimates, through¬
out the year the Treasury keeps a close control over such matters as rates of pay
and the aggregate size of the staff in all Government departments, in addition to
exercising a general supervision over all departmental expenditure. The Treasury
also lays down general rules of financial and accounting procedure for departments
and prescribes the principles on which departmental contracts shall be made and
the limits within which losses may be written off.
The Comptroller and Auditor General
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is
exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor General, who holds a permanent appoint¬
ment as an officer of Parliament. Since 1866 he has had two functions: as Comp¬
troller of the Exchequer he controls entries and issues of public money to and from
the Exchequer Account; and as Auditor General he audits departmental accounts
and submits the Appropriation Accounts to Parliament. His statutory function is
to ensure that all expenditure is properly incurred, e.g., that no payments are made
which go beyond any relevant statutory authority, and that Treasury sanction has
been obtained wherever necessary. In addition, however, he has been encouraged
by successive Committees on Public Accounts (see the next paragraph) to examine
departmental expenditure with a view to drawing attention to any cases of apparent
waste or extravagance.
The Public Accounts Committee
The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by the
Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a select committee called the
Public Accounts Committee (PAC). This was set up in 1861, by Mr. Gladstone,
for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was properly incurred in accordance
with the way it was voted and with any relevant Acts of Parliament. These terms of
427
FINANCE
reference have been widely interpreted by the committee which investigates
whether full value has been obtained for the sums spent by departments a
examines cases in which the administration appears to have been faulty or neghgen .
T^cor^ttee his therefore become a powerful instrument for the exposure of
waste and inefficiency. It embodies its findings in reports which may be ^
• House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the i reas y
'in consultation -thTpar,men,s and put into effect, so far as they are accepted
. Treasury instructions. If the recommendations are not acceptable, a
reasoned^reply 1m to^b^sutardtted to the comm.ttee, which may other accept the
objections or return to the charge in subsequent reports.
Select Committee on Estimates , . ^ W1-th
Tie am Z economies which could be made without altering the policy implied
THE BUDGET
■Budget1 is an old word meaning a bag containing papers or account. The use
^sthmtejo^^pen^ture^inder^^ioushead^ngs wU^iam^eenjimsented^to Par^ia-
ment a"d, p“bhshedi,“ chhancelfor estimates the yield of the revenue on the basis
re^g"n anises such changes in taxation -
surplus o? deficit he considers desirable on _icg^
“s"! excSuto'ha“e immediate statutory effect if adopted by Resolution
“'“dge^eTro gives figures relating to certain payment of a c ^
and others are set out in the part of the Budget wh.eh lies below the line .
1 In 1957, the Act was extended to include purchase tax.
(mie^ "LI and
(3) payments for which the Treasury has power to borrow.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
428
Budget Policy
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money for
Government expenditure. From an early stage, however, it was appreciated that
taxation would affect the distribution of income and property and the level of
expenditure on particular goods and services. At a later period it was realised that
taxation also affected the nation’s total expenditure and therefore the general level
of economic activity. Since the second world war, Budgets have been consciously
designed in greater or lesser degree to bring the total demand for goods and services
into balance with the supplies which could be made available.
Direct taxation on income and property affects the distribution of wealth because
the rates vary according to the size of income and property, the proportion of a
high income taken in tax being much greater than the proportion of a small one;
at the same time, the services provided by the Government (whether in cash or
kind) are generally available to all, irrespective of wealth, but in some cases they are
specially designed to benefit people with lower incomes. Indirect, or outlay taxes
(see p. 431) do not affect the distribution of income; their main purpose has always
been the raising of revenue, but by discouraging or encouraging consumption
of particular goods they can be used to influence the allocation of resources and
the pattern of trade.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure and, therefore, the total
demand for goods and services, in the following way: if there is an increase in
Government expenditure without an increase in taxation then total demand for
goods and services will tend to rise; the same thing will happen if there is a decrease
in taxation without a decrease in Government spending. In this way the Budget
can be used to counter unemployment. On the other hand, if there is an increase
in taxation without an increase in Government expenditure or a decrease in Govern¬
ment expenditure without a decrease in taxation then the total demand for goods
and services will tend to fall. In this way the Budget can be used to counter inflation.
For some years after the war, budgetary policy was mainly designed to avoid
inflation by holding down consumer demand for goods and services so that it would
not hamper exports, investment or the defence programme. The Budgets of
1951 and 1952 aimed also to hold down investment in the interests again of exports
and defence. By 1953, as total demand had fallen while productive capacity
had increased, some unused resources became available; in consequence, there
was a reduction of taxation in the 1953 Budget, which aimed particularly at
encouraging higher investment and production. These aims were continued in
the 1954 Budget, when, however, changes in taxation were much smaller than in
I953- The Budget of April 1955, which gave further tax reliefs, was followed in
October by a Supplementary Budget which had the purpose of reinforcing measures,
including a tighter credit policy, instituted earlier in the year with the object of
curtailing excessive internal demand and of strengthening the balance of payments
position. The 1956 Budget was designed to continue the drive against over-spending
and to provide new inducements to savers. During 1956 and 1957, as a result of
budgetary and other measures, inflationary pressure was reduced and the balance
of payments improved; consequently, in the 1957 Budget, it was possible to make
some reductions in taxation. The 1958 Budget, which included some further
taxation concessions—mainly in purchase tax and profits tax—was intended to
consolidate the country’s improved economic position and to prepare for future
expansion. The aim of the Budget of April 1959, which provided for important
reductions in taxation and an increased rate of repayment of post-war credits, was
to give a further stimulus to economic activity and to encourage the utilisation of
spare industrial capacity while ensuring that price stability was maintained.
FINANCE
429
"^^“rdinary’ (mainiy current) Budget expenditure of th^nutd
Exchequer.
Income Tax, Surtax, and Profits Tax . .
a o cttmriflrH rate for the year of assessment beginning
Income tax is imposed at a standard rate tor tne y
AUn ar^ril The standard rate, for the year 1959-60, is 7s. gel. m t ^ U /o
“/l^ The^ imposed on an indiyiduai^^aduated by =o
ailowances^and t^i^the case^f a^arried^tnople^the incomes of husband
“ie are aVgmgated and are treated as one income, but a h.gher persona!
paid year,y by peop,e with different
SSssstfratssrW
has been levied at the rate of 10 per cent which originates in the United
In general, income tax is charged on ™s0r(fncluding companies)
Kingdom and on all £c°me arising ^a ^ excepdons are that interest on certain
resident in the United Kingdom. nersons not ordinarily resi-
United Kingdom Government securities belong g Qf possessions
^dn"at,fnrrrro^
“s^^lfn^^ I^mains undistributed.
HpHnrtion of the personal allowances and
1 The balance of income remaining f taxable income are charged at reduced
reliefs is taxable income. The first thfee sectio h standard rate. For 1959-60
rates of income tax, and only 't'^^Vtot £60“ 4 . 3d. in the £ on the next £.50;
the reduced rates are: is 9d. m the £ on the nrst *,00, 4
and 6s. 3d. in the £ on the following £ 5 • Wher rates is charged on personal
* The surtax, which is essentially an income a onal’ allowances in excess of
incomes exceeding £2,000 a year f ef ded^dngjrtain per^a^ progre 1Vely
the single person s basic ai1ilo™cet; £15 000 a year, income tax and surtax combined
until (for 1959—60) on all income aoov 5>
“d —d ,n *he
430
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The United Kingdom has entered into agreements with many countries providing
for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are not in force, the United
Kingdom allows unilateral relief.1
Estate Duty
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of property (whether legally settled or not)
which passes or is deemed to pass at death. Thus, it is not limited to property
owned by the deceased. It may, for example, extend to trust funds to the income of
which the deceased was entitled during his lifetime, and to gifts made by the
deceased within five years of his death (one year in the case of a gift for public or
charitable purposes). Estates with a net capital value of £3,000 or less are exempt
from duty, but on estates of a higher value there is a progressive duty ranging from
1 per cent to 80 per cent.
TABLE 29
Income Tax and Surtax paid by Persons with Different Incomes
and Family Responsibilities in 1959-60
{to nearest £)
Income
before
tax
Single persons
Income
all
earned
income
Income
all
invest¬
ment
income(a)
Married couples
without children
Income
all
earned
income
Income
all
invest¬
ment
income(a)
Married couples with
two children
Earned Income
Two
children
not over
11
Two
children
over 11
but not
over 16
Two
children
over 16
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
2,000
5,000
10,000
1(6)
12
1(6)
12
29
49
74
101
131
162
192
493
1,953
5,352
52
84
123
162
200
239
278
665
2,340
5,953
8(6)
24
42
67
93
123
153
454
1,891
5,276
27(6)
53
84
123
162
200
239
627
2,279
5,877
2
15
31
53
77
377
1,769
5,123
5
21
37
61
357
1,738
5,085
10
27
46
338
1,708
5,047
Source: Financial Statement, 1959-60.
{a) Age Relief. Where the taxpayer (or his wife) is 65 or over and his total income does not
exceed £800, age relief is given; this reduces the tax payable to that chargeable on the
earned income scale. Where the total income exceeds £800, marginal relief is given so that
the full tax on the investment income scale is not payable until marginal relief runs out.
(6) A single person aged 65 or over is exempt from tax if his total income does not
exceed £275; a married couple is exempt if either of them is aged 65 or over and their
joint income does not exceed £440. There is marginal relief where the income slightly
exceeds these limits.
1 The information in this paragraph is not legally authoritative. For this purpose
reference should be made to the relevant Statutory Instruments. Inquiries in the United
Kingdom should be addressed to the Secretary, Board of Inland Revenue, Somerset
House, London, W.C.2.
FINANCE
431
Indirect Taxes . ,
Most indirect or outlay taxes are customs and excise duties and are levied on
commodities or services. They are called indirect because the “nporter^ manufac-
turer, wholesaler, or provider of commodities or services pays them first and then
adiusts his prices to his customers accordingly. , . ,
Customs duties are levied on imported goods, and excise duties on goo s pro¬
duced and services provided, at home. The purchase tax, which is also collected
by the Customs and Excise Department, applies equally, and at the same rate, to
home-produced and to imported goods. , f
The system of customs duties is twofold in its purpose: it has the function
providing a measure of protection for British industries or preference for products
imported from Commonwealth countries overseas and it has also the function,
association with the excise system, of providing revenue.
The principal revenue duties collected by the Customs and Excise Departm
are those on tobacco, alcoholic drinks and hydrocarbon oil (mostly petrol and diesel
fuel for road vehicles). There are a number of smaller revenue duties, e.g., on
betting, on cinemas (entertainments tax), and on television, matches and sugar
The protective customs duties cover a wider field, but their contribution to th
vield of indirect taxation is relatively small. „ . .
Purchase tax is charged on a wide range of goods, nearly all of ^ consum
„oods at rates varying from 5 per cent to 50 per cent of the wholesale value.
Articles subject to revenue duties of the Customs and Excise Department are in
general exempt from this tax; other goods free of purchase tax include food, fue ,
books and newspapers, young children’s clothing and footwear, certain non-pro¬
prietary drugs and medicines, some household appliances and textiles.
THE EXCHEQUER ACCOUNTS, 1959-60
In the Budget of April 1959, ^ta\ current expenditure for the financial year
ending 31st March, i960, was estimated to reach £5,223 million, while the estimate
for total current revenue (after allowing for taxation changes) was £5,325 million,
making a surplus of £102 million. These figures exclude self-balancing revenue and
expenditure (Post Office trading), for which the estimate was £379 million. Below
the line’ total payments were estimated at £1,205 million, while total receipts were
estimated at £382 million, leaving a deficit, to be borrowed or met from the surplus
on current account, of £823 million. . , , . .
Table 30 shows the Budget estimates for 1959-60 in comparison with the out-turn
(Exchequer receipts and issues) for the previous year. The diagram on p. 433
illustrates the pattern of Government estimates of revenue and expenditure on
current account in 1959—60.
CAPITAL PAYMENTS AND RECEIPTS
In the last few years the main items of capital expenditure dealt with in the part of
the Budget statement which lies ‘below the line’ have been loans to local authorities
for housing and other investment; funds to meet capital expenditure by the Post
Office; war damage payments; working capital for the National Coal Board, an
loans to other nationalised industries. Capital receipts have come mainly from the
repayment of these loans. If, on balance, there is a deficit, it is met frona the pro-
ceeds of Government borrowing or from the surplus, if any, in Ordinary revenue
and expenditure, i.e. ‘above the line’; while if there is a surplus it goes to reduce
the National Debt.
432
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 30
United Kingdom Budget: 1958-59 Out-turn and 1959-60 Estimates
(after 1959-60 Budget changes)
£ million
Above the Line
Revenue
Inland Revenue
Customs and Excise
Motor duties
Total Tax Revenue
Broadcast licences
Sundry loans
Miscellaneous
Total Revenue
1958-59
Out¬
turn
3,016
2,191
107
5,314
34
27
105
5,480
5,480
1959-60
Esti¬
mate
2,856
2,150
104
5,110
35
30
150
5,325
5,325
Expenditure
Interest on Debt
Sinking Funds
Northern Ireland
Miscellaneous
Total Consolidated
Fund Services
Supply: Defence (a)
Civil (includ¬
ing cost of
tax collection)
Total Supply
Total Expenditure . .
Surplus
1958-59
Out¬
turn
663
38
77
8
786
1,468
2,849
4,317
5,103
377
5,480
Below the Line
1959-60
Esti¬
mate
600
39
79
10
728
1,502
2,993
4,495
5,223
102
5,325
Receipts
Interest outside Budget
Housing receipts from
Votes
Repayments of past
loans:
Local authorities . .
Post Office . .
Nationalised indus¬
tries
Other repayments . .
Total Receipts
Net sum borrowed or
met from surplus
above the line
Total Receipts
206
7
52
10
29
22
326
559
885
5,806
240
55
10
47
22
382
823
1,205
5,707
Payments
Interest outside Budget
Post-war Credits
War damage . .
Loans to:
New towns . .
Building societies . .
Post Office . .
Export Credits Guar¬
antee Department
Colonial Develop¬
ment Corporation
Colonial Govern¬
ments
Nationalised indus¬
tries
Transport (railway
finances) . .
Other items . .
Total Payments
Total Payments
206
18
18
28
43
22
6
440
94
10
885
885
5,988
240
89
18
31
25
41
50
10
20
580
88
13
1,205
1,205
6,428
Source: Financial Statement, 1959-60.
{a) Not including receipts from Germany to cover local costs of British forces
(£12 million) and defence expenditure by civil departments (£18-85 million in i958-59
and £18-48 million in 1959-60).
FINANCE
433
THE UNITED KINGDOM BUDGET 1959-60
(based on April 1959 Budget estimates) 
REVENUE
Receipts per £ from different sources
TAXES ON INCOME AND CAPITAL IQs.
EXPENDITURE
Outlay per £ on different items
Taxes on Personal Incomes
Income Tax and Surtax, including tax
on dividends and intereet (£1.693 million)
National Debt
Interest on Government stocks,
including National Savings Certificates
(£639 million)
Tax Paid by Companies
Income Tax. Profits Tax, etc. (£900 million)
Death Duties (£195million)
Defence (£1.514million)
mu
ami
Tobacco (£750 million)
Alcohol (£376 million)
Entertainments, Television
and Betting i£54 million)
Purchase Tax (£471 million)
Oil and Motor Duties
Oil. including petrol (£355 million)
Motor (£104 million)
Other
Stamp Duties. Import Duties (except on
Alcohol. Tobacco. Oil), etc. (£212 million)
Miscellaneous, including receipts from
Government trading and servicing of certain QH)
loans and broadcast licences (£215 million) ^
Health (£560 million)
excluding grants to local authorities
Personal Payments
Family Allowances. War Pensions. National
Assistance, Government Contribution
to Insurance Funds (£543 million)
Excludes benefits and pensions paid out
of National Insurance Funds
Agricultural Support
Subsidies (£245 million)
Assistance to Local Services
School Education. Housing. Health. Police.
Classified Roads, etc. (£840 million)
OTHER SERVICES 3 S. 4,d .
Miscellaneous, including Atomic Energy.
Commonwealth and Foreign. Universities.
Tax Collection. Trunk Roads. Broadcasting
(£882 million)
TOTAL £ 5,325 mill)
>n £1. O. 0.
TOTAL (IncluU
£1. O. O. £5,325 million
434
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since the war, new lending by the Government has exceeded loan repayments as,
in the main, repayments are spread over a long term. Between August 1945 and
December 1952, local authorities were obliged, under the provisions of the Local
Authorities Loans Act, 1945, to rely upon the Exchequer, operating through the
Public Works Loan Board (see p. 77), for nearly all their borrowings. As from
January 1953, they were permitted to borrow in the open market. In October 1955,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that he had asked the board, before
it granted any further advances, to put all applicants on inquiry as to their ability
to raise the finance on their own credit either in the stock market or in the mortgage
market. Any advances granted were at a rate of interest reflecting not Government
credit, but the credit of local authorities of good standing in the market for loans
of comparable periods.
The National Debt
So far, borrowing on a large scale has been undertaken only to finance deficits
during or immediately after a war. The National Debt rose from £651 million in
1914 to £7,435 million at the end of the first world war, and from £7,131 million
in 1939 to £23,637 million in 1946. On the 31st March, 1959, the total National
Debt was £27,375 million, of which £2,187 million was repayable in currencies
other than sterling, mainly to the United States and Canadian Governments. Of
the £25,188 million of internal debt, about £5,629 million was short-term debt,
mainly in the form of 91-day bills on the Treasury, while the long-term loans
included a variety of stocks, bonds, loans, and certificates carrying fixed rates of
interest (ranging from 2^ to 5I per cent) and with fixed or indeterminate dates of
repayment.
PUBLIC FINANCE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main features,
similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole, under which public
revenues, with a few minor exceptions, are paid into the Exchequer, from which no
money can be withdrawn except on the authority of Parliament. That authority is
expressed in the case of Consolidated Fund charges in permanent legislative form,
and in the case of Supply Services by annual Appropriation Acts based on estimates
prepared by departments and sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance.
The major portion of taxation (customs duties and most excise duties, purchase
tax, income tax, surtax and profits tax) is imposed by the United Kingdom
Parliament over the whole country, and the amount levied in Northern Ireland is
paid, in the first instance, into the United Kingdom Exchequer. From this amount,
known as ‘Reserved’ Revenue, there is deducted and retained by the United
Kingdom Treasury, under the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, the sum con¬
tributed by Northern Ireland towards Imperial Services (called the ‘Imperial
Contribution’), the cost of the administration of the Supreme Court, the Post
Office, and other Reserved Services, and the cost of collecting Reserved Revenue.
The balance, termed the ‘Residuary Share of Reserved Taxes’, is paid over to the
Exchequer of Northern Ireland and joins with the proceeds of taxes levied and
collected by the Government of Northern Ireland, called ‘Transferred’ Revenue,
and with other non-tax receipts of a miscellaneous nature, to form the public
income. The items of Transferred Tax Revenue are estate duties, stamp duties,
pool betting duty, bookmakers’ licence duties, cinemas (entertainments duty),
television licence duty, most excise licence duties, and motor vehicle duties.
A Joint Exchequer Board, representative of the Treasury and the Ministry of
FINANCE
435
Finance for Northern Ireland, constituted in accordance with the Government of
fretad Ac, 1920, determines the amount of Reserved Revenue and the cos of
Reserved Services attributable to Northern Ireland for each year, the amount of
fhe Imperial Contribution and such other questions affecting the financial relation
of the two Governments as may be referred to it. MsrrM total
In the Northern Ireland Budget for i959~6o (year ending 3ist March) t
revenues were forecast a, £100.54 million and expenditure at £97^9 m‘Umm
After allowing for a small Budget surplus of £50.33°, the Impenal Contnbu
was provisionally estimated at £3 million. . i\/rQ1.„u men
The Public Debt of Northern Ireland, totalling £54 million on 31 st Mar , 959,
is Iliy covered by repayable advances and investments held by the Ministry of
F Omride the Exchequer system in Northern Ireland, ^
purposes6*!^ general,tthese<fundslhdlow t^United Kingdom pattern, the^pnnc^al
borrowings; on 31st March, 1959, a sum of approximately £76 million was ou -
standing against such authorities.
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The British banking system is long established and -dl
* centr'd hank- commercial banks which carry on the usual mam banking services,
the United Kingdom offices of various banks whose main business is in other
countries; and various speeialised banks and similar financial institutions.
The Bank of England
The Bank of England is the central bank and its principal business is to act as
Grtrrn,^^^
Tc minimum rate at which the Bank of England will discount approved bills
“tTanker ,0 the
^“n^orirro0;” ^Tteasury, the administration of ex-
ChThgee SrerStanks mSiSXt'baUSrwith the Bank of England and
^TteBSro/ETgCd has^he^ righ^ in England and Wales of issuing bank
nr^thus^nee^mope^m^vering^^^epari
covered by the latter ^ld ’is now held by the Issue Depart-
^SaXt EntCd,The bulk of the United Kingdom gold (and foreign
1 At 31st August, 1959, the Bank Rate stood at 4 per cent.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
436
exchange) reserves being in a separate account, known as the Exchange Equalisation
Account, originally established in 1932, for the purpose of checking undue
fluctuation in the exchange value of sterling. The provision of coin for circulation
is the responsibility of a Government department, the Royal Mint.
In August 1959, the comprehensive report was published of a committee set
up by the Government in April 1957, under the chairmanship of Lord Radcliffe,
to inquire into the working of the monetary and credit system and to make
recommendations; this was the first inquiry of this kind since 1931.
The Commercial Banks
The banks handling the major part of the domestic banking business in the
United Kingdom are, in the main, limited liability companies which are subject to
the ordinary law relating to such companies.
Some of the main features of the United Kingdom commercial banks are:
1. A relatively small number of banks control a large number of branches.
United Kingdom banking members of the British Bankers’ Association
include 11 London clearing banks, 5 banks in Scotland and 3 in Northern
Ireland, and control nearly 13,000 branches and have total assets of over
£8,000 million.
2. The volume of cheques handled is very large and, in spite of a stamp duty
of 2d. on each cheque, many payments—and even relatively small payments
—are made by cheque. The average daily value of cheques, drafts, bills and
bankers’ effects cleared in 1958 through the London and Provincial Clearing
Houses was £597 million; and many cheques do not, for various reasons,
pass through clearing houses.
3. It is the practice of the chief United Kingdom banks to maintain a ratio of
about 8 per cent between cash reserves and total deposits (of which about
two-thirds are repayable on demand, the remainder being deposits at
interest and subject to notice).
The banks make advances to customers partly in the form of overdrafts
and partly in the form of loans (with or without collateral security); in
either case, the advance is normally for a short term only, unless renewed.
The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total deposits declined
from 42-9 per cent in 1938 to 17-4 per cent in 1946, but rose to a level of
about 30-6 per cent in 1955-57. In I958, following the relaxation of
Government restrictions on the pattern and quantity of bank lending, the
percentage moved upwards, and by March 1959 was 35-6 per cent.1 This
increase was accompanied by innovations in bank lending practice, including
the introduction of schemes for personal loans repayable by fixed monthly
instalments over periods up to two years, and facilities for limited service
accounts at low cost. Another development was the acquisition, by many
banks, of share capital in hire purchase finance companies.
4. Certain banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland have retained limited rights
to issue notes (see p. 512); these issues, apart from an amount for each
bank which is specified by legislation, must be fully covered by Bank of
England notes and by coin.
1 About 31 per cent of the banks’ deposits at this time were covered by cash and other
liquid securities (e.g., money at call and short notice and bills discounted), while 29.1 per
cent were covered by British Government and other long-term securities.
finance
437
United Kingdom Offices of Banks Operating Mainly Overseas
The importance of London as a financial and trading centre and as the largest
city of the British Commonwealth has encouraged many banks whose mam business
i In other Commonwealth countries and foreign countries to maintain London
offices- il some cases, indeed, the institutions concerned are United Kingdom
companies and the London office is the head office. These London offices f°nn par
of the complex structure engaged in the financing of trade not on Y e ®
United Kingdom and other countries but also in goods which are shipped di
between other countries.
Savings Banks and the National Savings Movement
The function of Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Savings Bank is to
provide facilities for the investment of voluntary savings and particularly of the
small savings of persons with low incomes. Both these types of banks were already
wdl estabhffied during the nineteenth century. The growth of their business was,
however encouraged in the first world war when the War Savings Committee was
set up under Government auspices to promote an official savin|s driVeh ^
tvpe of long-term security for the small investor was inaugurated at that time.
This was the National Savings Certificate, with interest payable only on encash¬
ment but free of income tax. From this war-time drive originated the Pres^
National Savings Movement devoted to the encouragement of the widespread
investment of savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Savings Ba
and in National Savings Certificates and Defence Bonds. The policy of the move¬
ment is determined by the National Savings Committee for England and Wales
, r, • i tvnp 0f savings security—Premium Savings Bonds, issued in £1 u
—which after m initial period of six months and thereafter monthly, give investors
a chance to win prizes hanging from £z5 to £.,000 instead of receiving mterest
By the end of June .959, about £zzS million had been invested m this form of
SaTnruSstee Savings Banks are managed by boards of honorary trustees and managers,
and most of the funds deposited with them are ordinary deposits which are wnh-
drawTbt on demand or", short notice. These deposits are invested w^A
National Debt Commissioners, and the Government is responsible to tl«w«tees
for the repayment of the money so invested, with accrued interest, as and when
mauhed In certain circumstances, Trustee Savings Banks also accept deposits of
up m £zooo for special investment. These deposits, which may receive a slightly
hfgher rate of interest than ordinary deposits, are invested under the auperv sion
of the National Debt Commissioners, but the Government « not responsible .0
the trustees for the repayment of these investments In June .959, there
about 1,330 Trustee Offices controlled by 83 independent banks. 
> Twenty-eight overseas banks are members of the British Bankers’ Association
local committees and district groups, all of a voluntary nature.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
438
The Post Office Savings Bank is the largest organisation of its kind in the world.
It has over 22 million active accounts; in December 1958, total balances, which
carry a Government guarantee, amounted to £1,644 million, about £75 per deposi¬
tor. Through a centralised system of accounting, a depositor can pay in money or
make a withdrawal at any one of some 20,000 post offices throughout the country.
To ensure that Savings Banks are used primarily by the small investor there is a
limit of £500 on the amount which may be deposited by any individual in one year,
and of £3,000 on the total balance which may be held by one individual in the
ordinary departments of Trustee Savings Banks and in the Post Office Savings
Bank. The maximum amount of National Savings Certificates which may be held
by any one person is £750 worth of the current (tenth) issue, in addition to holdings
of previous issues, and £500 worth of Premium Savings Bonds. The limit on
individual holdings of the current issue of Defence Bonds (5 per cent) is £2,000;
this is in addition to holdings of previous issues.
Co-operative Banks
The Co-operative Wholesale Society formed a deposit and loan department
about the year 1870, and the right of a co-operative society to engage in banking
was legally defined in the Industrial and Provident Societies Act of 1876. The
primary purpose of the Co-operative Wholesale Society Bank was to serve the
co-operative movement, whose financial centre it has become, but the bank has
also come to include among its clients trade unions and other mutual societies, local
authorities and individual depositors.
OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many
special financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities, which are
supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are mainly provided
through the Discount Market, Finance Corporations, the Stock Exchange, Invest¬
ment Trusts, Building Societies and the Insurance Market.
The firms engaged in such activities are in the main highly specialised, e.g.,
discount houses, stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers.
Another type of financial institution, the merchant bank, has been of great impor¬
tance in the finance of trade and commodity dealings and in the flotation of major
issues of bonds, particularly for overseas concerns and governments.
The merchant banks helped to give London an international reputation as the
main world centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. Long-term loans for
development purposes floated on the London market earned for Britain a con¬
tinuing flow of interest and attracted a steady flow of orders for British goods and
products. This increasing trade and also a large proportion of trade between foreign
countries was usually financed by bills of exchange, which were accepted as payable
at maturity by the merchant banks (also known as accepting houses) and were
traded on the discount market, thus providing an easy method of transferring debts
and claims.
The Discount Market
The main business of the Discount Market consists of trading in and holding
commercial bills of exchange, United Kingdom Government Treasury bills and
other short-term securities.
If the various firms which compose the Discount Market have insufficient funds
of their own to finance the bills and securities which they wish to hold, they obtain
FINANCE
439
loans from the banks and, to a lesser extent, deposits from the public. In the mam
these loans and deposits may be called in at any time.
The commercial banks do not, in the ordinary way, buy Treasury bids at
weeklv teX“ except on behalf of customers, but purchase, from the Discount
Market, bills which have been taken up by the market and held unhl they become
0fItrbXSn:1obaL"hey have made to the Discount Market and the
latter is unable to cover its needs elsewhere, it will be forced to borrow from the
B ulk of England. It is not the practice of the commercial banks themselves to
obtaindirect loans from the Bank of England to augment their cash resources if
the need arises.
Finance Corporations _ . . , , ,,
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited and t
Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited, were set up in 1945 to
COr^rah°d,in^^0to1£^s^stedevelopme!prprojecte1ir^he CorrmwnweaWi^Among
"her finandal colorations of note are the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
Limited, and the Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Limited.
Finance Corporation for Industry Limited , „
rav, FrT formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of £200,0
The Equipment and development of major industries with a
“etm promoting efficiency and thereby assisting in the maintenance and increase
y coraitcil hnri been naid up to the extent of 2 per cent (£500,000), tn
HaMity of the shareholders in respect of the uncalled capital represents security
0 ffie lankrthat provide the funds out of which the FCI makes its advances^
The enternrisef assisted by the FCI are concerned with a variety of produc ,
e.g., steel, oil, chemicals, shipping, diesel engines, and electrical components.
Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited
The ICFC has a smaller issued capital than that of the FCI and has as its main
object the provision of credit and finance by means of loan capital and share capital
for industrial and commercial concerns in Great Britain, h are
the existing facilities provided by banking institutions and the Stock Exchange
not readily or easily available. . , r . TrE'r' fa million fully paid
The authorised and issued share capital of the ICFC is £15 m lion, P
2F
44°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and £200,000 for small and medium-sized concerns. It has over 650 customers
and has established branches in Birmingham, Leeds, Leicester, Manchester and
Edinburgh.
Commonwealth Development Finance Company Limited
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company was set up in 1953 as a
new channel for the investment of private capital in Commonwealth development
schemes. Its issued capital is £26 million, held by the Bank of England and 149
business concerns in the United Kingdom and in other Commonwealth countries.
The company is empowered to borrow up to twice its issued capital. At the end
of March 1959, its commitments totalled £15-5 million.
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Limited
The primary function of this corporation, which was established in 1928, is to
grant long-term loans against first mortgages on agricultural lands and buildings
in England and Wales. The share capital was subscribed by the Bank of England
and other banks, but the funds are mainly derived from public issues of debentures,
of which about £36 million is outstanding.
The Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Limited
This corporation was established in 1933 under the provisions of the Agricultural
Credits (Scotland) Act, 1929. Its share capital is subscribed by four Scottish banks.
It fulfils broadly similar functions in Scotland to those of the Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation in England.
The Stock Exchanges
Although there are several Stock Exchanges in the United Kingdom, the London
Stock Exchange is by far the most important, and is one of the world’s two foremost
free markets in securities.
The Stock Exchanges provide a means by which a holder of quoted stocks or
shares (all important securities are quoted) can, if he wishes, find a buyer for his
securities; they are also a most important element in the raising of new capital by
Government and commercial borrowers.
The Stock Exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains are
made between members reflect the interaction of supply of and demand for the
securities concerned. All the Stock Exchanges operate under strict rules of conduct
which they formulate themselves.
Controls over Borrowing
Since 1932, there has been some degree of control over capital issues and other
forms of large-scale borrowing in the United Kingdom. The 1932 controls, and
such modifications as were made up to 1939, were without a statutory basis but
resulted from public requests by the Chancellor which the various markets observed.
At the outbreak of war in 1939, the Foreign Transactions (Advisory) Committee,
which had been set up in 1936 to advise the Treasury on issues involving remittances
to countries outside the Commonwealth, was renamed the Capital Issues Committee
and was given the wider task of advising the Treasury on the administration of the
statutory control of capital issues (and analogous transactions).
The end of the war in 1945 saw the retention of the Capital Issues Committee
with its primary function unchanged; provision for capital issues control on a more
permanent basis was made the following year with the passing of the Borrowing
(Control and Guarantees) Act, 1946, which empowered the Treasury to make
orders regulating borrowing and the raising of money by the issue of shares.
FINANCE
441
Tn February iQSQ controls over capital issues were considerably related by a
eenLl co^t givek by the Treasury, under powers conferred by the Control of
Borrowing Ordef, 1958. The effect of the new regulations is that, with the exceptio
of redeemable bonus issues, it is no longer necessary for any person or C°™P ^
°t redeem Kingdom to apply individually for Treasury consent before
tettissassi— s—;—
are still subject to control by the 1 reasury.
^Inve^e^tmsts8 ^d unTtm’Tprovide media through which investors may
investment and change the investments as they Judge desirab <.
Although the first unit trust append m ^ndon m^68^^^
Art1 marienTd bThe1 Copies Act, .947, and consolidated in the
PmieS o?™audt.nvyes,men,s) Ac, .958, brought
Sortdl^nt'V^.?; the 0X0958, the total funds invested in unit trusts
amounted to about £100 million.
The Insurance Market ,
vided in the United Kingdom by certain Friendly Societies.
Insurance Companies  ^ nf jnter_
There are about 3.0 British “XTe^ ^XXdX«hfs X.
national repute accounting wit t eir su business (and even more com-
In addition, about .°^a^°”PKtogd0m thus emphasising the international
nature ^m^Vr n^rTctnt of the market is in London, but some of
Ae large companies have their administrative headquarters elsetvhere.
442
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1957, the premium income of British insurance companies amounted to about
£1,325 million. The three non-life branches—fire, accident and marine—together
accounted for some £788 million. ‘Ordinary branch’ life assurance accounted for
£397 million and the balance of £140 million was represented by ‘industrial’ life
assurance (i.e. a system of assurance in which the contributions are collected by
house-to-house visits at intervals of less than two months).
The total assets of British insurance companies at the end of 1957 are estimated to
have been about £5,590 million. This included £1,207 million invested in British
Government and British Government guaranteed securities, £1,117 million invested
in debenture and loan stocks and preference and guaranteed stocks and shares,
£940 million in ordinary stocks and shares, £139 million in municipal and public
boards’ securities, and £659 million in mortgages.
Lloyd's
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of underwriters in London. Although in its
earlier history the activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the conduct of marine
insurance business, during the last sixty years there has also been built up at
Lloyd’s a very considerable world-wide market for the transaction of other classes
of insurance business, except life assurance of which the amount transacted at
Lloyd’s is negligible. In addition to its insurance activities, Lloyd’s maintains a
world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping intelligence
(see pp. 356-7)-
The name ‘Lloyd’s’ is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established
in the late seventeenth century, where merchants with maritime and other interests
gathered to transact business. By the middle of the eighteenth century, Lloyd’s
coffee house had become the principal centre of underwriting business and of
intelligence about shipping movements. In 1871, Lloyd’s was incorporated by Act
of Parliament.
The conduct of insurance business and the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in
its corporate capacity are administered by the Committee of Lloyd’s.
The interests of a holder of a Lloyd’s policy are safeguarded in the following
ways: (1) every Lloyd’s underwriter is liable for his underwriting debts to the full
extent of his means and is required to lodge security by way of a deposit with the
Committee of Lloyd’s; (2) the whole of the premiums received by an underwriter
must be placed in a trust fund to be used exclusively for the payment of his under¬
writing liabilities and expenses, and only ascertained profits can be released to the
underwriter and then only with the consent of the trustees; and (3) every under¬
writer must submit his accounts to an annual audit.
The usual practice of underwriters today is to form themselves into groups
known as syndicates which generally specialise in particular branches of insurance.
The underwriters forming the syndicate appoint an agent who is empowered to
accept risks on their behalf and to control all matters concerned with the syndicate’s
business. If the insurance is for a relatively large amount, several syndicates may
participate, but each underwriter is individually liable only for the proportion of
the risk accepted on his behalf.
Underwriters may not accept business directly from the public, but must trans¬
act through Lloyd’s brokers (see p. 443) in London, who must be connected with
Lloyd’s, either as members or subscribers.
The total premium income of Lloyd’s underwriters in 1957 after deduction of
brokerages, commissions, returns and reinsurance premiums was about £268
million, of which some £120 million was in respect of marine, aviation and transit
insurance.
FINANCE
443
Insurance Brokers u , o1r _r
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalt
the ^sured Trok's are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a valuab e par
of the company market. Many brokers specialise in reinsurance business, acting
intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between companies, both British an
overseas, and often acting as London representatives of the latter.
International Insurance Services
Over two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine insurance business comes from
abroad partly by direct placing in London and partly from branches and agencies
establthed in over 100 countries. The basic principle of this international business
L that resources capable of meeting any potential loss are instantly available for use
international voltune of business stand the assets of the
sonal fortunes of Lloyd’s underwriters.
Building Societies ,
The principal function of building societies is to supply iong-termloansonthe
security3of private dwelling houses purchased for owner occupation, though loans
are^oc^^onalh^made on ?he security of commercial and industrial premises and
farms The funds of building societies are derived mainly from the gcner‘l Pu
who Invest in shares or deposits. The amount of share capital is not fixed but may
be regulated in accordance with the amount of mortgage business; shares are no
Unde^the Hous^Purcht^e andHotuiingA^'i^SQf f^rreasury trasempowered
to atan"es to budding societies which fulfilled
inspect of houses
built before ist January, 1919- which do not excee £ ,5
XIII. TRADE
Although relatively small in area and accounting for only 2 per cent of the world’s
population, the United Kingdom conducts 10 per cent of international trade. It
has acquired this position as a consequence of several factors. It was one of the
earliest countries to remove legal and fiscal restrictions on the internal movement
of persons and goods, and the first to develop adequate facilities for the movement
of large quantities of goods by mechanical transport (canals, roads, railways and
steamships). With its resources of coal and iron, and its succession of mechanical
inventions, Britain was also the first country to industrialise on a large scale and to
produce a wide variety of consumer goods in large quantities. In addition, Britain
evolved, over a long period of years, the specialised financial services needed to
facilitate the maximum volume of trade.
This chapter outlines some of the main features of Britain’s overseas trade and
payments and internal trade. Although some account of overseas trade and pay¬
ments is essential to an understanding of Britain’s economy, only a brief treatment
of trade policy and commercial relations has seemed appropriate in this handbook
which is concerned with the United Kingdom, its people and internal institutions.
OVERSEAS TRADE
In the nineteenth century Britain attained a pre-eminent position in international
trade. At the end of the century Britain’s share of exports of manufactures entering
into world trade was about 33 per cent. Its share of world imports was somewhat
larger than that of world exports, as imports into Britain were paid for not only by
exports of goods but by interest on overseas investments and net receipts from
shipping and a variety of financial services. Even before 1914, however, this
supremacy was being increasingly challenged by other nations, including Germany
and the United States, and although Britain’s imports and exports increased in
absolute terms over the years, its share of the world total tended to decline. By
1937, Britain’s share in world exports of manufactures, measured by value, had
fallen to 22 per cent compared with 24 per cent in 1929 and 30 per cent in 1914.
In the years immediately following the second world war, Britain’s share rose again,
and in 1950 was 25 per cent; but by 1958 it had fallen back to 18-2 per cent.
For over a century, Britain’s internal economy has been vitally dependent on
international trade. Britain relies upon imports for half its total consumption of
foodstuffs and nearly all the raw materials needed for its industries. Its exports
of goods represent 30 per cent of the output of manufacturing industry; exports of
goods and services together absorb about a fifth of the gross national product.
In 1958, Britain was the world’s second largest exporter and importer. It is a
major supplier of machinery, ships, road and railway vehicles, aircraft, metal manu¬
factures, chemicals and textiles. Britain is also one of the world’s largest markets
for foodstuffs, metals, cotton, wool, petroleum and many other products.
PATTERN OF TRADE
Changes since 1938 in value, volume, composition and geographical distribution
of imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
444
TRADE
445
Value and Volume  ,
Imports rose in value from £919 million in 1938 to £I>8°2 ^ g
£3 780 million in 1958. The rise in value of exports was from £471 million 93
Vr ta^ million in 1947 and £3,208 million in 1958- . . . .
ilcuTattos of changes in trade volume (i.e. changes after ™.ahon^
™erThe fi^re, wMelht "lume rf export approached
a^level twice that of ,938. Statistics showing the value ™lu™
TABLE 31
Imports and Exports : Annual Figures
Value (£ million)
Total imports c.i.f.(^)
Exports of UK goods,
f.o.b.(c)
Re-exports f.o.b.(c) • •
Volume Index Nos.
Total imports,
1954 = 100
Exports of UK goods,
1954 = 100
Price Index Nos.
Imports,
1954 = 100
Exports,
1954 = 100
Terms of Trade(d)
1954 = 100
1938(a)
919
471
61
110(e)
60(e)
n.a.
n.a.
75(e)
1947
1,802
1,142
59
80
63
n.a.
90(e)
1950
2,609
2,174
85
89
101
85
85
100
1953
3,343
2,582
105
99
96
101
101
100
1956
3,886
3,172
146
111
113
105
106
99
1957
4,071
3,324
134
114
116
107
111
96
1958
3,780
3,208
147
114
111
99
110
90
 Sources: AccounU RelaUn,
(a) Silver bullion and all coin (other than of gold) not of legal tender in the United
Kingdom are excluded from 1938 figures insurance and other expenses
inSSS^^^&^^ndwUnitedKlngdom.
Most of these expenses represented abroad, all costs and
chir^accmtag up to the .“placing tge goods on board the exporting vessel having
bWThebrya,!oeoSfel^port ,0 export price index numbers: a rise indicates an adverse
movement.
(e) Approximate.
n-a. = not available.
446
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CHANGES IN THE
INDEX
Some indication of the increased importance of exports in the national economy
is shown by the rise in the proportion of total national income derived from export
earnings—from 10 per cent in 1938 to 12 per cent in 1947 and 17 per cent in 1958.
Over the same period, the rise in the proportion of expenditure on imports to
gross national expenditure was smaller—from about 16 per cent in 1938 to 17 per
cent in 1947 and an average of 18 per cent in 1956-58.
Commodity Composition
A short analysis of the commodity composition of imports and exports in 1958 is
given in Table 32.
Owing to the expansion of the output of both domestic agriculture and
industry by about 60 per cent compared with 1938, Britain relies relatively
less than before the war on food imports, but needs a relatively larger supply of
imported raw materials for its industrial plants. Whereas 47 per cent by value of
total imports in 1938 consisted of food, beverages and tobacco, the proportion in
1948 was only 42 per cent, and in 1958, 40 per cent. On the other hand, the pro¬
portion for basic materials rose from 26 per cent in 1938 to 31 per cent in 1948,
but was reduced to 24 per cent in 1958. Imports of manufactures in 1958 represented
24 per cent of total imports, a slightly higher proportion than in 1938. Imports of
fuels rose from 5 per cent of the total in 1938 to 12 per cent in 1958, on account of
increased consumption of petroleum products.
TRADE
447
As compared with before the war, exports of engineering products have mcrea^
very considerably in relative importance and in 1958 accounted 43 p g
of total exports as compared with an annual average of 20-1 per cent ^ 935 3^-
The share of chemicals also shows an increase, from 6-3 percent ir 935 3
8-2 per cent in 1958. On the other hand, the share of textiles declined from 24 per
cent fn 1935-38 to 9-a per cent in 1958. In the fuels group, exports of petroleum
have partially replaced those of coal.
TABLE 32
Commodity Composition of Imports and Exports in 1958
Commodity Group
Food, drink and tobacco
Basic materials . .
Mineral fuels and lubricants
Manufactured goods . .
Miscellaneous . .
Totals ..
Imports
£ million
1,506
908
441
909
16
3,780
%
40
24
12
24
100
Exports
£ million
194
109
133
2,687
85
3,208
%
6
3
4
84
3
100
Source
: Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation of the United Kingdom.
Further details of the percentage composition of United Kingdom exports are
set out in Table 33.
TABLE 33
Percentage Composition of United Kingdom Exports
Commodity
Engineering products
Metals
Textiles
Chemicals
Other manufactures
Coal, coke and briquettes
Petroleum
Food, beverages and tobacco
Other products
Totals
Average
1935-38
20-1
13-4
24-0
6- 3
11-9
8-0
1-0
7- 4
7-9
100
1948
35-8
11- 9
19-3
6-8
12- 3
2-8
0-6
5-9
4-6
100
1954
38-0
12- 7
13- 4
7-6
10-9
2- 5
3- 1
5-9
5-9
100
1957
40-8
14-4
10-4
8-0
10-6
1- 9
2- 7
6-2
5-0
100
Per cent
1958
43-6
13-5
9-2
8-2
10-6
1-0
3- 1
6-0
4- 8
100
Source: Statistics Division, Board of Trade.
448
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Area Distribution
An analysis of the area distribution of Britain’s overseas trade is provided in
Table 34, which shows the sources of imports and destination of exports by
currency areas in the years 1938, 1950, and 1958.
TABLE 34
United Kingdom Trade by Currency Areas
Percentages
Imports c.i.f.(a)
Non-sterling
Dollar area
OEEC countries and dependencies
Other  
Sterling area
Totals
Total Exports f.o.b.(6)
Non-sterling
Dollar area
OEEC countries and dependencies
Other . .
Sterling area
Totals
1938
23
24
22
31
100
11
27
20
42
100
1950
18
25
19
38
100
13
26
14
47
100
1958
21
25
16
38
100
18
26
12
44
100
(а) See footnote (6) to Table 31, p. 445.
(б) See footnote (c) to Table 31, p. 445.
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
The main changes and other notable features shown in Table 34, which analyses
distribution by currency areas, are:
1. The proportion of imports drawn from the sterling area (see p. 459) in 1958
was much higher than before the war (38 per cent as against 31 per cent).
2. The proportion of imports from the dollar area (chiefly the United States
and Canada) after declining from 23 per cent in 1938 to 18 per cent in 1950
recovered to 21 per cent in 1958.
3. The dollar area has been taking an increasing proportion of exports in the
post-war years (18 per cent in 1958, as against 13 per cent in 1950 and 11 per
cent in 1938).
4. The United Kingdom’s trade with the member countries of the Organisation
for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) and their dependencies
accounted for about a quarter of the total imports and exports, both in 1938
and in 1958.
5. Trade with ‘other non-sterling countries’ (including the Soviet bloc
countries and non-dollar Latin America) in 1958 formed an appreciably
lower proportion of the total than it did before the war.
TRADE
449
Table 35 shows Britain’s principal markets and principal supplier countries in
1958, and the percentage change compared with 1957-
TABLE 35
Exports and Imports in 1958 by Main Countries of Destination and Origin
Total Exports(a)
to:
Value
(.£ million)
United States . .
Australia
Canada . .
South Africa
India
Western Germany
New Zealand
Irish Republic . .
293
237
194
187
160
141
129
117
%
change
on
1957
+ 17(6)
+ 0
- 3
+ 8
-10
+ 14
- 8
+ 6
UK Imports
from:
Value
(+' million)
United States
Canada . .
Australia
New Zealand
Netherlands
India
Western Germany
Sweden . .
352
309
199
161
159
139
136
135
0/
/o
change
on
1957
-27
- 4
-20
-12
+ 21
-11
+ 9
-14
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
(4) ThutompMUon with 1957 excludes silver bullion repayments to the United
States in 1957-
In 1958 the Commonwealth provided a market for 45 per cent of the United
Kingdom’s total exports, while the six countries of the European Econom
Community or Common Market (Be^ium, France, ^ Luxembou^ the
Netherlands and Western Germany) and their dependencies took 14 per cent th
United States 9 per cent, the Middle East 6 per cent, Latin America 5 per cent, an
the rest of the world 21 per cent.
Re-Export Trade , . , .
Re-exports are goods which are exported (1) in the condition m which they are
imported or (2) after having undergone minor operations—e.g., simple blending,
huskine repacking—which ^eave them essentially unchanged. For some hundreds
of* years' Brita^nhas btn an important centre of re-export trade though over the
pasH, years its importance relative to total United Ktngdom export trade has
declined The greater part of United Kingdom re-export trade has aiways been m
raw materials and foodstuffs, e.g., wool, rubber tea, non-f=™“S
skins Recently, a considerable re-export trade has developed in machinery which
has undergone repair and maintenance in the United Kingdom. Traditionally,
re-export commodities are imported from Commonwealth countr.es and re-exported
t017.9(8*0 fotalTaiue of re-exports was £.47 million, and the principal items
were: rubber, fur-skins, raw wool, tea, and aeroplane engines.
Invisible Transactions
As previously mentioned (see pp. 444-5), the United Kmgdom normally .mports
45°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
payments and net earnings of invisible transactions, divided, for statistical purposes,
into six main groups: Government; shipping; interest, profits and dividends;
travel; migrants’ funds; and other items. Some of these figures are precise (e.g., for
Government transactions), others are estimates.
Under the heading of Government (current transactions), the main items on the
debit side are military expenditure overseas and grants to the Colonies and for
relief and other similar purposes; the credit items include defence aid received
from the United States (although by 1958 this amount had fallen to £3 million),
and receipts from sales (under the NATO programme) to the United States of
goods for the United Kingdom armed forces. Shipping receipts come mostly from
liners, and include earnings from export freights and cross trades between other
countries and also from passenger traffic. Shipping payments, on the other hand,
arise mainly on account of tramp shipping services.
TABLE 36
United Kingdom Invisible Overseas Transactions
£ million
Class of Transaction
1948
1956
1957
1958
Government (current transactions). . debits
credits
-172
+ 96
-258
+ 91
-248
+ 105
balance
debits
credits
balance
debits
credits
balance
debits
credits
balance
Migrants’ funds, legacies and private gifts
Other items (net)
Totals ..
- 76
-167
143
Shipping
Interest, profits and dividends
Travel
-175
+ 255
-412
+ 517
-444
+ 554
+ 80
+ 105
+ 110
-101
+ 192
-259
+ 374
-251
+ 360
+ 91
+ 115
+ 109
- 66
+ 33
-129
+ 121
-146
+ 129
33
- 8
- 17
- 34
+ 169
- 28
+ 275
- 43
+ 305
+ 197
+ 292
+ 321
-272
+ 56
-216
-343
+ 510
+ 167
-285
+ 338
+ 53
-152
+ 137
15
- 28
+ 374
+ 335
Sources: Cmnd. 700 and United Kingdom Balance of Payments, 1946-37.
About two-thirds of Britain’s receipts under the heading interest, profits and
dividends come from investments in the sterling area; the returns from these
investments are closely linked to movements in the prices of primary commodities.
On the debit side, major items include interest paid on sterling holdings by overseas
TRADE
451
countries and interest payments on long-term loans from Canada and the United
States. Receipts from travel have increased greatly since 1950, reflecting t e grow“^g
importance of the British tourist industry (see below) The largest component und^er
‘other items (net)’ is the overseas transactions of United Kingdom ol1 co
panies (this does not include United Kingdom oil imports and export8, oil for the
armed forces overseas and capital items, which come under other sections of the
accounts) Other major items are: payments and receipts in respect of insurance,
““ation and films; expenditure of United States and Canadian forces m
Britain; net earnings of merchants; and royalties, commissions, banking and other
services.
Tourist Trade , .
Since the second world war, the tourist industry has grown considerably m im¬
portance and is now one of Britain’s largest earners of foreign currency. Over the
per oS I9T7-57, earnings from the foreign tourist trade and business travel
amounted to the equivalent of £856 million, in addition to £37S million earned by
associated British shipping and air services. In 1958, tourist receipts from overseas
amounted to £137 million. United Kingdom residents on holiday or travelling on
business overseas spent about £150 million m the same year. million2—
The total number of visitors to the United Kingdom in 1958 was U mil
double the ^so total and almost three times that of x937. There was a further
marked increase in the number of visitors in 1959- . . :jeci hodv
The British Travel and Holidays Association, which is a grant-aided body,
is concerned with the promotion of the tourist trade, particularly by means
of publicity overseas. It maintains offices in seven overseas countries and agencies
and representatives in several other countries overseas. The association was formed
in AprU 1950 by the merger of the British Travel and Hobdays Board and the
Travel Association. Its work is directed by a board consisting of a chairman and
23 members. The President of the Board of Trade appoints the chairman and eight
members, the council of the association elects seven members, the Scottls^ ^ ’
and Northern Ireland tourist boards between them appoint four members and
"sociaWs board has power to co-opt four members to represent tounst mterests
not otherwise covered.
CONDUCT OF TRADE
It has been a major aim of successive United Kingdom Governments since the
second world war to work for the removal of restrictions on trade and payments,
to secure a reduction of impediments to exports and, when possible, to restore the
convertibility of sterling. To this end, Britain has taken a leading part “the se«lr«
un of such organisations as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the Organisation for EuroP^“"“1^
Co operation (OEEC) and the European Payments Union (now succeeded b} the
European Monetary Agreement), and has played a major part m these organisations
activities, especially as regards the freeing of trade from the restrictions which gr
“"in’ addition to^substanfial^reductions in tariffs on imported goods, carried out
through the GATT, the United Kingdom has greatly relaxed its quota restriction
on import and has modified its exchange restrictions on foreign currencies. By
1 For fT^TCu-rcncy alkT^CTfCunitcd Kini^CT^rists, see p. 454.
«TWs .otafexcludes tourists (other than aliens) from the Irish Republic and foreign
visitors in transit to other destinations.
452
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the end of 1958, nearly all its imports from the sterling area, 94 per cent of those
from OEEC member countries and about three-quarters from dollar countries
had been freed from quantitative restrictions. At the Commonwealth Trade and
Economic Conference at Montreal, in September 1958, the Government announced
its intention to free the remaining classes of dollar imports (mostly consumer goods
and certain foodstuffs) by stages, beginning in 1959; restrictions on a wide range of
these were removed in June 1959.
Tariff Policy
In the nineteenth century the United Kingdom became strongly attached to the
principles of free trade, and at the beginning of the twentieth century the only
customs duties were those imposed for revenue purposes on a small range of
products. After the first world war, certain key industries, notably optical and
scientific instruments and fine chemicals, were given protection for strategic reasons
under an Act passed in 1921. It was not until 1932, however, that any serious
departure was made from the principles of free trade. Under the Import Duties
Act of that year, the United Kingdom imposed a duty of 10 per cent ad valorem on
all imported goods except those on a Free List (mainly important raw materials
and foodstuffs) and set up machinery for the imposition of additional duties and
for additions to be made to the Free List where appropriate. This measure provided
a degree of protection for British industry and, at the same time, a basis for
negotiations with foreign countries already in possession of a tariff structure.
, The principle of Imperial Preference had been introduced into the United
Kingdom customs tariffs in 1919 and, as a result of the Ottawa Conference in 1932,
agreements were concluded with independent Commonwealth countries providing
for reciprocal preferential tariff treatment over a wide range of Commonwealth
goods. The Import Duties Act had already permitted the duty-free entry of goods
from the United Kingdom dependencies.
A series of bilateral trade negotiations with other countries between 1932 and
1939 resulted in some modification in the level of protection and in the Common¬
wealth preferences which had been established. During the second world war,
because of Government purchase and import control, protection by the tariff was
of relatively minor importance, and it was only after the substantial relaxation of
quantitative import controls in 1949 that the tariff again became an effective
instrument of protection.
Since the second world war, the United Kingdom’s protective tariff has been
considerably modified as a result of a series of multilateral tariff negotiations held
under the auspices of the GATT, which permits the retention of existing tariff
preferences, but prohibits the creation of new preferences. The United Kingdom
has, however, obtained certain limited waivers from the GATT no-new-preference
rule; these permit, under certain conditions, increased tariff protection for United
Kingdom industries while preserving duty-free commitments for Commonwealth
goods, and allow increased preferences for the benefit of Colonial products whose
disposal is wholly or mainly dependent on the United Kingdom market. In the
negotiations under the GATT, United Kingdom customs duties have been reduced,
or bound against increase, on goods which account for about half of Britain s
normal imports from other contracting countries, in return for concessions by those
countries. Margins of preference have thereby been reduced in some instances, but
only in return for compensating tariff concessions by other countries, and only after
consultation with all the Commonwealth countries concerned.
The United Kingdom Government in February 1957 put forward proposals
under which the six countries (France, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
TRADE
453
Italy and the German Federal Republic) which in March i957 signed the Treaty of
Rome establishing the European Economic Community, and other mem ers
OEEC would be associated in a free trade area in Europe. Negotiating machinery
for this purpose was set up by OEEC, and, in October 1957, OEEC made a
unanimous declaration of intent to form such an area. Under the British proposals
protective tariffs and other barriers to trade affecting industrial products would
be progressively reduced; agricultural products and foodstuffs would not b
included, but the United Kingdom announced its readiness to enter into practc
arrangements designed to secure freer and fairer trade in agncuifure fn November
10158 however, these negotiations were suspended. In July 959,
Kingdom Government participated in negotiations, held in Stockholm, as a resu
of which it was agreed to establish a free trade association among seven countries
outside the European Economic Community. ^ ,
The Customs Duties (Dumping and Subsidies) Act 1957, empowers the B
of Trade to impose duties on imported goods of any description which have been
dTLedImrport)SDduSffeds Act, 1958, replaced the existing legislation relating to the
protective tariff (i.e. four main Acts and some 70 ^“^^waTrecasI
brought it up to date in a single measure. As a result of the Act, the tariff was recast
into an internationally agreed form (the Brussels Nomenclature), which came into
use from 1st January, 1959-
Private and State Trading . , Tr.
The export trade and virtually all the import trade of the United Kingdom are
^Methods^f export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the industry,
the product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export trade, especi¬
ally of the smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through export merchants in
the United Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to importers and consume
abroad through their own agents or resident representatives in the countries con¬
cerned- in other cases, sales are made through a firm’s own branch offices, dis¬
tributing organisations or subsidiary sales companies established in overseas
mSiSlarly in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or domestic
trade buy directly from overseas suppliers, while smaller firms may find .t more
convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export houses, com¬
mission agents, and the representatives of overseas firms. ,0 , ,
In the Immediate post-war years, nearly all the principal imported foods and
raw materials and some other goods were bought wholly or mainly on Govemrorit
account and the Government was also the sole purchaser of nearly all domestically
produced food and certain raw materials such as flax and timber. In later years, an
particularly since 1951, private trading has been restored to each commodity.
Since January 1957, overseas trading undertaken directly by the Government has
been confined to jute goods. The purpose of this control is to ^ ^mted
Kingdom jute industry, which is concentrated in Dundee and still forms th
mainstay of employment in that city.
CONTROLS ON TRADE AND PAYMENTS
A large number of the restrictions on the movement of goods and services and
on payments have been progressively abolished. The following section gives a short
account of the controls still in force.
454
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exchange Control
Exchange control, which includes inter alia control over the purchase and sale of
gold and foreign currencies, was introduced at the outbreak of war in September
1939. The legal basis was at first the Defence (Finance) Regulations issued under
the Emergency Powers (Defence) Acts, but in 1947 most of these temporary war¬
time powers were embodied in permanent legislation in the Exchange Control Act,
1947.
Exchange control does not affect transactions wholly within the sterling area.
At present, it is imposed only on transactions between residents within the sterling
area and residents outside it.
Although the main structure of exchange control has continued intact since 1939,
several relaxations in its operation have been made in recent years. For example,
in March 1954, the facility which certain countries possessing transferable accounts
have enjoyed of settling current transactions between each other—as well as with
sterling area countries—in sterling was extended to virtually all non-dollar
countries; the facility now applies to capital as well as to current transactions. In
February 1958, restrictions were lifted on the amount of sterling currency notes
allowed to be brought into Britain from abroad. In December 1958, the facility for
settling transactions between countries in sterling was further extended to cover all
countries outside the sterling area (including the dollar countries) and at the same
time sterling (other than that in ‘blocked accounts’) held by residents outside the
sterling area was made freely convertible into foreign currency, including dollars.
Exchange control applies to exports of goods to destinations outside the sterling
area, and, in general, these have to be paid for within six months in an acceptable
currency or by sterling from an external account. Control is also exercised over
imports, to ensure that currency authorised for their payment is in fact available.
Exchange control policy is the responsibility of the Treasury, but most of the
administration is in practice carried out by the Bank of England as agent of the
Treasury—and in turn the Bank of England has delegated to the commercial banks
a wide variety of powers to deal with applications.
Tourist Currency Allowances
There are restrictions on the amount of currency and notes that United Kingdom
tourists may take with them abroad. The position in September 1959 was as follows:
for visits to non-sterling countries including the dollar area, United Kingdom
tourists are entitled to a basic foreign currency allowance of £100 per twelve-month
period, and the equivalent of this amount may be taken out of the country in
foreign currency notes together with not more than £20 in sterling notes. These
limits on the amount of currency notes that may be taken out also apply to United
Kingdom tourists visiting sterling area countries, but there are no restrictions on
the amount that may be taken to these countries in the form of travellers’ cheques
or letters of credit. Special arrangements apply to Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Greenland, and the Faroe Islands: United Kingdom tourists visiting these countries
are allowed all reasonable amounts of currency, subject to a normal maximum
of £250. Special allowances of currency are also made for visits overseas of United
Kingdom businessmen; these are made available through the commercial banks.
Import and Export Control
The Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act, 1939, empowers the
Board of Trade to make statutory orders prohibiting or regulating the import or
export of goods. The powers of both import and export control derive from the
same legislation, but the purpose and mechanism are quite distinct.
TRADE
455
Import Licensing
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and the IMF,
the United Kingdom Government has, as the balance of payments has permitted,
progressively removed restrictions from most imports from the countries oi the
free world This policy is carried out by means of Open General Licences, which
from time to time are granted by the Board of Trade by virtue of temporary powers
vested in them under the 1939 Act. *
Goods still subject to control require a specific import licence. For most oi these
goods, quotas have been set up, either for individual countries bilaterally or for
groups of countries on a global basis. Bilateral quotas are generally shared among
their exporters by the authorities of the country to whom they are accorded; global
quotas are generally divided by the United Kingdom authorities between importers,
usually on the basis of their past share of the trade.
Export Controls
Except for the control necessary to establish that exports to destmattons outside
the sterling area are paid for in the proper manner (see p. 454). United Kingdom
exports are not, except in a very minor way, subject to any Government control or
direction. The few controls that are in operation are imposed to supervise exports
of military and strategic importance, to conserve materials, such as metal scrap,
which may be in inadequate supply, to assist exchange control operations in
preventing the export of capital in the form of valuable goods, and to prevent the
export of works of art classed as national treasures, such as paintings by old masters,
manuscripts and antiques. , . . ,
The operation of the export licensing control is such that goods are freely
exportable to all destinations unless there is a specific ban on their export without
licence. Normally, individual licences are required for specific consignments of
goods subject to export licensing control, but, in a few cases, Open General
Licences are issued. In other cases, bulk licences are issued to permit exports of
specified quantities of controlled goods within a given period.
P Goods controlled for strategic reasons, not included in the category of arms and
ammunition, may be exported to the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic and the
United States of America without licence.
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO OVERSEAS TRADE
The United Kingdom Government does not subsidise exports, but supplies
information, advice and practical assistance (including credit insurance facilities)
to exporters. In addition, the Government, in its general economic policy, seeks to
create conditions in which export trade can flourish. This includes the use of fiscal,
credit and other measures to maintain a stable economy and to control excessive
demand for goods and services by the home market, and action through inter¬
national negotiation to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and to move towards
the freest possible system of trade and payments.
Ihformation and Advice to Exporters
The United Kingdom Government provides a service of information and advice
to merchants and manufacturers in the export trade.1 The Government department
most concerned is the Board of Trade, which calls upon the assistance of overseas
Council of Wales and Monmouthshire, see p. 254.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
456
representatives. At each Embassy or Legation there is always an officer of high
rank, a Minister, Counsellor or First Secretary (Commercial), who specialises in
commercial matters. These officers direct the commercial activities of consular
officers in their respective territories. At important centres in the Commonwealth
there are Trade Commissioners, who are directly responsible to the Board of
Trade.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial conditions,
pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities, and generally
assist the exporter to overcome the difficulties he encounters in trade with the
country in question, particularly those arising out of governmental regulations.
These officers indicate potential demand for United Kingdom products, advise
about methods of trading with particular areas, and seek out and pass on all
opportunities for export business and inquiries for United Kingdom goods. Assis¬
tance is also given to United Kingdom exporters in appointing agents and locating
potential importers. From the records the department keeps in London, brought
up to date by reports from its overseas officers, it can provide information con¬
cerning any country on:
(1) prospects for United Kingdom exports and requirements of particular
markets;
(2) governmental regulations affecting trade, including import restrictions and
tariffs and duties on particular commodities;
(3) methods of trading;
(4) goods most likely to sell;
(5) local tastes and preferences in design; and
(6) the probity and influence of firms with which an exporter contemplates
entering into business relations.
Export Credit Insurance
The Export Credits Guarantee Department, responsible directly to the President
of the Board of Trade, is run on commercial lines to provide insurance for United
Kingdom exporters and merchants against the main risks of financial loss incurred in
overseas trading. These facilities have been developed over a period of more than
thirty years, and the department now underwrites some £500 million worth of
insurance a year for more than 4,000 policy holders; this sum represents about
18 per cent of the total United Kingdom export trade. The department is obliged
to conduct its business on a self-supporting basis, taking one year with another, and
cannot therefore be regarded in any way as a provider of subsidies to exporters.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer, Govern¬
ment action which blocks or delays transfer of payment to the United Kingdom
exporter, imposition of new import licensing restrictions in the buyer’s country,
war between the buyer’s country and the United Kingdom, cancellation or non¬
renewal of a United Kingdom export licence, or ‘any other cause of loss occurring
outside the United Kingdom and not within the control of the exporter or the
buyer, and not normally insurable with commercial insurers’. Cover may commence
from the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the date of shipment.
There are three main types of export insurance policy:
1. Short-term policies normally covering goods sold on terms of up to six
months’ credit. The exporter insures the whole of his trade, or the whole of
his trade with an agreed group of markets, for the twelve months (or, in
some cases, three years) covered by his policy. For certain engineering
TRADE
457
goods this type of cover is extended to goods sold on maximum credit
teirns of up to three years. Cover is also available for goods of foreign
origin sold by a United Kingdom merchant to third countries, provide
this trade does not conflict with direct United Kingdom exports.
2. Medium-term policies which cover capital and other goods sold on credit
terms exceeding three years. Specific polices are negotiated for each
individual contract.
3. Dollar market policies for North America and the dollar account comitries
of Central and South America. The policies listed above cover risks affecting
payments under a contract of sale: the dollar market policies are designed
to reduce to manageable size the special risks of loss in breaking into these
markets. The exporter insures against a percentage of the loss which may
result if market surveys, advertising or sales promotion campaigns, or stock¬
holding, do not produce sufficient revenue to defray their cost. A similar but
more extensive form of insurance is provided by joint venture policies.
In the case of all the department’s policies, the exporter or merchant is required
to retain an interest in the debt or risk involved and, consequently, guarantees are
given up to a maximum of between 85 and 95 per cent. Premium ^s are assesse
separately for each country, and vary according to the risks and the terms of
parent Cover is also available for United Kingdom concerns carrying out
S° Under the Export Guarantees Acts, 1949 to 1957, the Government has powers
to give economic assistance to other countries (see p. 4t>«)-
Trade Fairs „ i- 1
The discontinuance of the annual British Industries Fair after the i957 display
heW at Castle Bromwich, Birmingham, was the result of a decision to concentrate
efforts^upmi specialised fairs. An inquiry carried out by the Federation of British
Industries (FBI) in 1957 showed that the large majority of British trade associat
favoured the development of specialised fairs, concentrating on the products of a
S^y or group of fndustries, rather than the general fair at which wide
thf Unke^IUngdom^over 60 specialised fairs are held every year and the
number is growing steadily. An increasing number, at present about half the total
are^nternat onal fn character, and the remainder are national (i.e. open only to
firms showing Un ted Kingdork products). A list of the more important ones appears
mgularly in the fairs section of the Board of Trade Journal
fairs such as the Motor Show and the Radio and Television Show, attract larg
numba“ of *e public as well as many trade buyers from home and overseas,
and orovide an important means of advertising and selling British goods.
United Kingdom manufactures are shown at most of the large international trade
fahs throughout the world. For example, the products of more than 350 United
Ktagdom firms were exhibited at the i959 Milan Fair, and .00 at the ,958 Vienna
autumn fair; the United Kingdom is always well represented at the Hanover and
Posnan Fairs At the more important of these international trade fa rs there is
often an official United Kingdom export promotion stand, where officials deal with
trade inquiries and^assist British exhibitors, and an impression is given of some
aspects of British industry. In addition to these international events at which
British goods are shown, there are, from time to time, specially organised displays
of British products. Through a subsidiary company, BnUsh Overs^s Fa Ld^,
the FBI has organised British Trade Fairs in Baghdad m 954, P
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
458
in 1955, in Helsinki in 1957, and in Lisbon in 1959; and it is planned to hold one
in New York in i960. At the Brussels Universal and International Exhibition,
held in 1958, the FBI organised a highly successful British Industries Pavilion.
United Kingdom manufacturers have been prominent at the many important
specialised international fairs which are held in North America and Europe.
Dollar Exports Council
In December 1951, the Dollar Exports Council replaced the Dollar Exports
Board, which had been established in June 1949 by representatives of United
Kingdom industry, trade, finance and organised labour, with the approval and
support of the United Kingdom Government. It is an independent, self-governing,
voluntary organisation whose purpose is to give all possible service to exporters
from the United Kingdom to Canada and to the United States.
BRITAIN’S ROLE IN THE FINANCING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
By a process of evolution through the centuries, the United Kingdom has
developed an efficient and adaptable organisation of trade and financial services,
centred mostly on London, and capable of meeting the needs, not only of Britain
itself, but of the world in general. Britain’s supremacy in this respect derives from
a number of factors—historical, geographical and economic—as well as the techni¬
cal efficiency and low cost of its services. In the nineteenth century, the rapid
growth of British industry, commerce and shipping under the stimulus of the
industrial revolution made Britain the market as well as the workshop of the world.
It became the site for the chief world markets in raw materials (see below), freight,
insurance, and precious metals. At the same time, British capital was invested in
overseas countries to assist their development, increase their output and exports,
and provide markets for manufactured goods. London became the chief supplier
of capital for many Commonwealth and foreign governments and a centre for
entrepot trade proceeding to and from the growing industrial areas on the continent
of Europe and in North America. In course of time, the pound sterling and the
sterling bill of exchange developed into the principal form of money for transactions
between one country and another in all parts of the world.1
Side by side with these developments, a sound commercial banking system and
a flexible system of central bank control have been built up, while specialised
institutions such as discount houses, merchant banks, accepting houses, the stock
exchanges, investment trusts and finance corporations have evolved to satisfy
particular needs for short-term or long-term finance (see pp. 435-41). The facilities
provided by merchant banks and accepting houses, for example, have long been
used to finance shipments of goods not only to and from Britain, but also between
overseas countries themselves.
Commodity Markets
Britain is the traditional centre for marketing many of the world’s basic com¬
modities. Most of these markets were closed during the war but most, if not all,
have now reopened and many have fully regained—some even surpassed—their
previous position. Among the more important are the Baltic Exchange (the market
for shipping and air transport, grain, seeds and vegetable oils), the London
Commodity Exchange (cocoa, coffee, copra, hides and skins, rubber and sugar),
1 It has been estimated that sterling is used as the currency of account for about 40 per
cent of the world’s international transactions.
TRADE
459
the London Wool Exchange, the London Metal Exchange, the Liverpool Cotton
Exchange and the Liverpool Corn Exchange. These markets not only cater for the
import of goods for home consumption but do much business in effect g
transactions between buyers and sellers in other countries In addition to these
formal markets, there is scarcely any product which cannot be traded through a
intermediary in the United Kingdom. For example, London is the world s most
important philatelic market and also the leading international centre for the sale of
works of art.
The Foreign Exchange Market
The Foreign Exchange Market, which was closed during the war, was reopened
for forward dealings in December 1951 and for arbitrage dealings in currencies of
members of the European Payments Union in May i953- The market is subject to
United Kingdom exchange control regulations governing the purchase and sale
of foreign currencies in the sterling area, but these regulations have been
progressively relaxed in recent years. , , .
The market consists of authorised banks and brokers linked together y e ep
in the United Kingdom, and by telephone, telex and cable with overseas centres.
The London Gold Market
The London Gold Market, which had remained closed from the outbreak of war,
was reopened on a restricted basis in March i954, under the general supervision of
the Bank of England. It has regained its pre-war position as the world s leading
06 Authorised dealers in gold are now free to deal with residents outside the sterling
area against payment in any foreign currency, or in sterling held outside the sterling
area, but residents of the sterling area have access to the market only as sellers
except where permission is given for the purchase of gold for essential mdustna
purposes and for the jewellery trade.
The Sterling System
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, severa
countries tended not only to use sterling as their natural currency for ^national
transactions, but also to maintain central currency reserves ^ Bntaim When
Britain abandoned the gold standard in 1931 these countries which came to be
known as the ‘sterling bloc’ and later as the sterling area , did likewise, and pegged
their currency exchange rates to the pound sterling. In 1939, after the outbreak
war, the pound sterling was no longer freely convertible into other currencies and
the sterling area became more formally defined as a currency area, for exchange
control purposes. Within the sterling area the United Kingdom imposes virtual y
no restrictions on payments, whether in respect of current or of capital transactions.
All the Commonwealth countries (except Canada), together with Burma, Icela ,
the Irish Republic, Jordan, Libya and the British protected states ^ the Persian
Gulf are members of the sterling area. These countries contain one-quarter of the
world’s population and do one-quarter of the world s trade. The mam Mature of
the sterling area is that the greater part of the overseas trade of member countries
is financed in sterling; they keep their foreign reserves largely m the form of sterling
and maintain a fixed relationship between their currencies and sterling. Member
countries for the most part sell their foreign currency earnings in London in
exchange for sterling and can purchase for sterling the foreign currency they
require. They generally also sell gold in the London Market for sterling e
United Kingdom reserves of gold and foreign currencies are held in the Exchange
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
460
Equalisation Account, which buys and sells exchange in the market as appropriate,
and is a large buyer of gold from the sterling area and elsewhere.
All these currency arrangements are voluntary; there are no strict or centralised
rules of conduct, the Commonwealth member countries agreeing between them¬
selves at periodic conferences the broad policies to be followed for the strengthening
of sterling and of the reserves.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Estimates of the United Kingdom’s balance of payments are published half-
yearly in White Papers, and in March 1959 a new publication, United Kingdom
Balance of Payments, 1946-57, was issued, giving figures covering twelve years.
These publications provide a summary of the whole range of the United Kingdom’s
transactions with other countries, classified by type of transaction and by area.
The transactions fall into three main groups—current account, long-term capital
account and monetary movements. The balance on current account is composed of
the balance of visible trade (i.e. the difference between merchandise imports and
exports and re-exports) and the balance of invisibles (see pp. 449-51 and 461).
On long-term capital account, the main groups of items are inter-Government
loans (including amortisation) and other identified net long-term investment abroad
by residents, or in the United Kingdom by non-residents. The third heading,
monetary movements, reflects in part the United Kingdom’s position as an inter¬
national banker. It includes identified capital transactions not of a long-term
character (e.g., changes in acceptances); changes in overseas sterling holdings and
in Britain’s credit or debit balance in the European Payments Union (which,
since 30th December, 1958, has been superseded by the European Monetary
Agreement); and changes in the central reserves of gold and convertible currencies.
Table 37 gives details of the United Kingdom’s balance of payments in 1956,
1957 and 1958.
Balance of Payments in 1958
For 1958 as a whole, the United Kingdom had an unusually favourable balance
of payments. On current account there was a credit balance of £455 million (£327
million in the first half-year and £128 million in the second half). Visible trade
showed an exceptional surplus of £141 million in the first half-year and a small
deficit of £21 million in the second; the change between the two halves of 1958
was due to a rise in the volume of imports and a fall in the volume of exports.
The surplus on invisibles was also smaller in the second half-year (£149 million
compared with £186 million); this was mainly accounted for by the debt service
(interest and capital repayments) on the North American loans (see pp. 465-6),
which was paid in full. The current surplus of £455 million in 1958 was counter¬
balanced partly by new long-term investment abroad and partly by an improvement
in the United Kingdom’s external monetary position. Thus, net long-term invest¬
ment abroad (inter-governmental as well as private) amounted to £236 million, and
the reserves of gold and convertible currencies rose by £284 million. There were
also changes in the sterling holdings of overseas countries: holdings of countries
outside the sterling area rose by £158 million, while holdings of sterling area
countries declined by £82 million (largely on account of falls in commodity prices).
Trends in Earlier Years
The main balance of payments problem for Britain since the second world war
has been to earn enough from exports, visible and invisible, (1) to pay for half
TRADE
461
TABLE 37
United Kingdom Balance of Payments
£ million
Current Account
Visible Trade (a)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Exports and re-exports
(f.o.b.)
Balance . .
Invisibles:
Balance
Current Balance
Long-Term Capital Ac¬
count (b)
Inter-governmental
Other long-term capital
Balance
Monetary Movements (b)
Overseas sterling holdings
Gold and convertible
currency reserves
Other items
Balance
Balancing Item (c)
1956
3,462
3,407
- 55
+ 292
- 58
■321
+ 237
- 51
-200
-251
+ 45
- 42
- 67
- 64
+ 78
1957
1958
(provi¬
sional)
3,573
3,515
+ 120
+ 335
+ 263
+ 72
-270
-198
-175
- 13
- 11
-199
+ 134
3,309
3,429
+455
- 46
-190
-236
+ 54
284
+ 23
-207
12
1957
Jan.-
June
July-
Dee.
1,807
1,782
- 25
+ 139
- 33
+ 182
+ 114
18
-160
■178
+ 64
- 51
- 30
17
+ 81
1,766
1,733
+ 149
+ 90
-110
- 20
-239
+ 38
+ 19
-182
+ 53
1958
Jan-
June
Tily-
Dec.
(prov.)
1,613
1,754
141
+ 186
- 21
+ 149
+ 327
14
90
-104
- 13
-287
+ 47
-253
+ 30
1,696
1,675
+ 128
- 32
-100
-132
+ 67
+ 3
- 24
+ 46
42
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments, 1956 to 1958, Cmnd. 700.
(a) The values of exports and in becLte^o^dXrencesof cLlrngt
and Navigation ^tXwhdfFShJrJs tJade with the Channel Islands, and exports to
ne. landings by Whal ’ eluded from this table, but imports and exports
here excluded from the value of imports , o c-
(b) An increase of assets is shown by a minus sign and a decrease by a plus sign. A
increase in liabilities is shown by a plus sign and a decrease by a minus sign.
(c) The balancing item is introduced to balance the account.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
462
Britain’s food and nearly all the raw materials used in its factories; and (2) to
provide a balance of payments surplus in order to build up the gold and foreign
exchange reserves needed in a world of multilateral trading and convertible
currencies, and to meet obligations overseas, including foreign debt service, and
obligations voluntarily accepted in respect of economic development in Common¬
wealth countries and elsewhere.1
Between 1945 and 1951, the balance of payments on current account fluctuated
widely owing to several factors, including changes in the terms of trade, the
devaluation of the pound sterling in 1949, and the trade boom following the Korean
War with its aftermath of high import prices. From 1952 onwards, there have
been surpluses in each year except 1955. The diagram below shows changes in the
balance of payments on current account from 1954 to 1958.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS ON CURRENT ACCOUNT I954-S8
£ million 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958
Regional Balance of Payments
Table 38 shows the balance of payments on current account with the main
currency areas of the world, from 1946 onwards.
There is normally a triangular pattern of trade between the United Kingdom,
the rest of the sterling area and the rest of the world. While the United Kingdom
is usually in current deficit with the non-sterling world, the rest of the sterling
area is usually in current surplus; on the other hand, within the sterling area, the
1 In addition, since the war, the United Kingdom Government has had to meet heavy
overseas military expenditure. In 1958, for example, this amounted to £181 million.
TRADE
463
position is reversed and the United Kingdom normally has a current surplus with
other sterling area countries. . . , , • TTnl>„fl Kingdom’s
In the early post-war years, the principal component m the United Kingdom
current deficit with the non-sterling world was the deficit with the dollar a .
H^er stce .95., this deficit has been considerably reduced-front an average
of £307 million in 1946-51 to an average of £65 million in 195 5 » 95
was, in fact, a dollar surplus of £56 million.1 * *
TABLE 38
United Kingdom Regional Balance of Payments
Current Account
£ million
Year
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958(c)
Rest of
Sterling
Area
- 26
+ 128
+ 256
+ 299
+ 283
+ 320
+ 348
+ 152
+ 267
+ 214
+ 301
+ 353
+440
Dollar
Area
{a)
Other
Western
Hemis¬
phere
Countries
-299
-506
-241
-291
- 79
-427
-166
+ 8
- 60
-184
- 13
- 95
+ 56
OEEC
Countries
- 24
- 65
- 38
+ 62
+ 26
+ 5
+ 93
- 24
+ 8
+ 2
+ 5
+ 25
+ 30
+ 78
+ 1
+ 79
- 22
+ 104
-209
- 42
+ 72
+ 26
- 54
- 66
- 24
- 22
Other
Non-
Sterling
Countries
- 16
+ 12
- 40
- 6
- 32
- 99
- 15
- 21
- 45
+ 17
+ 6
- 47
Non-
Terri¬
torial
Organi¬
sations
(6)
- 8
- 12
- 9
- 4
- 5
- 9
- 6
- 14
- 9
- 6
- 7
- 2
- 2
Totals
-295
-442
+ 7
+ 38
+297
-419
+ 227
+ 179
+ 211
- 73
+ 237
+ 263
+455
Sources: United Kingdom Balance of Payments, 1946 fox 957, and
United Kingdom Balance of Payments, 1956 to 1958, Cmnd. 700.
, V rp 1 rnrrent balance with the dollar area does not include European Recovery
Progrm™meCgrants o+Urfited^ States and
^53^7.oai1mfflten- mmlon; .,55, £46 million; .956, £*6 million; .957,
£21 million; and 1958, £3 million.
the^Intenwtional^Mtmetary Fmid'^IMF^and^the
and Development (IBRD).
(c) Provisional.
1 The figures from .95. omrards ^^n^edkTde'havYb^n
Unittd States'and6 Canadian burned forces’ expenditure in Britain and offshore sales to
the United States Government.
464 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Reserves of Gold and Convertible Currencies
The reserves of gold and convertible currencies at the end of each year from 1945
to 1958 are shown in Table 39 and in the diagram below. At the end of August
1959, these reserves amounted to £1,160 million ($3,248 million).
TABLE 39
Reserves of Gold and Convertible Currencies
(at end-December)
Year
£ million
Year
£ million
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949(a)
1950
1951
610
664
512
457
603
1,178
834
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
659
899
986
757
762
812
1,096
Sources: Annual Abstract of Statistics and
Monthly Digest of Statistics.
(a) In September 1949 the £ sterling was devalued.
RESERVES OF GOLD AND CONVERTIBLE CURRENCIES I94S-S8
£ million
A ‘second line’ of reserves is provided by the United Kingdom’s drawing rights
in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), to which Britain is the second largest
contributor. In May 1959, the United Kingdom paid £58 million in gold to the
IMF as part of the 50 per cent increase in its quota. As a result of the higher
quota, the United Kingdom’s drawing rights are increased by £232 million.
TRADE
465
The diagram below shows trends in the level of overseas sterling holdings
ofTtrfing Sea countries, non-sterling countries and non-terntonal organisations,
from 1945 to 1958.
OVERSEAS STERLING HOLDSMGS 1945-58
Total
Holdings
Holdings of non-territorial organisations
Holdings of non-sterling area countries
Holdings of sterling area countries
External Financial Aid received by Britain
Britain’s difficulties in balancing its external accounts P^cularly with the
dollar area, in the immediate post-war years, were greatly alievrated by aid receive
^In ^94^^^^ t0 Britain a Hne °! amOU|!tin?
St T.o million, and a loan of $650 million (later adjusted to S622 million) m
settlement of Lend-Lease and reciprocal aid adjustments arising out of^ he wa
T cv.A romrli olco extended a line of credit, amounting to &L. 1,250 minion, 01
l;;crLCu"„grm drew SC. M8S mi,Hon The terms of ^tlement w„h
both countries provided for payment in 5° annual mstalments, startmg on 3
December tost with interest at the rate of 2 per cent a year. The ongmal loan
agreements included provision for waiver of interest under certain circumstances.
In Zrch . "stthcse were replaced by new arrangements whereby the United
Kingdom Government could defer up to seven of the annuity W“e«s ofb«
capital and interest if it judged this postponement necessa^ in view die ^rre
and prospective conditions of international exchange and the level ot
0tf" t^SandiVst: BrMn received in all Sa.yoo million in Marshall Aid
from the United States under the European Recovery Programme. Ofthis, Si, 7
million was grant aid, some $620 million was •conditional aid (.^ dollar ari
condition that Britain provided corresponding sterling aid to other Europea
466
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
countries) and $337 million was a loan to be repaid with interest at 2J per cent.
By far the greater part of the Marshall Aid allocated to Britain was used to buy
essential food and raw materials. But technical assistance and help in promoting
intra-European trade co-operation were also provided.
After 1951, the financial aid received by Britain from the United States was
mostly under the provisions of the United States Mutual Defence Assistance Pro¬
gramme and Mutual Security Programme. Between 1951 and 1958, net receipts by
Britain amounted to $1,184 million, including a loan of $48 million repayable with
interest at 2^ per cent. Mutual Defence Assistance allocations in 1950-51 totalled
$122 million, mainly for the purchase of machine tools. The Mutual Security
grants of $241 million in 1951-52 and $369 million in 1952-53 were used chiefly
to buy raw materials. After 1952, United States surplus agricultural commodities
(mainly cotton, fruit and tobacco) were made available to the United Kingdom for
payment in sterling; these funds were used by the United States to finance the
purchase of military equipment (notably aircraft) in the United Kingdom. In 1956,
the United Kingdom ceased to be allocated any Mutual Security Aid; it has,
however, entered into small deals whereby purchases of fruit and tobacco for
sterling have financed the building of houses, both in the United Kingdom and the
West Indies, for use at nominal rents by the United States armed forces.
The Mutual Security Programme also assisted Britain’s dollar balance of pay¬
ments by the system of ‘offshore procurement’, under which the United States
has placed contracts in Britain for military goods to be supplied to other NATO
countries.
United States Private Investment in Britain
Since the war, the United Kingdom’s economy has benefited from the expansion
of United States corporate investment in Britain and the growth of licensing
arrangements between United Kingdom and United States companies.
It has been estimated1 that between 1950 and 1957 the total book value of United
States direct investments in Britain rose from $847 million to $1,899 million,
representing half the total United States direct investment in Western Europe over
the period. The 1957 total included $394 million in petroleum refining and distribu¬
tion and $1,201 million in manufacturing industry (chiefly motor vehicles and
equipment, machinery, electrical appliances, chemicals, metals and food products).
Much of this investment is in expanding industries such as agricultural tractors,
earth-moving equipment and office machinery. This investment by United States
industrial firms has enabled the British economy to acquire some new techniques
and to make considerable savings in imports and at the same time to expand its
exports of several important products.
North American investors are also allowed to repatriate the proceeds of the sale
of these investments, including any capital gains that may have accrued, provided
that the investment was made after 1st January, 1950. Portfolio investment (e.g.,
by purchase, on a stock exchange, of securities in United Kingdom companies)
by United States citizens has also increased markedly since 1957.
UNITED KINGDOM FINANCIAL AID TO OTHER COUNTRIES
For well over a hundred years the United Kingdom has been a major supplier of
external finance for other countries; up to the first decade of the twentieth century
it was the foremost supplier of private long-term capital. Since the second world
United States Department of Commerce’s Survey of Current Business, September 1958.
TRADE
467
development and other economic purposes; between i945 and 1958,
KinP-dom expended over £5,000 million gross for these purposes.
In recent years United Kingdom finance for overseas development has bee
made available through private sources, public funds and intergovernmental orgam-
^fons The greater part of such finance goes to Commonwealth countries (mclud-
S Cololl territorL) and consists of private funds There Jo ",
been substantial direct or indirect Governmental ass.s,^cet^Jonial «rr.tone:
ne^importers'of long-term8capital and look to the United Kingdom for a substantial
^de^;rnTLr^
^ ra r a„,i TVIeetino's At the Commonwealth Conference in
new funds J-'“^"uwSd'flow is estimated to have averaged £330
r£€nTs oT te —
h:z?J^z :’^y£
SS: ”no"a:Sy loans and grants from the United Kinfom Go=nt to
ru,7.t^:trdiin=^
‘Si ^5^-
Development, IBRD), 0™cn aD°ut Kingdom’s net financial contri-
Sn7tt7vXmenTo7^1tlo^
about £215 million.
Private Finance . .
, 'riS=,
companies^the ploughing back of profits earned overseas; and participation,
jointly with domestic capital, in enterprises overseas.
London Market Borrowing
Because of the heavy demand for such funds, borrowing by overseas Govern¬
ments on the Londonlapital market since the war has normally been confined
issues by Commonwealth and Colonial Governments.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
468
Borrowing by Commonwealth and Colonial Governments on the London market
during the last few years (excluding refinancing and conversion issues) is shown in
Table 40.
TABLE 40
Borrowing on the London Capital Market
£ million
1955
1956
1957
1958
Colonial Governments {a)
Other Commonwealth Governments.
Totals ..
9-7
10-0
11-2
5-0
15-5
0-0
19-7
16-2
15-5
5-0
45-0
50-0
Source: Central Statistical Office.
(a) Includes reservations for local subscriptions and Crown Agents’ subscriptions.
Other Private Investment
The United Kingdom imposes no restriction on investment in the sterling area by
United Kingdom firms. Such investment is frequently made frpm a firm’s existing
resources. If, however, the investing firm raises the necessary finance by borrowing
in the United Kingdom, it must normally obtain the consent of the Treasury
(which is advised by the Capital Issues Committee) to this borrowing if the amount
so borrowed exceeds £50,000 in any one year. In 1954-57, approvals for applications
to issue capital destined for sterling Commonwealth countries averaged over £50
million a year. Finance is also made available by the Commonwealth Development
Finance Company (see p. 440), which, by March 1959, had entered into commit¬
ments totalling £15-5 million in eight Commonwealth countries for a wide variety
of projects.
Finance from Public Funds
There are several public sources of finance from which United Kingdom funds
are made available for overseas development. The following are the principal forms
of machinery through which funds are provided.
Export Guarantees Acts
The Government has authority under Sections 2 and 3 of the Export Guarantees
Act, 1949, as amended by Section 2 of the Export Guarantees Act, 1957, for the
giving of economic assistance to countries outside the United Kingdom. Securities
issued by the borrowing country are acquired by the Export Credits Guarantee
Department (ECGD), and their purchase price used to facilitate payment for
United Kingdom exports.
United Kingdom Government loans are made through these powers to overseas
Governments. The loans bear interest at rates related to the notional rates for
United Kingdom Government borrowing.
From 1949 to 1958, loans have been effected through ECGD to Yugoslavia
(£17 million); India (£43-5 million); Iran (£10 million); Pakistan (£10 million);
and Iraq (£3 million). Loans to Yugoslavia (£3 million), Pakistan (£10 million),
the Sudan (£5 million), and India (£3 million), were arranged early in 1959.
TRADE
469
Colonial Development Corporation .
The Colonial Development Corporation is a public corporation se UP
Felw 1948 Us purpose as re-defined in the Overseas Resources Development
Act 1956, is to assist Colonial territories, in accordance with the provisions
Overseas Resources Development Acts, 1948 to 1958, in the deve opme
““ this purpose the corporation has power ‘-"a pr"
-orritories either alone or in association with others, projects for the promotio
or expansion of a wide range of enterprises specified in the Overseas Resourc
D TheT'empowemthe corporation to borrow, in order to carry out its functions,
sol to have ^standing at any one time not ^T^t^'^ans TheTcreta?;
ITtaTe^the^to
E AtX'end of 1958, the corporation reported that it had 77
renresenting a total capital commitment of over £82 million. Th y
P « follows - utilities (power, transport, communications, housing) 51-8 per c ,
p^du^^ulture, minerals, forestry) 3a-9 per cent; processing and
manufacture (factories, animal products) 15-3 Per cent-
Colonial Development and Welfare Acts . ,
The United Kingdom has made available, under the Colonial Development an
provides for additional loans of up to £100 million in thesamePen°d;*l™™™™
“ f£.8TmSLrwasTsU7inXl™SofmgrannK and loans from these
souLs ,’such financial assistance is used by the Colonies to -W ^ deVel°p-
ment expenditure from their own resources and from market borrow g.
Other Government Sources . _
United Kingdom Government funds are also made available for overseas
in other wavs than those mentioned above, e.g., grants and loa
are Malaya and Libya.
United Kingdom Aid through Intergovernmental Organisations
The principal intergovernmental organisations through which the Un
Kingdom provides aid » other — - *e —, n l^ankfor Recon^
strucuon and D^elopmentJIBRD^d ' programme for Technical
Assignee and Special Fund for Technical Assistance, and (through private an
‘’Theob^fl'BmwUch wounded in I946, is to supplement other sources
of G^vemment and private credit for investments in sound projects for the
470
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
economic development of its member countries. The United Kingdom’s subscrip¬
tion to IBRD is the second largest of any country, amounting to the equivalent of
$1,300 million.
In accordance with the rules of IBRD, 2 per cent (about £9 million) of this
subscription has been paid in gold and dollars and is freely available for IBRD to
lend to any country, while 18 per cent (about £84 million) has been paid in sterling
and can be lent by IBRD only with the United Kingdom’s permission. In fact,
the United Kingdom has given permission for £4 million of this to be lent to any
member country, and for the remaining £80 million to be lent to Commonwealth
countries; it is expected that all but about £10 million of the 18 per cent subscription
will have been disbursed by about the end of i960. Repayments on loans financed
in this way may be re-used by IBRD for fresh lending, thus constituting a revolving
fund. In addition, IBRD has also been allowed to borrow £10 million on the
London capital market.
The remaining 80 per cent of IBRD subscriptions is not paid up but is subject
to call if required to enable IBRD to meet its obligations as borrower, thus
serving as a guarantee for the funds which IBRD raises from the world’s private
capital markets and which it uses to finance its lending operations.
In February 1959, the Government took legislative action, in accordance with
recommendations by the executive directors of IBRD to member countries, to
double its subscription to IBRD. It is intended that the whole of these additional
subscriptions should remain subject to call, thus strengthening the guarantees
behind IBRD’s market borrowings.
The United Kingdom is also the second largest contributor to IFC,1 subscribing
15-4 per cent of its total subscribed capital of $93-3 million. In addition, the
United Kingdom has contributed over £5 million to the United Nations Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance2 and has agreed to contribute $1 million
towards the resources of the United Nations Special Fund3 during its first year
(1959).
Colombo Plan
The Colombo Plan for Co-operative Economic Development in South and
South-East Asia had its origin in, and took its name from, the meeting of
Commonwealth Foreign Ministers held at Colombo in January 1950. It is designed
to provide a framework within which a co-operative effort can be made to raise the
area’s standards of living and to undertake economic development.
United Kingdom disbursements under the Colombo Plan (not including the
sterling releases above) from its inception to June 1958 amounted to £92! million.
This figure comprises aid given under the Colonial Development and Welfare
Acts, and from the Colonial Development Corporation to Malaya, North Borneo
and Sarawak; technical assistance; ECGD credits; and releases from the United
Kingdom’s sterling subscription to IBRD, in the shape of loans for approved
projects in Commonwealth countries. These IBRD sterling loans amounted to
about £21 million at 30th June, 1958. In addition to the £gz\ million disbursements
mentioned, some £31 million from the United Kingdom stood committed at 30th
June, 1958.
1 IFC was set up as an affiliate of IBRD in 1956 to assist the growth of private enterprise
in member countries.
2 The object of this programme is to provide under-developed countries with expert
advice and training facilities over a wide field.
3 The object of the fund is to extend the scope and resources of the existing technical
assistance and development programmes of the United Nations.
TRADE
471
The United Kingdom undertook, at the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee
meeting at Seattle in November 1958, to increase the amount of technical assistance
to be provided up to 1963 from £7 million to £9 million.
INTERNAL TRADE
The internal trade of the United Kingdom can be divided into two broad
categories: trade in raw materials, capital goods and intermediate products (for
example, vehicle components) and trade in consumer goods, that is to say goods
for direct sale to the public. (The pattern of consumers expenditure is outlined
Chanter VIII, The National Economy, see p. 247.) . . .
The 1957 Census of Distribution, which was a large-scale sample inquiry,
nrovides an account of the structure of the retail trade. The full Census of
Distribution, relating to the year 1950, also covered wholesalmg and ^eMtenng
and other service trades, and provides a comprehensive picture of the distributiv
trades as a whole. It also included more detailed information on the retail trades
Than wS given in the t957 census. Both censuses covered Great Bn,am but no,
Northern Ireland.
WHOLESALE TRADE
On the basis of some pre-war researches,1 it would appear that about 17 per cent
of°ales wermade”o consumers through producers’ own selling org^uons
Out of a total of some 55,700 wholesale establishments, there were about 7,000
th^c^othhig^footwear andtextile trades, 6,900 in the groceries, confectionery and
drink trades and 6,900 in other food trades. , f merchandise
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according yp , ,
handled Fresh fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to ^ "ers who
sell to inland wholesalers at the main ““““ °r^”'yC^o;ers to
to retailers; fruit and vegetables on ^ th^ to wholesalers or direct to
commission agents who dispose of t p wholesale firms
foodstuffs, particularly imported S^P{? _ each * about 8)000 tons of meat
Leadenhall (poultry) -^““Me^ndent retails linking them-
quite rapidly in the grocery trade since 1954- As yet, however, y
only a small but growing proportion of grocery business.    
somfu^ffiddpioni^sS^^^^^
James B. Jefferys, published in 195°-
2H
472
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
RETAIL TRADE
Types of Retail Shops
Retail shops in Britain may be classified under four heads: (i) retail co-operative
societies; (2) department stores with a number of departments selling different
types of goods (in some cases a firm may own several department stores); (3) mul¬
tiple traders, that is organisations, other than co-operative societies or department
stores, with ten or more branches; and (4) independent retail businesses and
branches of small multiple stores (i.e. chains of stores with nine or fewer branches).
In addition, there are a number of market and street traders, but according
to the 1950 Census of Distribution, the amount of business done by these traders is
usually very small; their average turnover was less than £2,000 per year. Table 41
shows the shares of the four main groups of retail business in total turnover
in 1957.
TABLE 41
Turnover of Main Groups of Retail Business in 1957
Main Groups
£ million
Percentage
Retail co-operative societies
Department stores
Multiple traders
Independent retail businesses
Total Retail Trade
905
381
1,902
4,610
7,798
11-6
4.9
24-4
59-1
100-0
There are a large number of small undertakings; the 1950 Census recorded
246,000 businesses with an annual turnover of under £5,000. Most of the smaller
undertakings have working proprietors; out of the 2-7 million persons engaged in
the retail trade in 1957, 590,000 were working proprietors and unpaid family
helpers. Out of a total of some 5 74,000 establishments shown by the 1957 Census, and
recorded in Table 42, grocery and other food retailing groups numbered nearly
276,000 establishments, and the clothing and footwear group some 94,000.
Present Trends in Retail Trade
In recent years, multiple concerns and the retail co-operative societies have
succeeded in raising their sales relative to those of other groups. The 1957 census
showed that multiple retailers succeeded in raising their turnover by 71 per cent
between 1950 and 1957, while the corresponding increases for co-operative societies
and independent traders were 58 per cent and 46 per cent, respectively. Sales by
department stores trading in 1950 increased by 27 per cent between 1950 and 1957,
and there was also an increase in the number of department stores over the period.
Trends since 1957 are shown by the monthly statistics of retail trade compiled
by the Board of Trade. In 1958, the increase in retail sales was about 3 per cent,
which is considerably below the annual rate of growth since 1950. Since the
removal of hire-purchase restrictions, the growth in the value of retail sales has
been most marked in food shops (partly reflecting the higher than average rise in
food prices) and in sales of radio and electrical goods.
TRADE
473
TABLE 42
Retail and Service Trades, 1950 to 1957
Total Retail Trade . .
Grocers and provision
dealers
Other food retailers
Confectioners, tobacconists,
newsagents
Clothing and footwear
Household goods . .
Other non-food retailers
General stores
Service Trades
Boot and shoe repairers
Hairdressers
Number of
Establishments
1950
579,813
140,559
143,896
74,613
96,247
65,062
57,771
1,665
18,467
33,113
1957
573,988
149,109
126,777
77,440
93,556
64,906
58,487
3,713
14.458
34.458
Turnover
1950
million
5,100
1,232
1,006
503
932
571
385
471
19
38
1957
£ million
7,798
2,041
1,565
703
1,151
888
578
872
23
62
Per¬
centage
change
in turn¬
over
Per cent
+ 53
+ 66
+ 56
+40
+ 23
+ 56
+ 50
+ 85
+ 19
+ 64
Source: Board of Trade.
Self-Service Shops and Mobile Shops , , ,
The development of self-service in retail establishments since 195° has proba y
helped the rnultiple stores and the retail co-operatives to achieve a higher rate of
expansion in sales. Unofficial estimates give the number of self-service shops m
operation in the United Kingdom at the end of April 1959 as over 5.000, a d
mml tumov’er in that year exceeded
in the grocery and provision
trade bu^ for other types of merchandise the proportion is insignificant
Supermarkets which may be broadly defined as self-service shops with a sell g
ama <+ more than 2,000 square feet, have been operating since 1956 m the Unite
Kingdom. By the middle of 1958, about 175 had been opened, “arly 'me-ha'f
them in or around the London area. Co-operative societies own nearly half of
lying housing estates the
majoAy'selling^roceries or other foodstuffs; several manufacturers specialise in
building fully equipped vehicles for this type of trading.
474
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mail Order Sales
Retail sales amounting to £128 million were reported by specialist mail order
houses, and some manufacturers and large stores also sell by mail order. The twenty
largest companies account for about 85 per cent of total mail order sales; the
bulk of their trade consists of clothing, footwear and household textiles. The
smaller mail order businesses normally specialise in a single commodity, notably
in the sale by post of seeds, plants and small horticultural requisites.
Retail Co-operative Societies
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary non-profit-making organisations
-engaged in the retail trade and controlled by their members who are also their
customers. An operating surplus is returned periodically to members as a dividend,
and the amount distributed is proportionate to the value of the member’s purchases
over the period.
Retail co-operatives also sell to the general public, but membership is open to
anyone paying a small deposit on a minimum share, which entitles the member to
an equal voice with other members in determining the policy of the society. Invest¬
ment by individual members is limited to £500 but the rules of some societies may
fix lower limits. Only a low rate of interest is paid on the shares.
At the end of 1957, there were 1,045 retail co-operative societies registered under
the Industrial and Provident Societies Act, but amalgamations are slowly diminish¬
ing the number of societies. More than a quarter of the total membership of the
co-operatives (12,148,000, an increase in the two years from 1955 to 1957 of 542,000)
was provided by the eleven largest societies, each of which had a membership of
more than 120,000. One, the London Co-operative Society with about 1*3 million
members, is the largest retail co-operative in the world. Total sales of the retail
co-operative societies in 1957 reached £954 million, the largest having a turnover
of more than £50 million, and of the total trading surplus, £51 million was allocated
to dividends on sales.
Retail co-operative societies are free to purchase where they wish or to produce
their own goods, but in order to secure the advantages of large-scale production
and distribution, they have collectively established wholesale and production
societies.1
The report of an independent commission, set up by the Co-operative Union to
survey the whole field of co-operative production and marketing, was published in
1958. Its recommendations, which have not yet received the approval of all branches
of the movement, include the amalgamation of smaller societies, improvements in
the management structure, the setting up of national chains of specialist shops
through a new organisation, and the concentration of the productive effort of the
wholesale co-operative societies on a narrower range of goods.
Hire-Purchase Sales
The rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such as
cars, furniture, washing machines, refrigerators and cookers, has been greatly
facilitated by the development of instalment purchasing. In February 1955, the
Government had imposed restrictions, in the form of minimum initial payments
and maximum periods for repayment, on hire-purchase and credit transactions; in
October 1958, however, these controls were lifted completely, and this led to a sharp
rise in the volume of outstanding hire-purchase and other credit instalment debt.
1 The two major wholesale societies are the Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited
and the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited.
TRADE
475
After an advance of about £60 million ,0 a total of £469 nulhon in the
iq?8 there was a further increase to £559 million by the end 95 >
£708 mdlkin^by the end of June X959- About one-third of the total debt was owed
in resnect of nurchases of new and second-hand cars.
The Board of Trade compiles, on a sample basis, monthly returns of hue-
nurchase sales and other instalment credit for durable goods. These showed that 1
thefinaf quarterof 1958, following the ending of controls, about half the sales o
furniturelhops and also of the shops selling radios and electrical goods, and abou
-io per cent of the sales of cycle shops, were in the form of instalment purchases
There are numerous finance companies which specialise in providing finance for
credit transactions. At the end of 1958, such compames were c^mg a^out
million of direct hire-purchase debt. The remainder is either financed by the retailer
ely or subsecpiently discounted for him by a ~ TheWve
largest of these companies account for about 70 per cent 01
provided.
P““ish Productivity Council has estimated that British industry spends not
less than /400 million annually on packaging, an increase of one-third in the past
Scade The expansion of self-service shops and the growth of sales m the form o
branded and standardised produets have been major factors m the great changes
which have taken place in packaging methods. These developments are ^fleeted -n
the marked increases in output of the mdustnes ^
mbps tin nlate and glass containers. Fruit and vegetables, for example, a
increasingly' sold in packs of transparent film-estimated to number about 200
million in 1058. Aerosol dispensers, almost unknown a few years ago, are being
, ‘ , i|lion a year. Laminated aluminium foil is now employed
extensiirely ^s^ tvrapping^material in the food industry. A Packaging Centre has
been set up in London to provide information on packaging methods.
AThr'e^fnsion of productive capacity in industries manufacturing consumer
goods in Britain, and the ever-increasing choice of goods and services aval a
ftie consumer in recent years, have been accompanied by a steady "e"d
Ahmit S'xlK million is estimated1 to nave Deen spent
expenditure 0 million was expended on advertising
rn"oll td pryinca pmsl a/d about three-guar,ets of that sum in
periodicals and magazines and in the technical and trade press as well as about
Ao mUHon on television advertising (about three times as much as in 1956^ The
remainder was divided between other media, such as posters, films, catalogue
window displays and exhibitions. Most of the advertising is carried out y
rdvertMng agencies, which, in some cases, also provide marketing, consume
research and other services. The central organisation of the profession the
Institute of Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising.
Consumer Protection
Various legislative measures exist in the United Kingdom to con¬
sumer against specific abuses. Independent organisations have also sought to
establish voluntary minimum standards of quality. 
• This figure is derived from estimates given by Mark Abrams in AdvertiAm: A Financial
Times Survey, issued in June 195 9-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
476
The Merchandise Marks Acts, 1887-1953, are designed to ensure that the
marking of goods is both accurate and honest. Weights and measures legislation,
one of the earliest forms of consumer protection, is strictly enforced by qualified
inspectors. In establishing standards for consumer goods, the British Standards
Institution (see p. 262) is providing valuable services, and the Council of Industrial
Design (see p. 225) helps to foster improvements in the design of consumer goods.
Advice to the public on the merits of consumer goods and services is provided
through the British Standards Institution’s Consumer Advisory Council, with a
membership of over 50,000, and the Consumers’ Association Ltd., a private body
financed by the subscriptions of members who number over 125,000. Assistance
with certain aspects of consumer guidance is also given by a number of other
private bodies and by certain Government departments, e.g., the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research. Special arrangements, in the form of consumer
councils and consumer committees, have been made for the nationalised industries.
Individual trades and industries have also taken measures to raise standards of
quality.
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by the Food and
Drugs Acts, 1955, 1956, and 1958 (see p. 146).
A committee was set up by the President of the Board of Trade, in the summer
of 1959, to consider and report whether changes in the law and other measures are
desirable for the further protection of the consumer.
XIV. SOUND AND
TELEVISION BROADCASTING
Broadcasting of sound and of television in the y”te^fr^s ^wlphy
powers conferred on the Postmaster General by the Wireless ieiegrapny
Acts IQ40-I9SS which prohibit the sending or receiving of radio communications,
except under fence. Users of sound and television receWng sets must obtam an
annual licence, which can be purchased from most post offices Broadcasting
Sound broadcasting services are provided solely by theo ‘“^“f^Wer
Cornoration (BBC), which was established as a public corporation by y
fnToa, Televistan services are provided by both the British Broadcastmg Cor¬
poration and the Independent Television Authority (ITA), which was established
^e "TfeS fences current in the United Kingdom at the end of
Tune .0^ 4 847,481 of which 9,495,tS8 were for sound and television
June 1959 was 4. 4/.4 •?’ 6 f ts fitted in cars) for sound only.
combined, and 5,352,295 (including 39.3,4^4 /t excise duty);
A combined sound and television licence costs £4 (including excise duty, ,
it , r Pccistered blind people are entitled to free sound
:=t ”
in a household, but a separate licence is required for a set fitted in a car.
Broadcasting Authorities , . , ,
When sound broadcasting began in the United Kingdom in 1922 it was decided
in Parliament that the Postmaster General should grant only one licence for that
j tup f;rot licence was granted exclusively to a limited
company^tthc^Bi^hish^Broadcashng Company). The decision to grant only one
fence for broadcasting was maintained when the British Broadcastmg Corporatton
BBCWas formed to fee over the functions of the limited company m 1927; « was
reaffirmed in 1937 when the BBC’s second Charter was granted to cover the sound
services and the television service which the BBC had inaugurated during the
previous year; and it was upheld throughout the second world war and during
,hXfe”“d"war, television broadcasting was suspended and trans-
Uunng iftpr rpsnmotion however, the television
1949 ana W5 . Porlinment in the press and among
“i^ifTe^Xa—ary and general discussion i, was decided by
he Government Lt the potential power of television was so great that it would be
unSo ieave
«ferhyed“r.mptfe^ to those of the BBC for an inife
Period of ten veart and independent television transmissions began in September
U5Ahe BBC’s monopoly in the provision of sound broadcasting services remain-
'"^Both the BBC and the ITA are independent authorities in so gt “^ly ^mmi-
stration and presentation of programmes are concerned. The Government, ho
477
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
478
ever, retains ultimate control, and the Postmaster General, as the responsible
minister, is answerable to Parliament on broad questions of policy. The Postmaster
General may issue directions to the BBC and to the ITA on a number of
technical and other subjects; and he has power to prohibit their broadcasting
any particular matter or class of matter, or to revoke their Licences at any time.
Both the BBC and the ITA are required to publish annual reports and accounts,
which are presented by the Postmaster General to Parliament.
The BBC and the ITA both consult with the Postmaster General as to the hours
of television broadcasting, and he has approved an arrangement which permits
a maximum of 50 hours a week, together with extensions (averaging ten hours a
week) for certain stated purposes, such as religious broadcasts, ministerial and
party political broadcasts, schools broadcasts, outside broadcasts and Welsh
language broadcasts. The authorities may broadcast television programmes, within
the prescribed maxima, during any periods best suited to the needs of their
audiences. The BBC broadcasts in all four of its domestic sound services for some
18 hours out of the 24.
Organisation and Finance
The BBC operates under the provisions of two documents, each granted for
limited periods at the end of which they may be renewed or amended: the Charter,
which sets out the constitution, objects and internal organisation of the BBC and
contains certain financial provisions; and the Licence and Agreement between the
BBC and the Postmaster General, which deals with technical matters, certain
non-technical conditions such as the prohibition of commercial advertisements
and sponsored programmes, and details of the financial arrangements in force.
The operations of the ITA are governed by the provisions of the Television Act,
1954, which formulate its constitution, its functions, its purpose and the framework
of its finances; and by the Licence (which contains technical provisions) issued to
it by the Postmaster General in 1955.
The British Broadcasting Corporation
Under the current Charter (which came into force in 1952 and expires in 1962)
the corporation consists of nine governors (including a chairman, a vice-chairman
and separate national governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) each
appointed for a period of not more than five years by the Sovereign in Council.
As a corporate body, the governors are responsible for the conduct of the whole
broadcasting operation, including the content and presentation of the programmes
in sound and television, and the provision and working of the necessary installations-
and equipment.
In the discharge of its responsibilities, the BBC is required to ensure that its
services are used, as stated in the preamble to the Charter, ‘as a means of
disseminating information, education and entertainment’, to pay heed to the
requirements of the Licence (e.g., it must allow the broadcasting of any announce¬
ment at the request of a Government department, and it must strictly exclude
commercial advertisements in any form from its programmes), and to refrain from
formulating or allowing the expression of editorial opinion, since to express such
opinion would be to depart from the rule of impartiality which the BBC is expected
to observe in current affairs and matters of public issue.
The governors are advised on all aspects of their work by a number of councils,
established in accordance with the terms of the Charter, e.g., the General
Advisory Council, which has been in existence, except for a break during the war
years, since 1934; the National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales,
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
479
which, under the chairmanship of the national governors for Scotland and W ales
are responsible for the domestic sound services in those countries; and the Regiona
Advisory Councils for the English regions and for Northern Ireland There are
also a number of other councils and committees, not specifically required by the
Charter, but established by the BBC to advise on such matters as religious broad¬
casting schools broadcasting, music and agriculture. , , . • . j
The chief executive officer of the BBC is the Director-General, who is appointed
by the governors at their discretion and with whom they discuss all maJ°r ^^e
of policy and finance. Under the Director-General are eight directors (the Ch ef
Assistant to the Director-General, and the Directors of Sound Broadcasting, Tele¬
vision Broadcasting, News and Current Affairs, External Broadcasting, Engineering,
Administration, and Staff Administration) who, between them! ^ ^ of
work of the BBC, and who, with the Director-General, constitute its Board
Management. The number of staff employed in 1959 was approximately 16,11 .
The services of the BBC are financed from (1) an annual sum, voted by Parliament,
which is related to revenue derived from the sale by the Post Office of broadcast
receiving licences; (2) an annual grant-in-aid, voted by Parliament, for the Ex^er^a
Services i.e. the European Services, the Overseas Services, and the Monitoring
Service-/and (3) profits from BBC publications, mainly the Radio Times, which has
a weekly sale of about 8 million copies and attracts a large advertismg revenue The
gross revenue from the sale of licences for the year ended 31st March, 1959,
amounted to £33,350,545, excluding the excise whlch;S Xoadcasting38
of the income from licences and is not available to be spent on broadcasting
It was agreed with the Postmaster General that, for the period 1st April, 1957, to
o 1st March i960, the Treasury should retain 12k per cent of the net revenue fro
the sale of licences, i.e. the gross revenue, less a sum deducted by the Post Office
equal to the actual expenses it incurs in collecting the licence fees, investigating
complaints of interference and rendering other services, and the cost of administra¬
tion In 1958-59, the Post Office deducted £2,124,128 from the gross licence
revenue, the Treasury retained £3,903,302 of the net licence revenue and the
BBC received a net licence income of £27,323,115. In t e same y ,
revenue from publications was £1,144,578, and grant-in-aid rece^ts amounted to
£6 178,000. Under an arrangement by which additional sums may e pai
BBC7 if, on application by the BBC to the Postmaster General, the Treasury is
satisfied that the BBC’s income is insufficient for the adequate conduct of horn
broadcasting during any portion of the term of the Licence the sum to be retained
b^ the Treafury Jthe year 1959-60 has been reduced to 7i P- cent “
ing the BBC’s share of the net licence revenue for that year from 87 2 per cent to
gzi per cent.
The Independent Television Authority
The Independent Television Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman
and eight ordinary members (three of whom have special responsibility for Scot¬
land Wales and Monmouthshire, and Northern Ireland severally) appointed by
the Postmaster General. The ITA owns and operates the transmitting stations, but
Z production stud,os and equipment are owned, and the actual pro^ammes are
provided, by commercial programme companies under contract to the 11 .
These companies pay the ITA for the right to present programmes which may
include advertisements. The ITA is, however, reqmred by *he Jelf™10n “
satisfy itself that the programmes maintain certain standards—e.g., it must ensure
that they do not offend against good taste or decency, that they are balanced 1
their subject matter, that they preserve due impartiality in presenting matters of
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
480
industrial or political controversy, and that the news is reported accurately. The
ITA therefore has controlling and regulatory powers of a wide and important
character in regard to programmes and advertisements, as well as the task of
choosing the programme contractors and drawing up the contracts under which
they are to operate.
In the discharge of its duties, the ITA is advised by three statutory committees:
the Advertising Advisory Committee, the Children’s Advisory Committee, and the
Central Religious Advisory Committee, which by arrangement with the BBC acts
as the statutory advisory body to the ITA on religious broadcasting. The ITA has
also appointed a panel of five consultants to assist it in the exercise of its day-to-day
responsibilities for religious services and programmes.
The chief executive officer of the ITA is the Director-General. There is also a
Deputy Director-General, and a headquarters staff covering all technical, admini¬
strative, clerical, typing and office services, which numbered 118 in June 1959.
Staff has also been recruited for the transmitting stations and for regional offices,
bringing the total number of ITA staff to some 363. Ten programme companies
are under contract with the ITA: Associated-Rediffusion Limited; Associated
Television Limited; ABC Television Limited; Granada TV Network Limited;
Scottish Television Limited; Independent Television for South Wales and the
West of England Limited (TWW Ltd.); Southern Television Limited; Tyne-Tees
Television Limited; Anglia Television Limited; and Ulster Television Limited.
A common news service is provided by Independent Television News Limited.
A standing consultative committee, composed of two representatives of the ITA
and a representative of each of the programme companies, provides consultative
machinery between the ITA and the companies on matters affecting the companies
as a whole. There is also an Independent Television Companies Association,
designed to further the collective interests of the companies with such outside
bodies as trade unions and sporting organisations, and generally to ensure that
they speak as far as possible with one voice on public issues connected with television
broadcasting policy.
The ITA receives no payments from licence revenue; its finance is drawn from
payments made to it by the programme companies which, in the year ended 31st
March, 1959, amounted to £2,871,293. In addition, advances (limited to £1 million
during the first year of the ITA’s existence and to a total of £2 million in all
during the first five years) may be made by the Postmaster General with the
consent of the Treasury for the purpose of paying initial expenses and for providing
the ITA with working capital. However, by the end of March 1959 (some three and
a half years after the inauguration of independent television) only £555>000 had
been loaned to the ITA under this head, and this amount has already been repaid.
There is also provision in the Television Act for an annual Exchequer grant, not
exceeding £750,000, to be made to the ITA, but it has not, in fact, been found
necessary to pay this grant.
Sound Broadcasting
The BBC operates four domestic sound broadcasting services from 58 long-wave
and medium-wave transmitters at 44 transmitting stations, and two main groups
of external broadcasting services from 39 high power, high frequency transmitters:
37 in the United Kingdom and two (used for relay purposes) at Tebrau, near
Singapore. Until recently, the domestic sound services were broadcast solely on
long and medium wavelengths, allocated to the United Kingdom under the
Copenhagen Agreement of 1948, which aimed at minimising interference between
the broadcasting stations of the participating countries. However, the growth in
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
481
the number of European broadcasting stations after that date (there are now twice
as many as in 1948) so diminished the effectiveness of the Agreement that, in 1955,
the BBC began to establish a network of very high frequency (VHF) transmitters.
By 1959, 18 permanent VHF transmitting stations had been built and put into
operation, and the VHF service is now available to some 96 per cent of the
population. The VHF stations broadcast the Home Service appropriate to the
region in which they are situated, as well as the Light Programme, the Third
Programme and Network Three, and for all these services greatly improved
reception is assured. Further VHF stations are under construction or projected.
There are 148 studios for the domestic sound programmes, of which 59 are in
London and 89 at various centres in the regional areas. The external services use
or London studios. There are also semi-automatic studios which can be operated
in 17 different centres in the United Kingdom by a programme official without
the assistance of an engineer.
Domestic Services
The domestic sound services, which produce over 20,000 programme hours a
year are designed to cater for the varying tastes of a diverse listening public. They
consist of the Home Service, the Light Programme, the Third Programme and
Network Three.
The Home Service, which occupies some 17 hours a day, is planned to serve
the middle section of the community. It provides a wide range of musica
programmes (with particular emphasis on the great standard works of music)
and plays (including the classics and contemporary drama). The pnncipa
news and information programmes, discussions on domestic and foreign
affairs, party political broadcasts, special programmes for children and
young people (e.g., Children’s Hour, and Broadcasts for Schools), religious
programmes, and ‘outside broadcasts’ (which take the listener to national
occasions and sporting events) are also produced on the Home Service n
addition, the Home Service is the vehicle for regional broadcasting, which is
the generic term for programmes specially compiled for listeners in Scotian
Northern Ireland, Wales, the north of England, the Midlands and the west of
England. All these services carry items from the basic Home Service, together
with programmes produced within the region; the Welsh Service also broad¬
casts daily in the Welsh language.
The Light Programme, which occupies 18 hours a day, is intended for those
who wish to enjoy relaxation and distraction in the least demanding form.
Entertainment programmes are the main feature; they include light music
and dance music as well as variety programmes, short plays programmes
for women and children (e.g., Woman’s Hour and Listen with Mother ) and
regular news summaries and bulletins. There are also frequent outside
broadcasts’ on the Light Programme, and commentaries on sport.
The Third Programme, which normally occupies three hours in the evening
(five on Saturdays and Sundays), is planned for minority audiences The range,
style and presentation of its programmes, which include music, drama, a s
and features, are intended to satisfy listeners’ intellectual and cultural interests.
The programme claims on the one hand to be contemporary and forward-
looking, and on the other to represent the artistic achievements of the past,
it has an international flavour in that many of the plays presented are trans a-
tions of European drama or are by American authors, and many of the talks
are about foreign political thought and cultural activities m countries overseas.
482
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Network Three, which occupies between one and two hours on weekday even¬
ings, provides programmes of specialised interest, mainly programmes of the
spoken word. It is intended as a means of meeting the practical needs (e.g., for
further education, learning a foreign language, or acquiring expert information
on various aspects of hobbies or work) of groups of people, which cannot
properly be met during the evening hours by the other services.
Each of the domestic sound services has its own characteristics, but the Home
Service and the Light Programme are planned together, while the Third Programme
is co-ordinated with the other two, so far as is practicable, to ensure the widest
possible choice of programmes for listeners.
External Services
The external broadcasting services of the BBC are intended to provide a link of
culture, information and entertainment between the peoples of the United Kingdom
and those in all other parts of the world; to present events of world-wide importance
with speed and accuracy; and generally to reflect British opinion and the British
way of life. These services are heard in English and in 39 other languages through¬
out the world for a total, between them, of over 80 hours a day, which is longer
than the output of all the BBC’s domestic sound and television services added
together, and involves the transmission of some 48,000 news bulletins and 50,000
talks (including press reviews) in the course of a year.
The services, under the Director of External Broadcasting, are divided into the
European Services and the Overseas Services, each in charge of a Controller.
Within these two groups are the regional divisions. Common to both groups is the
External Services News Department, which prepares all the news broadcasts for
overseas audiences.
The European Services broadcast over 200 programme hours a week and are
sub-divided into five regional groupings: French, South European (Spain,
Italy, Greece, Turkey, Israel), Central European (Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Poland, Finland), East European (Soviet Union, Roumania, Bulgaria, Yugo¬
slavia, Albania), and German. There is also an English Service directed to
the whole of Europe. The material broadcast by the regional services is mainly
supplied by two central departments: the European Talks Department and
the European Production Department.
The Overseas Services, which are directed to countries outside Europe, broad¬
cast over 350 programme hours a week. They comprise the General Overseas
Service (started as the Empire Service in 1932) with its world-wide audience
of English-speaking listeners, and a number of regional services in English and
22 other languages. The General Overseas Service pays special attention to its
audiences in the Commonwealth, to British Forces and to British communities
overseas; it gives a complete programme service, including news bulletins,
talks, music, light entertainment, religious services and sport, for 22! hours
every day. The regional services include: the African, Caribbean, and Colonial
Services; the North American, the Pacific and the South African Services; the
Arabic Service for the Arab countries; the Asian Services for India, Pakistan,
Ceylon, Iran and the Far Eastern countries; and the Latin American Service.
The external broadcasting services also include the Transcription Service, which
records over 700 BBC sound programmes annually and distributes them to
broadcasting organisations in all parts of the world; the Television Transcription
Unit, which distributes telerecordings and films made by the BBC television
service for screening by other television organisations; the ‘English by Radio' service,
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
483
which distributes English lessons with explanations in over 30 languages and
reaches an audience of several millions by direct transmission from London and by
recorded broadcasts from local stations; and the Monitoring Service, which reports
foreign broadcasts from some 35 countries and languages and works under a
reciprocal agreement with its American counterpart as regards monitored mate
from the Far East and other areas inaudible in the United Kingdom.
The selection of the countries to which the external broadcasting services are to
be directed, and the time on the air to be allotted to each, rests with the Government
departments concerned with overseas relations. On appropriate occasions, these
departments are consulted about the content of the programmes, but the final
responsibility remains with the BBC. . _ T v 1 TWlin
The BBC maintains offices for its representatives in New York Paris, Berli ,
Ottawa, Toronto, Sydney, New Delhi and Beirut, to encourage local interest in the
BBC and to provide the BBC with advice and help concerning programmes
whether for home listeners about that area or for listeners in the area lt^'
offices (which are concerned with the whole field of sound radio and, where appro¬
priate television) are also responsible for promoting good relations with the local
teoadiSg organisations, and for keeping the BBC infold about tocal brorf-
casting and other developments of interest; in these matters, y
with the BBC’s Overseas and Foreign Relations Department. Audience research
is undertaken by sampling surveys and by listener panels, 15 of which operate m
different parts of the world.
Television Broadcasting
In 1036, the BBC launched the world’s first public television service. By 1959,
this service was being transmitted from 22 stations and was available to over 98 per
cent of the population. In the course of a year, it broadcasts more than 7,000 items
on a national network, made up of studio productions, outside broadcasts, films,
and relavs from the continent of Europe.
BBC studio productions come from the London Television Theatre atShephers
Bush- eight main London studios; and fully equipped regional studios at Man¬
chester Birmingham, Cardiff, Glasgow, Bristol and Belfast. In addition, eleven
small interview studios (used mainly for short insertions mto *e news) have bee"
established in London, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, and in the north,
midland and west of England regions. The Television Film Department of the
BBC is housed at the Ealing film studios; and Television News and newsreUpro-
grammes originate from a specially equipped studio at Alexandra Palace Londo .
lubstantial progress has been made in the building of a Television Centre, in
London (see photograph facing p. 486). The studios at this centre will be used for
^Out'sid^Troadcasting (which during the year 1958-59 transmitted nearly 1,000
nroerammes providing about 18 per cent of the total BBC television output)
covers most’ parts of the United Kingdom with its mobile units presenting
programmes both of national and of specifically regional interest, and also brings
scenes of events in Europe to viewers in the United Kingdom.
The first regular independent television (ITV) service was maugura ed in
September 1955, by a programme transmission from the ITA London station a
Beaulieu Heights, Croydon. By the end of .959, programmes -re bemg trammttted
from it stations in all parts of Great Britain, and approximately three-quarters ot
the total number of homes with television sets were able to receive ' ' .
ITV programmes are produced at studio centres in London Bmnmgham,
Manchester, Glasgow, Cardiff, Southampton, Newcastle, Norwich, Belfast and
484
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Dover. The establishment of these studios is the direct result of the ITA’s policy of
encouraging the development of regional television, and the programmes are
either for local broadcasting or for transmission to one or more of the other regions
through the link system operated by the ITA. At the end of 1959, this consisted of
1,554 miles of vision links, about 66 per cent of which were two-way circuits.
Generally speaking, both the BBC and the ITV services provide programmes
of music, drama, light entertainment, variety, and films. Broadcasts for schools are
produced on five days in the week both by the BBC and by one of the programme
contractors—Associated-Rediffusion Limited. Religious broadcasting is also a
feature of both services, as are balanced political discussions, programmes on the
arts, children’s and family programmes (including BBC programmes specially
designed for deaf children), television films, interviews with outstanding person¬
alities, investigations into matters of public interest, agricultural television broad¬
casts, news reports covering international, national and local events, and outside
broadcasts, particularly of sport. The State opening of Parliament was televised
for the first time in 1958.
Advertising is altogether excluded from the television programmes of the BBC,
as from their sound programmes. The ITA broadcasts advertisements (on which
the programme companies depend for their revenue) subject to the relevant pro¬
visions in the Television Act, namely, that there should be no sponsoring of
programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should be clearly distinguishable
as such and recognisably separate from the programme, and that the amount
of time given to advertising should not be so great as to detract from the
value of the programmes as a medium of entertainment, instruction and informa¬
tion. The ITA has also agreed rules with the Postmaster General about certain
classes of broadcasts (including, in particular, religious services) in which advertise¬
ments may not be inserted and, on the advice of the Advertising Advisory Com¬
mittee, has drawn up certain ‘principles for television advertising’ with a view to
the exclusion of misleading advertisements from the programmes. The cost of
inserting advertisements in the ITA service is borne by the advertisers, who pay
the programme companies for advertising time.
Wire Broadcasting
Wire broadcasting—a system whereby radio programmes are received at a central
point, whence they are distributed by wire to listeners and viewers—began in the
United Kingdom in 1925 as a private venture and remains in the hands of private
enterprise. Wire broadcasting companies operate under licence from the Postmaster
General. They are not allowed to originate programmes of their own, and their
function is to distribute programmes put out by general broadcasting stations.
A specified minimum of their programme material must be taken from BBC
sources. Subscribers to wire broadcasting services must have ordinary broadcast
receiving licences. At the beginning of 1959, there were 432 wire broadcasting
services, of which 156 gave television service and the remainder sound-only service.
The number of subscribers at that date was 1,048,438, including 196,165 who were
receiving television services.
Audience Research
Audience research, as conducted by the BBC, is carried on by interviewing, each
day, some 4,000 people throughout the country (a sample or cross-section of the
public) to ascertain what programmes they have heard or viewed on the preceding
day, and by means of listening and viewing panels, the members of which
are volunteers, prepared to answer questions about the programmes they usually
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
485
hear or see. Trends in public taste, which cannot be dxscovered by an examination
of the results of interviews and of the reports of the panels, are the concern
special section of the BBC’s Audience Research Department, which also carries
OUAudience Research is undertaken, on behalf of independent television, by an
independent research organisation—Television Audience Measurement Limited.
Scientific Research , ,
Research into the technical problems of broadcasting is carried out > e
scientific and engineering staffs of the BBC, the Post Office and the radio industry
in order to improve the technical facilities of broadcasting and thus to increase
ltSColour^television has been one of the main interests of the BBC Reseav^^d
Designs Departments which, following some years of laboratory work, bega
series of experimental transmissions in colour from the London Television Stat
in iq^. The results of these transmissions have been communicated to the iele
vision Advisory Committee which the Postmaster General appointed to advise him,
inter alia, on the whole field of development of colour television^ Meanwhile,
regular colour test transmissions continue for the use of the radio industry.
The BBC has also been conducting experiments on a new system of recording
television pictures on magnetic tape. The equipment produced for this operation,
known as Vision Electronic Recording Apparatus (VERA), was publicly dem
strated in April 1958, and has since been tried out in the Lime Grove studio centre
Other subjects of research undertaken by the BBC have been: the improvement
of studio acoustics, microphones and loudspeakers; the introduction of stereo¬
phonic sound tests; ultra-high-frequency bands; iong-distance propagati^
in the short-wave, VHP and ultra high frequency bands; the development of a
mobile unit, known as the Roving Eye, for outside broadcasting, which contains
television cameras and all the equipment needed to operate thf^, toge
VHP transmitters; and methods of increasing national coverage both in sound a
television by such means as the sharing of frequencies between stations m different
parts of the United Kingdom, the construction of transmitting aerials havmg speaa1
horizontal radiation patterns, and the deve opment
mitters of very low power for providing a television or VHP sound service to small
and isolated Communities. Following the installation of one such transmitter in
1958, the BBC is proceeding with the construction of 14 more,f.°rfilte eV1S1°^ for
10 for VHP sound. In June 1959, the BBC inaugurated its cablefilm sys e
transmitting short newsfilms over the transatlantic telephone cable.
International Relations ,
The BBC is an active member and the ITA, together with ^dependent
Television Companies Association, is an associate member of the Europea
Broadcasting Union. The union, which now has 26 active members among the
broadcasting organisations in the European zone (and 17 associate mem ers
mostly from outside Europe, including the United States of America and many of
the nations of the Commonwealth) meets every year to exchange views and
information, and to study common problems in the programme technical and
legal fields. It also maintains a Technical Monitoring Station, where frequency
measurements and other observations on broadcasting stations can be carried out.
Within the Commonwealth, the BBC is closely associated with the broadcasting
organisations of the other member countries and of the dependent terr*° -
A decision, taken at the third Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference in 1956,
486
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to achieve still closer co-operation, resulted in the BBC joining with the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, and the Rank
Organisation to establish a British Commonwealth International Newsfilm News
Agency Trust. Through an associated non-profitmaking company (the British
Commonwealth International Newsfilm News Agency Limited), this joint enter¬
prise provides a reliable service of international news on film for subscribers who
operate television services, produce cinematograph newsreels or acquire newsfilm
for any other purposes, including education, anywhere in the world.
The BBC also participates in the work of the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency responsible for the regulation
and control of all international telecommunication services (including sound and
television), for the allocation and registration of all radio frequencies, and (through
its International Consultative Committees) for the promotion and co-ordination
of the international study of technical problems in broadcasting. In addition, the
BBC has long-established relations with the United Nations Radio Division, with
the United Nations Educational and Scientific Organisation, and with the Council
of Europe.
Eurovision
As well as taking part in the exchange of sound radio programmes arranged
between the member countries of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the
BBC is a regular contributor to the network of European television (Eurovision).
This network now includes twelve Western European member countries; the
exchange of television programmes between them is arranged by the EBU, which
maintains an International Television Co-ordination Centre (Eurovision) in
Brussels. To facilitate programme exchanges on the Eurovision network a perma¬
nent television link, operating in either direction between London and the Conti¬
nent, has been constructed by the Post Office. The range of Eurovision is steadily
increasing as countries expand their networks and facilities, and new countries
participate.
The new BBC television centre at the White City, London, will be opened in i960.
Preparing
for a BBC
television
broadcast:
the Asian Club
programme.
Inflatable rubber life-rafts, which have already saved
many lives, using a special launching system.
Dungeness Lighthouse:
the light from the new,
small 2-kW lamp is three
times as powerful as the
former light. Itiset: The
new lens being installed
above the old one.
The Walmer, Kent, lifeboat. The Royal National
Lifeboat Institution (see p. 359) maintains 154
lifeboats round the coast of Britain.
Marconi marine remote radar display unit and
Lodestone long-range direction finder.
XV. THE PRESS
The British press caters for all political views, different levels of education and a
wide range of interests. It is free from Government censorship and interference.
The British public buys more newspapers per person than any other in the world.
It has been estimated (by UNESCO, in 1958) that for every 1,000 inhabitants of
the United Kingdom 573 copies of daily papers are sold every day. Next comes
Sweden with 462 per 1,000 inhabitants. Circulation figures of individual newspapers
are proportionately high. The Sunday Nezvs of the World, which reached a circula¬
tion of over 8 million copies, and the average circulation of which has recently
(January to end-June 1959) been 6,555,485, bolds the world’s record for the
circulation of a newspaper; and seven of the daily morning newspapers have
circulations in the millions. These high figures are largely explained by the fact
that the London morning papers have ‘national’ circulations, i.e. they are distribute
throughout the United Kingdom, being available almost everywhere on the day of
PBritain*imports half its newsprint requirements, while the other half is made
from imported raw materials. In 1958, about 950,000 tons of newsprint were used
in the United Kingdom. The average size of London national morning papers
varies between 10 and 20 pages. Prices of daily newspapers vary from 2*d. (for the
majority of papers) to 4d. (for The Times). Sunday papers run up to 40 pages and
to a price of 5b. , ,0
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 * there are some 150 daily and Sun¬
day newspapers: 16 London mornings, 3 London evenings 10 London Sundays,
18 mornings, 64 evenings and 3 Sundays in England outside London; 1 morning
and 3 evenings in Wales; 7 mornings, 8 evenings and 2 Sundays in Scotland, 3
mornings and 1 evening in Northern Ireland; x Isle of Man daily; and 1 morning
and 2 evenings in the Channel Islands. j 1 +
There are over 1,300 weekly papers published in Greater London and almost
every sizeable town in the rest of the country. These papers deal mainly with news
of interest to the region where they are sold. There are also the sporting paper ,
papers in foreign languages for groups of nationals of other lands resident in Britain,
anInt^V,U1 Royal Commission on the Press was appointed to inquire into the
finance control, management and ownership of the British press. Its report was
issued in June i949 (Cmd. 7700) and has been recognised as a comprehensive an
^TheRoya6! Commission found that the British press ‘is completely independent of
outside financial interests and that its policy is the policy of those that conduct n,
there was evidence that the direct influence of advertisers on policy was neghgi e
After studying management and ownership, the Royal Commission concluded that
‘there is nothing approaching monopoly in the press as a whole, or . . in any class
of newspaper’. Among other recommendations it suggested the establishment o a
General Council of the Press and this was set up m 1953 (see p. 494)-
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly • figures are based on the i959
edition of The Newspaper Press Directory, published early in 959-
487
21
488
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 43
‘National’ Newspapers and London Evenings
Title
Dailies
The Times (1785)
Daily Telegraph
(1855)
Manchester
Guardian 1 (1821)
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Herald (1912)
News Chronicle and
Daily Dispatch(\%A6,
as Daily News)
Daily Worker (1930)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Sketch (1909)
Financial Times
(1888)
London Evenings
Evening News (1881)
Star (1888)
Evening Standard
(1827)
Sundays
Observer (1791)
Sunday Times (1822)
General
Political
Tendency
Independent
Conservative
Liberal
Independent
Stresses
importance of
British Empire
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Communist
Left of centre
Conservative
Independent
As for Daily Mail
As for
News Chronicle
As for
Daily Express
Independent
Conservative
Owner
Times Publishing Co.
Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Manchester Guardian
and Evening News
Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
Daily News Ltd.
Daily Worker Co-op¬
erative Society Ltd.
Daily Mirror News¬
papers Ltd.
AssociatedNewspapers
Ltd.
The Financial Times
Ltd.
As for Daily Mail
As for News Chronicle
As for Daily Express
The Observer Ltd. All
shares owned by The
Observer Trust
Thomson (formerly
Kemsley) Newspapers
Ltd.
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1959
254,046
1,140,685
182,561
4,052,713
2,071,054
1,464,773
1,207,217
56,487
4,496,752
1,155,537
95,163
1,169,698
758,488
576,618
660,444
879,647
1From 24th August, 1959, The Guardian.
THE PRESS
489
TABLE 43 (contd.)
Title
Sundays {contd.)
News of the World
(1843)
People (1881)
Sunday Express
(1918)
Sunday Dispatch
(1801)
Reynolds News
(1850)
Empire News and
Sunday Chronicle
(1884)
Sunday Pictorial
(1915)
Sunday Graphic
(1915)
General
Political
Tendency
Independent
Independent
As for
Daily Express
As for Daily Mail
Supports the Co¬
operative Move¬
ment and the
Labour Party
Conservative
As for
Daily Mirror
Conservative
Owner
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1959
News of the World
Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
As for Daily Express
As for Daily Mail
Co-operative Press
Ltd. Co-operative
societies are share¬
holders
As for Sunday Times
Sunday Pictorial
Newspapers Ltd.
As for Sunday Times
6,555,485
5,054,783
3,447,203
1,594,322
342,152
2,102,262
5,331,268
877,788
Ownership
As Table 43 shows, several companies or groups own a number of newspapers;
in some cases, nev/spaper groups also have interests in groups of periodica s
The five largest press groups are: Associated Newspapers Limited, which, with
four London papers, owns directly or through subsidiary companies a total of
14 dailies and 16 weeklies, of which 9 dailies and 6 weeklies are linked under the
management of Northcliffe Newspapers Group Limited; Ihomson Newspapers
Limited (formerly Kemsley Newspapers Limited), which owns eleven dailies, ten
weeklies, and four Sundays and whose chairman also controls Scotsman Publi¬
cations; Westminster Press Group, which controls nine dailies and 38 weeklies>
Provincial Newspapers Limited, which owns four dailies and 20 weeklies; and the
Mirror Group, which owns a London daily and Sunday, each with Manchester
editions, two general weeklies, and, through a subsidiary company, two Glasgow
‘v^TargelublE' of periodicals in England and Wales: the
Mirror Group, controlling Fleetway Publications (formerly the Amalgamated
Press) which produces about 70 periodicals and many technical publications, and
Odhams Press Limited, which controls the George Newnes Group and the Hulton
Press, and owns in all about 100 general, specialised, trade and technical journals.
There are other, smaller groups and publishers of single magazines. ^ Scotland,
the largest publishers of magazines are the Thomson-Leng Group (see p. ^as¬
certain newspapers and periodicals are controlled by trustees whose aim is to
preserve the character and traditions of the paper and prevent control from falling
490
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
into the hands of people who might change the editorial policy and tradition.
Various forms of trust govern the direction of The Times, The Guardian, News
Chronicle and Star, Observer, Economist, Spectator and New Statesman.
The ‘National’ Press
Ten morning papers with headquarters in London, and one in Manchester,
are ‘national’ in the sense of circulating throughout the British Isles, and there are
10 ‘national’ Sunday papers (see Table 43). Thirteen of these papers have northern
editions published in Manchester. The leading Scottish papers (see below) circulate
widely, and certain specialised daily papers also have a circulation not limited by
region, e.g., Lloyd's List and Shipping Gazette and Sporting Life. Woman's Mirror
(weekly) also has a specialised national circulation (1,099,122). The three London
evening papers each have affiliations with one of the national dailies, but they draw
their readership very largely from people living within fifty miles of London.
Provincial Newspapers
The provincial newspapers, numbering about 90 morning or evening dailies and
Sunday papers and over 900 weeklies, provide the general and local news expected
by readers whose daily life and interests are known to, and shared by, the newspaper
staff. Some 60 provincial papers still in existence were founded before 1800; the
oldest being Berrow's Worcester Journal, dating back to 1709. With a few exceptions
(e.g., Yorkshire Post, Birmingham Post, Newcastle Journal, Northern Echo, Sheffield
Telegraph, Western Mail) they reflect no definite political tendency. The total
circulation of the provincial morning papers is about zb million, of the provincial
evenings about 7J million, and of the provincial weeklies about 12 million. Among
the provincial mornings, The Journal (Newcastle) and the Yorkshire Post have
circulations of over 100,000; the Northern Echo and the Sheffield Telegraph, over
91,000; the Birmingham Post and the Liverpool Daily Post, about 75,000; two
provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle-upon-Tyne), owned by
Thomson Newspapers, and the Sunday Mercury, owned by a subsidiary company
of the Birmingham Post and Mail Limited—have circulations of over 200,000;
while, among evening papers, the Liverpool Echo and Evening Express has a circu¬
lation of over 404,000, the Manchester Evening News of over 328,000, and at least
ten evenings have circulations of over 100,000. The provincial newspaper, often
read far more thoroughly than the national daily, is a valuable medium for national
and local advertising.
London suburban weeklies, of which there are about 90, are closer to the pro¬
vincial weeklies than to the national dailies in readership and appeal.
Ownership of the provincial press is varied: it includes individual owners, two
or more partner proprietors, local printing and publishing firms, newspaper com¬
panies owning between one and half a dozen papers, or press groups controlling a
chain of newspapers in different parts of the country.
Scotland
Scotland has seven morning, eight evening and two Sunday newspapers; in
addition, there are separate Scottish editions of the Daily Express, Daily Mail and
Sunday Express, with their own editors. The Glasgow Herald, founded in 1783, and
The Scotsman, founded in 1817 and a daily since 1855, published in Edinburgh,
are among the papers which influence serious opinion in Great Britain. The
circulation of the former is 78,713 and of the latter 63,361 (average figures January
to end-June 1959). Other morning papers are The Daily Record, The Bulletin
(a picture paper), and the Noon Record, published in Glasgow; The Courier and
THE PRESS
491
Advertiser, published in Dundee; and Aberdeen’s The Press and Journal. Evening
papers include the Edinburgh Evening News and Evening Dispatch, Glasgow s Evening
Times and Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen s
Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday
papers are the Sunday Mail, the Sunday Post and the Scottish Sunday Express.
Among the weekly papers are the Weekly Scotsman and The People s Journal,
which also circulate outside Scotland; in all there are 164 weekly papers published
in Scottish towns.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has three morning papers and one evening paper, all printed
in Belfast: they are Belfast News-Letter, Northern Whig, Irish News and Belfast
Telegraph. There are 42 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, including two
published twice a week. There is also a sporting paper, Ireland's Saturday Night,
published each Saturday afternoon (Belfast). The majority are published by
individual companies and all the counties have good coverage of local papers.
There are no Sunday newspapers.
'W&lcs
One daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, a Thomson newspaper, is
printed and published in Cardiff; it has a circulation of over 97,5°8> mainly m the
southern half of Wales. In North Wales, the Liverpool Daily Post gives wide cover¬
age to events in the area. Evening papers published in Wales are the South U ales
Echo Cardiff, the South Wales Daily Argus, Newport, and the South Wales Evening
Post ’ Swansea. North Wales is served by the Liverpool Echo and Evening Express
and to a smaller extent by evening papers published in Manchester, the Manchester
Evening News and the Manchester Evening Chronicle. J 0 ,
Since October 1954, a special Welsh edition of the Empire News and Sunday
Chronicle has been printed in Cardiff. Other national Sunday papers carry columns
of news on Welsh affairs.
The weekly press includes 56 weekly papers in English, many of them carrying
articles in Welsh; two bilingual papers; and eleven papers in Welsh, of which five
are denominational.
Channel Islands and Isle of Man
The Channel Islands have one morning paper {Guernsey Star) two evening
papers, one twice weekly and two weeklies. The Isle of Man has one daily, a special
weekly edition of which is published on Saturday, and four other weeklies.
Periodicals
Weekly, monthly and quarterly journals cover an enormous field. Salient features
of the last twenty-five years have been the development of periodicals with a mass
appeal and the growth of the trade and technical press. There are over 4.000 penodi-
cal publications: general magazines with circulations ranging up to over a million,
women’s magazines, some of which have even larger circulations; numerous
publications for children; a wide range of religious periodicals for all denominations,
magazines dealing with sports, hobbies, fiction and humour; periodicals specialising
in various subjects such as politics, finance and economics, science, the professions,
and the arts; over 1,700 trade and technical publications, many with circulations
not confined to the United Kingdom; and the journals of learned societies, trade
unions, regiments, universities, colleges, schools, and other associations. There has
also been a large increase in recent years in the number and circulation of ho
492
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
journals’, produced by industrial organisations mainly for their staffs; a survey made
in 1958 by the British Association of Industrial Editors estimated that some 1,500
house journals were published, and were read by about 30 million people.
Some popular periodicals, such as Reveille, Weekend, and John Bull Illustrated
have circulations (January to June 1959) of over a million copies. Six women’s
weeklies have circulations of over a million, Woman having over 3 million buyers;
a monthly magazine, Woman and Home, also sells over a million copies of each
issue.
Of considerable influence, although their circulations are only in the tens of
thousands, are the weeklies dealing with political, social and economic affairs:
The Economist, which covers topics of the day from a far wider angle than its title
would indicate and is politically independent; The New Statesman, a review of
politics, literature and the arts with an independent socialist political tendency;
The Spectator, which covers much the same subjects and is non-party; Time and
Tide, which has a right-wing tendency; and Tribune, with a left-wing but strongly
anti-communist bias. Other papers whose circulations are in the tens of thousands
are the illustrated weeklies such as The Illustrated London News, The Sphere, The
Field, and Country Life, while Punch is the leading humour periodical. The reader-
ship of all these weeklies is greater than is apparent from their circulation figures,
since they are widely read in libraries, clubs and other institutions.
Monthly and quarterly journals, generally speaking, appeal to the more serious
type of reader, particularly the literary and political journals and those specialising
in international and Commonwealth affairs.
In addition to the circulation of periodicals published in England, Wales has had,
since 1957, its own farming weekly, the Welsh Farm News. There are also eight
monthly and quarterly magazines and periodicals published in the Welsh language
and three published in English. The University of Wales, the National Museum of
Wales and the National Library of Wales also publish several important periodicals.
Four monthly illustrated periodicals are published in Scotland: Scottish Field,
Scotland’s Magazine, the Scots Magazine (founded 1739) and Scotland', and two
weeklies devoted to farming interests, Farming News and the Scottish Farmer.
Among literary journals, probably the most famous is Blackwood’s, published in
Edinburgh. Popular magazines are numerous: the Thomson-Leng group of Dundee
alone distributes about 10 million copies of weeklies in the British Isles and abroad.
In Northern Ireland, weekly, monthly and quarterly publications cover farming,
the linen industry, building, motoring and politics.
News Agencies
There are three principal British news agencies:
Reuters Ltd., which is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of the
United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The owners treat their stockholding
in Reuters as ‘a trust rather than an investment’ and are bound by a Trust Agreement
which guarantees the independence and integrity of the news service for all time.
Reuters has correspondents in all major capitals and is associated with the principal
news agency in every country in the world. It employs several hundred staff
correspondents abroad and also has the services of more than 2,000 local journalists
as part-time correspondents throughout the world.
Press Association Ltd., which distributes home news. It is owned by British
provincial newspapers. All profits are used to develop the service.
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd., a public company which distributes home
news to British papers and other subscribers.
THE PRESS
493
Two other agencies supply a general service of overseas news:
Associated Press, which is a branch of the Associated Press of America.
British United Press, which is a Canadian subsidiary of the United Press
Association of America.
There are also some 60 United Kingdom, Commonwealth and foreign agencies
and news services with offices in London, as well as agencies in other cities,
specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical requirements.
Training for Journalism
Until recently, and this therefore applies to most older newspapermen working
today, journalists were, broadly, of two classes: those who entered newspaper
offices on leaving school and worked their way up, learning by experience; and
university graduates who held some of the specialised posts, such as correspondents
abroad or on special subjects, leader-writers, sub-editors or reporters. The second
class has always been comparatively small. The Kemsley Newspaper Group made
provision for combining instruction with the practice of journalism, and courses m
journalism were organised by the Polytechnic, Regent Street, London, and by
King’s College, London (until the outbreak of war in 1939)-
In 1952, an agreement was reached for a more comprehensive plan for the training
and education of junior journalists in newspaper offices. A National Council for
the Training of Journalists, on which the principal press organisations are
represented, administers the scheme, which is based on the voluntary co-operation
of newspaper offices. There are regional training committees of local newspaper
representatives to supervise the operation of the scheme in provincial areas.
Examinations are taken at two levels: the proficiency test which may be taken after
three years of active journalism; and the diploma, which may be awarded after
further examination and submission of a thesis. Over 80 per cent of each year s new
intake of journalists by British newspapers are now trained under this system.
Press Institutions
Both employers and employees in the industry are well organised. n t e
employers’ side, the most important organisations are the Newspaper Proprietors
Association, whose members are proprietors of London (national) daily and Sunday
newspapers; the Newspaper Society, whose members are proprietors of provincia
daily and weekly newspapers in England and Wales; the Scottish Daily Newspaper
Society; the Scottish Newspaper Proprietors’ Association; the Belfast Newspap^
Society; the Publishers’ Group, Irish Master Printers Association (Northern
Alliance), whose members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ire¬
land’ and the Periodical Proprietors’ Association, whose membership embraces the
independent publishers of trade and technical pubhcations and general mag^mes
On the employees’ side there are the Institute of Journalists (loj) the National
Association of Journalists until 1889—incorporated by Royal Charter m 1890, and
the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in 1907. The National Union of
Journalists has a membership of about 14,500 working journalists; editors who
have powers of dismissal are excluded from full membership but may be associate
members. The Institute of Journalists admits all qualified journahstsonequa
terms of membership, and can claim, therefore, to be representative of *e pro¬
fession as a whole. Free-lance journalists (who are not on the Sta^ °f ^ ^ P^T
or group of papers but send contributions to any journal) may belong to the NUJ
or loj The aims of these organisations are the improvement of the economic status
of journalists, the promotion of their professional welfare, and the safeguarding o
the status of the press and its editorial staffs.
494
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are, inter alia, to sustain
the dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of editors,
to protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the education and
training of junior journalists: the guild has over 300 members. The British
Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to which most
editors of house journals belong.
The Typographical Association, in the provinces, and the London Typographical
Society, in London, are the principal craft unions organising such workers as
compositors and machine minders. The National Union of Printing, Bookbinding
and Paper Workers is principally concerned with the publishing and distribution
side, and the National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA)
includes machine assistants, clerical workers and general assistants in printing
works. These unions cover the printing industry generally.
The General Council of the Press
Following the recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Press, a Press
Council representative of the various press organisations was set up in 1953. Its
aims are:
to preserve the established freedom of the British press;
to maintain the character of the British press in accordance with the highest
professional and commercial standards;
to keep under review' any developments likely to restrict the supply of informa¬
tion of public interest and importance;
to promote and encourage methods of recruitment, education and training of
journalists;
to promote a proper functional relation among all sections of the profession;
to promote technical and other research;
to study developments in the British press which may tend towards greater
concentration or monopoly; and
to publish periodical reports recording its own work and reviewing from time
to time the various developments in the British press and the factors
affecting them. Reports are published annually.
The council consists of eight editorial representatives, four nominees of the
National Union of Journalists, three nominees of the Institute of Journalists, and
ten managerial representatives.
The work of the Press Council has been largely concerned with complaints of
unjustifiable intrusion by the press into the private lives of individuals, including
members of the Royal Family, or other breaches of professional standards, and
with the admission of the press to meetings of local authority councils and to
hearings of administrative tribunals.
The Press and the Law
The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say what
it likes provided it does not transgress the law; and, in general, it enjoys very great
liberty of comment on matters of public interest. There are no special press laws
(other than those relating to such matters as the registration of newspapers), but
requirements which affect the press occur in a variety of Acts of Parliament; for
example, the admission of the press to meetings of local authorities is regulated by
the Local Government Acts, and restrictions on the reporting of domestic pro¬
ceedings and proceedings concerning juveniles are imposed by legislation governing
procedure in the law courts.
THE PRESS
495
In particular, the press must comply with the copyright laws and with the laws
against the publication of matters covered by the Official Secrets Acts, with the
laws of seditious libel, blasphemous and obscene libel, and defamation, with the
laws for the protection of children from publications which might do them moral
harm, and with the laws against fraudulent advertising, against breach of parlia¬
mentary privilege, and against ‘contempt of court’—for example, the publication of
anything affecting a case before the courts which might tend to influence the result
of the trial, or of comment on court proceedings which might tend to prejudice
their reputation for fairness.
Legal proceedings against the press are infrequent; the majority of actions that
do take place are brought by private individuals seeking to protect their own
interests, for example, against libel. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publisher,
printer and distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author of the article, may
all be held responsible.
XVI. SPORT
The people of Britain attach great importance to sport. The extent of their
interest, which has its roots far back in history, is shown by the number of people
of all ages and both sexes who take an active part in sport of some kind, by the
vast crowds that throng to watch popular sporting events (spectators at professional
football matches, for example, number between one and two million weekly during
the season), by the amount of space devoted to sport in the national and provincial
press, and by the frequency with which programmes on sport are broadcast, both
on sound radio and television, and the size of the audiences that such programmes
command.
The Government is not directly concerned with the organisation or promotion
of sport, but it gives encouragement and support to physical education through
the Ministry of Education and the Scottish Education Department, and it allocates
grants from public funds to bodies responsible for the provision of playing fields
and other facilities for physical recreation, and to national sporting organisations
towards the cost of appointing instructors (coaches) in various kinds of sport.
The Minister of Education and the Secretary of State for Scotland, although not
responsible for prescribing the curricula in any school, require that all schools
receiving financial assistance from public funds shall provide for the physical
education (e.g., gymnastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of their
pupils, and are concerned, through inspectors of physical education and by means
of departmental publications, that a high standard shall be maintained. All schools
in the national system must have their own playing field, or the use of one, and
most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Facilities for, and instruction in, most
kinds of sport are also provided at the independent preparatory and public schools,
and at the universities (some of which have recently instituted departments of
physical education).
The Ministry of Education is closely associated with the Central Council of
Physical Recreation (see p. 178), and the Scottish Education Department is
similarly associated with the corresponding Scottish body, the Scottish Council of
Physical Recreation (see p. 178). Both the ministry and the department also
co-operate with the National Playing Fields Association (see p. 178). Local
authorities are empowered, under the Public Health Acts and the Physical Training
and Recreation Act, 1937, to provide playing fields. Gymnasia, lawn tennis courts,
golf courses and swimming baths are also provided by local authorities on a varying
scale.
In Britain, the word ‘sport’ is used generally to describe such pursuits as
organised games, athletics, field or country sports, indoor games, aquatic sports,
and such other activities as horse-racing, dog-racing, show-jumping, riding, boxing,
rock climbing, motor racing, cycling, and rifle shooting. Those who engage in sport
may be professionals, i.e. paid players, or they may be amateurs, i.e. people who
play games or take part in other forms of sport usually in their leisure time and
without monetary reward. Professionals keep up the technical standards of the
sports in which they take part1; spectators make a vital contribution by their
enthusiasm and their financial support; but the sporting life of Britain derives its
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby football, hockey and rowing, are entirely
amateur.
496
SPORT
497
character principally from the amateur element—the many thousands of boys and
girls and men and women who engage in sport solely for pleasure.
Outdoor Games
Outdoor games played in Britain include team games such as football, cricket,
and hockey, and games, e.g., lawn tennis and golf, in which individuals or couples
match their skill. Judged by the number of participants and spectators the most
popular of the team games are football and cricket, and the most popular of the
individual games is lawn tennis, but each of the others has its own particular
following.
Football
Although football of a kind was played as long ago as the Middle Ages (and there
are even earlier records), as an organised game it dates from just over a century
ago. One type of football, in which the feet only are used, was adopted at Cambridge
in 1855; the other type, in which the ball is handled as well as kicked, was first
played at Rugby School, from which it derives its name, and was adopted by the
Blackheath football club in 1859. . .
In England and Wales, the controlling body of the non-handling game, Association
Football (colloquially known as ‘soccer’) is the Football Association (FA), which was
formed in 1863. The association’s chief function is to promote and protect the
interests of the game and to prevent infringement of the agreed rules; it also arranges
for the instruction of promising young players and organises various matches and
competitions, including the international matches played by England, the Amateur
Cup competition (see p. 498), two national youth competitions, and the competi¬
tion for its own leading trophy—the Football Association Challenge Cup. Over
350 clubs are registered with the FA—more than 200 as full members and between
130 and 140 as associate members. Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own
controlling bodies: the Scottish Football Association, which is responsible for the
organisation of international games and the Scottish Football Cup fixtures; and the
Irish Football Association.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played weekly) are
controlled by the Football League, which comprises the major professional clubs
in these countries. In Scotland, the Scottish Football League is m charge of the
weekly games; Northern Ireland has its own league. Clubs belonging to the
English and Scottish Leagues are organised in divisions, the members of which
compete against one another for the respective league championships. Their
positions in the divisional tables are decided at the end of the season by the number
of points gained for wins or draws, the totals determining promotion or relegation.
Several million people stake small weekly sums on the results of the matches in
the league competitions by filling in what are known as ‘pools’ coupons; the
aggregate sum staked during the 1958-59 season was £75,675,000. The odds
against winning anything in the pools are very great, but the prizes, which are
tax free, are extremely high—last season, individual payments of £300,000 were
occasionally made. The promoters of the pools deduct varying amounts from the
stakes for commission and expenses, including payments to the leagues for the
use of league fixture lists. , . ,
The annual competition for the FA cup is organised on a knock-out basis, and
any team, whether or not a member of the league, can enter. The final—the Cup
Final—is the most important football match of the year in England; it is always
played at Wembley Stadium, near London, which can accommodate some 100,000
spectators. The Scottish Cup Final is played at Hampden Park, m Glasgow.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
498
The international matches between England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, in which
distinguished amateur players sometimes appear, also excite great interest, as do
the matches between British teams and teams from European and South American
countries.
There are many more amateur association football players than there are pro¬
fessionals (the comparative figures are about 30,000 amateurs, including schoolboys
and members of the armed forces, to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals), but with one or
two notable exceptions their teams cannot compete on equal terms, since professional
teams are more systematically and intensively trained. Amateur teams compete
against each other for the Football Association Amateur Challenge Cup.
Rugby football or ‘rugger’ is played under the auspices of the Rugby Union
(a controlling body with functions similar to those of the Football Association),
which was established in 1871. The rules of the game are completely different
from those that govern soccer, and there are 15 players, instead of 11, in a
side. International matches between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and
France are played regularly at the leading rugby football grounds of each country,
including Twickenham, London—the headquarters of the Rugby Union. Other
important rugger matches are: the county championship competitions; the annual
match between the universities of Oxford and Cambridge; the Hospitals’ Cup final;
and the Services Challenge Cup final.
Seven-a-side football (a variant of rugby football) is also played by clubs and in
English and Scottish secondary schools.
Membership of the Rugby Union is strictly confined to amateur clubs, but in
the north of England there is a professional variant of the game played by teams
of 13 instead of 15, according to the rules of the Rugby League, which was insti¬
tuted in 1895. The Rugby League holds frequent international matches as well as
regular inter-county competitions. The match for its highest trophy—the Rugby
League Challenge Cup—is played at Wembley and is attended, on average, by
some 75,000 spectators.
Cricket
Cricket is often called the English national game. The exact date of its origin is
not recorded, but a variant of the game was undoubtedly being played during the
sixteenth century, and by the beginning of the eighteenth century it had gained
greatly in popularity both in the villages of England and on the larger country
estates.
The game has been played more or less as it is played today since the middle of
the eighteenth century, after it had been regularised, in 1744, by the adoption of a
generally accepted set of rules. In the early part of the period, a cricket club, formed
at the little Hampshire village of Hambledon, made an outstanding name for itself
and acquired a membership representative of patrons of cricket from all over
England; later, in 1787, the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), now the governing
body of cricket, was founded with its headquarters in the centre of London on a
site rented by a Thomas Lord. In the year 1809-10, the MCC, retaining the name
Lord's, moved its headquarters to a ground in Regent’s Park, and four years later
to another ground in the same neighbourhood, at St. John’s Wood, where it has
remained ever since.
Following the establishment of the MCC, the rules of cricket became stabilised;
other clubs that sprang up all over England during the nineteenth century recog¬
nised its authority, and nowadays all cricket is played according to the ‘laws of
cricket’ as laid down by the MCC in consultation with cricketing organisations in
Britain and the overseas Commonwealth.
SPORT
499
In England, cricket is played in schools and universities, and almost all towns
and villages have their cricket teams which play at least one match a week during
the season—roughly May to September. There are many thousands of cricket
grounds all over England—in the London area alone nearly 400 pitches are provided
by the county council besides many leased or owned by various well-established clubs.
Apart from the university match between Oxford and Cambridge and certain
representative games, such as Gentlemen versus Players, i.e. amateurs versus
professionals, the greater part of first-class cricket is played in a county champion¬
ship between seventeen ‘first-class counties’. (The other counties have a ‘minor
counties championship’ of their own.) Among famous grounds are the Oval,
Kennington, London, headquarters of the Surrey Cricket Club; Old Trafford,
Manchester; Headingley, Leeds; Trent Bridge, Nottingham; and Lord’s—centre of
cricket throughout the world.
In the late nineteenth century, cricket was played almost entirely by amateurs.
Nowadays, when first-class matches last three days and each county plays between
twenty and thirty matches in a season, most county players are professionals,
although there are still some amateurs who can afford the time to play regularly.
League cricket, which is a feature of the game in the north of England, is played by
teams mainly consisting of amateur Saturday afternoon players with one or more
professionals, many of whom are distinguished players from other Commonwealth
countries The MCC is an entirely amateur body, although sometimes retired
professional cricketers of ‘the highest merit’ are elected to honorary membership
of the club. { ,
In addition to county championships, matches known as test matches are
played regularly between England and other countries of the Commonwealth. The
first of these matches was played at Melbourne, Australia, in 1877, between Englan
and Australia. Present-day test matches are played against Australia for a mythical
trophy called the ‘Ashes’, and also against South Africa, New Zealand, the West
Indies, India and Pakistan. The matches last five days, and are played alternately in
England and in the country of the opposing eleven; they arouse great popular
interest and are widely reported in the press and on sound radio and television.
Hockey
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain for at
least five centuries and perhaps even longer; a haphazard form was played in schools
before football became popular, and many hockey clubs were to be found in the
London area during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Modern hockey, how¬
ever, dates from the formation (in 1886) of the Hockey Association, which standard¬
ised the rules. Nowadays there are several hundred hockey clubs affiliated to the
Hockey Association and a county championship was instituted in 1957, but the game
has never attracted the same wide public interest as football and cricket and there
are no professional county teams and no cup-ties. On the other hand, regular amateur
international matches (inaugurated in 1894) are played between England Scotland
Ireland and Wales, with overseas countries, e.g., France, the Netherlands, and
Denmark, sometimes taking part. . , rp.
In Britain, hockey is more commonly played by women than by men.
controlling bodies are: the All England Women’s Hockey Association (founde
1895) to which are affiliated some 1,550 girls’ schools and about 950 womens
clubs- and the Scottish Women’s Hockey Association. The first international
women’s hockey match took place in 1896. Nowadays, one such match is always
played at Wembley Stadium, and in 1959, spectators numbered 50,000 a record
attendance at hockey matches, including men’s games.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
500
Lacrosse
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North
America, is played mainly by women—in girls’ schools, at lacrosse clubs, and at
universities, at some of which it is also played by men. International lacrosse
matches are played, as well as regional matches by women’s teams representing the
east, west, south, north and midlands of England.
Netball
Netball is a popular game for girls and women, and is commonly played in
schools, youth clubs and women’s netball clubs all over the country. The controlling-
body is the All England Netball Association.
Polo
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British in
India, and brought to England by the 10th Hussars in 1869. The governing body
of British polo is the Hurlingham Polo Association to which all the Commonwealth
polo associations are affiliated.
Polo players are a very small section of the community, for the cost of the purchase
and upkeep of polo ponies is very high. However, many of the clubs now own
trained ponies which are hired out to members at moderate cost, thus enabling
promising young players with only modest incomes to learn and play polo. There
are about 1,400 players handicapped by the Hurlingham Polo Association, and the
number is still growing.
Public interest in polo has increased greatly since the end of the second world
war, and large numbers of spectators attend inter-club tournaments and matches
between high-handicap teams composed of players from several countries. The
better known polo grounds are those at Cowdray Park, Sussex; Windsor Great
Park; Cirencester Park, Gloucestershire; Tarporley, Cheshire; and Tidworth on
Salisbury Plain.
Lawn Tennis
A form of tennis has been played out of doors from the earliest times; but
modem lawn tennis dates from about 1873, when it began to take its place with
cricket as one of the British national summer games. In 1877, the words ‘and
lawn tennis’ were added to the title of the All England Croquet Club at Wimbledon
and in the same year the first championships were played; the Lawn Tennis
Association, the controlling body of the game in Britain, was founded in 1888.
The governing body of the game in the world is the International Lawn Tennis
Federation, with headquarters in London and Paris.
The number of people who play lawn tennis has greatly increased during the
past sixty years; the game is played nowadays in most secondary schools (particu¬
larly in girls’ schools) throughout the summer months, by families in their own
gardens, and at the innumerable tennis clubs that exist throughout Britain. Many
local authorities also provide tennis courts in parks and recreation grounds, where
members of the public may play at a very low cost.
The annual amateur championships, held for two weeks at the end of June and
beginning of July, at Wimbledon, London, are the main event of the lawn tennis
season. These championships, for which men and women of many nationalities com¬
pete, draw large crowds; there is accommodation for over 30,000 spectators in the
grounds of the Wimbledon Club where the matches are played—14,000 can be
accommodated round the centre court where the championship finals take place.
Other tournaments which attract public attention are: the British Hardcourt
Championships; the British Junior Championships, in which boys and girls com-
SPORT
501
pete; the county championships; the Service Championships; and the matches for
the public schools’ cup. An important international event is the tournament
for the Davis Challenge Cup (for men), in which a number of countries compete.
Britain and the United States of America also compete annually for the Wightman
Cup (for women).
Golf
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in the other
countries of the United Kingdom until towards the end of the nineteenth century.
Since then, however, it has gained steadily in popularity, and nowadays there are
golf courses in the vicinity of many towns and villages—some owned by local
authorities, but the majority owned by golf clubs. The headquarters of the Royal
and Ancient Golf Club is St. Andrews, Scotland. .
The main event of the golfing year is the British Open Golf Championship,
which was first played in i860; other important matches include the Walker Cup
(for amateurs) and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played between Britain
and America; the Amateur Championship; and the Ladies Championship.
Bowls
The game of bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century.
Nowadays the flat green game (which is quite different from the American game)
is regulated, as far as the English Bowling Association is concerned, by the Inter¬
national Bowling Board (IBB), founded in 1905. The Bowling Associations of
Ireland, Scotland and Wales also come under and play to the laws as laid down
by the IBB, but there are other bowling associations in England the English
Bowling Federation, the Crown Green Association and the English Womens
Bowling Association—which are not under the IBB’s control.
During the summer, bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in winter,
it is played on indoor greens, of which there are a fairly large number throughout
the country. At one time regarded as a pastime for the elderly, the game has now
greatly increased in favour—nearly 2,450 bowling clubs in 34 counties of Eng an
are affiliated to the English Bowling Association alone, and international, national
and inter-county matches are played.
Other Outdoor Games
Other outdoor games played in Britain include: croquet, which originated in
Ireland and reached the height of its popularity during the nineteenth century,
although it is still played on a limited scale according to rules laid down by the
Croquet Association, founded in 1900; and curling, a winter variant of bowls
played on ice, which has been popular for more than three centuries in Scotland,
the Royal Caledonian Club being recognised throughout the world as the controlling
body of the game.
Athletics
Amateur athletics, which include running (track, road and cross-country),
relay racing, jumping, hurdling, throwing and race-walking, are governed by the
Amateur Athletic Association (AAA), which was founded in 1880 to encouiage,
promote and control amateur athletics, to improve the management of amateur
athletic meetings by the establishment of uniform regulations and to promote
annual championship matches. The association, whose membership increased
rapidly from small beginnings, is now organised from club to national level by
502
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
honorary officers and managed by representative members appointed by the
northern, midland, southern and Welsh areas and by affiliated clubs and associa¬
tions (amateur athletic clubs, schools and youth organisations), of which there are
hundreds throughout England and Wales. The AAA employs five full-time
national coaches, towards the cost of which it receives grants from the Ministry
of Education. These coaches conduct courses, including courses at a summer
school, for teachers and athletes wishing to qualify by examination as honorary
coaches; some 2,000 qualified honorary coaches give voluntary services in the
counties and districts of England and Wales. Scotland and Northern Ireland have
their own amateur athletic associations, with functions analogous to those of the
AAA; there is also a separate Women’s AAA.
International athletics and the selection of teams representing the United King¬
dom are dealt with by the British Amateur Athletic Board, which is composed of
representatives of the three national associations and is affiliated to the International
Amateur Athletic Federation.
Track meetings of athletics are held throughout Britain from April to October.
The main events in England and Wales are: the AAA championships for men and
international matches held at the White City, London; area and county champion¬
ships; and the universities, Services, business houses and schools championship
meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country running from October to
March, and international, county and area cross-country championships are held.
Teams representing Great Britain and Northern Ireland compete in the Olympic
Games (held every four years), and separate teams representing England, Wales,
Scotland, and Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, the most
recent of which were held at Cardiff, in Wales, in 1958.
Highland Gaines. The Highland games are traditional gatherings of local people
in the Highlands of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting
the weight, and throwing the hammer), and dancing and piping competitions take
place. Among the better known Highland games are the Northern Meeting at
Inverness, the Braemar Gathering on Deeside (traditionally attended by the royal
family), the Argyllshire Gathering at Oban, and the meeting at Aboyne. The
Highland games attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world.
Country Sports
The most popular country sports are hunting, shooting and fishing; these are
old-established sports with a long history, and they still play a considerable part
in the life of the countryside.
Hunting
In Britain hunting means primarily hunting the fox on horse-back with a pack
of hounds especially bred for the purpose, but it also includes stag-hunting, which
preceded fox-hunting and is still pursued—mainly in Devon and Somerset;
hunting the hare, either on foot with beagles or with harriers when the followers
are mounted; and otter-hunting along the banks of rivers.
Fox-hunting originated some 200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for the
landed gentry and local farmers, it has gradually widened its appeal, in spite of the
fact that it is an expensive pastime for those who are not farmers. Farmers now
outnumber all others in the hunting field, but a large number of other people,
including many who live in towns, take a keen interest in the sport.
There are between 190 and 200 packs of hounds in England and Wales, 26 in
Ireland, and 10 in Scotland. The packs range in size from the large establishments
in the ‘shires’, i.e. the midlands of England (e.g., the Belvoir, the Cottesmore, the
Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud 6-cylinder saloon: one
af the world’s most luxurious cars.
Jaguar XK150 drophead coupe: a new version,
with disc brakes; it develops 250 b.h.p.
The Triumph Herald: a new British light car of
revolutionary design.
A Cooper Climax, one of several prize-winning
British racing cars, winning at Oulton Park.
The London-Birmingham motorway, one of the new roads, under construction (see pp. 370-7.),
A competitor
in the
Highland Games
at Blackford,
Perthshire,
throwing the
28 lb. weight.
Miss Pat Smythe riding Mr. Pollard at the Inter¬
national Horse Show, White City London.
Ian Black (Scotland), European and Empire champion
and holder of several British records.
Peter Radford (England), British 100 yards
champion 1959.
Norman Sheil (England), world amateur
pursuit champion 1955 and 1958.
SPORT
5°3
Quorn, and the Fernie) where mounted followers may be two hundred or more,
to small kennels in the west and north, where hunting is often on foot.
The fox-hunting season proper starts in early November and lasts until April;
it is preceded by cub-hunting, i.e. the hunting of young foxes, when young hounds
are taught the science of hunting. Meets of the fox-hounds, held on village greens,
at cross-roads, or in the grounds of country houses, and attended by many people
who do not intend to ride to hounds, are one of the most picturesque sights of the
winter countryside. At the end of the season, most hunts organise steeple-chases,
known as point-to-points, which are patronised by large crowds.
Hunts are financed mainly by the subscriptions of their members and with the
aid of the farmers, whose support enables fox-hunting to continue to flourish,
sometimes, however, the Master of Fox-hounds (MFH), who is in charge of the
hunt, must bear a proportion of the cost.
Shooting
Shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the early part
of the nineteenth century; nowadays, it consists mainly of grouse shooting, partridge
shooting, pheasant shooting and wildfowling (duck and geese). There is also some
snipe and woodcock shooting. t
There is virtually no free shooting in any part of the United Kingdom. In the first
place a gun licence or a game licence must be applied for and purchased annually,
and secondly, nearly all game birds are to be found on privately owned land, shot
over either by the owner and his friends or by syndicates who have leased the
shooting. However, in some parts of the more remote countryside, rough shooting
may be enjoyed in a less formal way. Much of the country s wild-fowling is
controlled by the Wildfowling Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
through its numerous clubs. < ,
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other game birds are preserved , that
is to say, there is a ‘close season’ during which they are protected under the game
laws and allowed to breed in security, under the care of privately employed game-
keepers on numerous estates. The grouse, partridge and pheasant seasons open on
12th August, 1st September and xst October, severally and last for between four
and five months. Grouse shooting takes place mostly in Scotland, northern England
and North Wales, where the main grouse moors are to be found; partridge an
pheasant shooting in nearly every county of England, Waks and Scotlan
former mainly over farm land, and the latter in or near woodland, and wildfowhng
on the marshes and fenlands of the coastal areas. ,
Deer stalking, which derives its name from the fact that, in order to get a
effective shot, a very cautious approach is needed (since red deer have a keen scent,
are far-sighted, and take alarm at the slightest sound), is mainly a sport of the
Highlands of Scotland. The tracts of land on which the deer are P^serv<M (the
close season lasts from June to October) are known as deer forests . although some
of them are almost devoid of trees; deer forests range in size from 9,000 or 10,000
acres to over 30,000 acres.
^Fishing is the most popular of the country sports in that it is withm the reach
of everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and line
to the experienced fly-fisherman), and that many more people fish in their leisure
h°ThetlC)Uts^£mding Sforms of the sport in Britain are salmon and trout fishing.
Trout streams are to be found in most parts of the country, and in Scotland there
5°4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are also many hundreds of lochs which provide good sport. Salmon fishing may be
enjoyed on many rivers in England and North Wales, but the best salmon rivers are
to be found in Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England and Wales, the most
widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish (e.g., pike, perch, carp, roach,
tench, chub and bream), and the National Federation of Anglers (NFA) has more
than a million members. Match angling—competitive fishing for coarse fish by
weight—is a feature of the many angling clubs affiliated to the NFA, particularly
in the midlands and north of England; a national angling championship, composed
of 110 teams of 12 anglers, is organised annually by the NFA; and the NFA enters
a team in the International Angling Competition.
Fishing around the coasts is another popular pastime, while deep-sea fishing for
tuna and shark has gained many adherents since the end of the second world war.
Coastal and deep-sea fishing is free to all, but, as a rule, freshwater fishing has
to be paid for. Most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs and associations; trout
and salmon fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club, stay at a hotel with
its own fishing rights, or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. The
cost of salmon fishing is particularly high.
Indoor Games
Indoor games played in Britain include billiards, table tennis, and badminton,
which are enjoyed by large numbers of people, and for which facilities are provided
in social clubs of every kind, including youth clubs; and games such as real tennis
(a game which originated in thirteenth-century France), squash rackets, rackets and
fives, which are less national games than games of the schools, universities and
specialised clubs. Annual championships are held in all these games, the controlling
bodies of which are: the Billiards Association and Control Council; the Badminton
Association of England and the Scottish Badminton Union; the Tennis, Rackets
and Fives Association; and the Squash Rackets Association.
Basket-ball, an indoor variant of netball which originated in the United States
of America during the nineteenth century, is also played in Britain, primarily by
men. Matches in the game are included among the Olympic events—the controlling
body in Britain being the Amateur Basket Ball Association.
Aquatic Sports
The most commonly practised of the aquatic sports are rowing, sailing and
swimming. All three are included in the Olympic events and the Commonwealth
Games.
Rowing
Rowing as a pastime is enjoyed by people from all sections of the community,
and as a sport, it arouses considerable public interest. The two annual rowing events
which excite the greatest enthusiasm are the University Boat Race, which originated
in 1820 and has been rowed annually on the Thames in the early spring since 1836;
and Henley Regatta, founded in 1839, which takes place each July at Henley-on-
Thames in Oxfordshire. Considerable interest is also shown in the Head of the
River Race from Mortlake to Putney, in March, in which between 200 and 300
eights row in procession—the largest assembly of racing craft in the world—and in
the regattas held at many riverside resorts every summer.
The University Boat Race, which provides one of the sights of London, is
between eight-oared crews from Oxford and Cambridge over a course of some
4J miles between Putney and Mortlake; it is watched by many thousands of rival
supporters gathered on both sides of the river. Victory in the boat race is a much-
coveted honour, but the winning eight receives no tangible award.
SPORT
505
Crews from all over the world compete at Henley Regatta, where various kinds
of races rowed over a straight course of one mile 550 yards are arranged, e.g., for
the Grand Challenge Cup, open to eight-oared crews from any nation, the Silver
Goblets for pair oars, the Diamond Sculls for single scullers, and the Ladies
Challenge Plate, open to crews from schools and colleges in the United Kingdom.
The art of oarsmanship is taught in many schools, universities and rowing
clubs, including women’s rowing clubs, throughout Britain; and women as well
as men compete in the European rowing championships. The Amateur Rowing
Association is the governing body of the sport.
Sailing
Enthusiasts have always devoted much of their leisure to yachting on the inland
waters and round the coasts of Britain, but since the end of the second world war
the sport, and in particular small boat sailing, has greatly widened its appeal.
Sail numbers registered in the Royal Yachting Association s small boat classes in
May 1958 were: Flying Fifteens 312, International Fourteens 703, National
Twelves 1,728, Fireflies 2,323, Merlin Rockets 945, National Eighteens 227,
Swordfish 196, and Redwings 201, and there is an even greater number of still
smaller sailing boats not included in the register.
Most British yacht racing is administered by the Royal Yachting Association,
subject to the rules of the International Yacht Racing Union, founded in 1907-
The main event of the inshore yachting season is the annual regatta at Cowes
in the Isle of Wight, the headquarters of the Royal Yacht Squadron, founded in
1812. Other events include the Round the Isle of Wight race and the races arranged
during the special yachting weeks (or fortnights) held at such sailing centres as
Poole in Dorsetshire, Bembridge in the Isle of Wight, Lowestoft in Suffo ,
Harwich and Burnham-on-Crouch in Essex, Plymouth in Devon, Falmouth in
Cornwall, and on the Scottish river Clyde.
Off-shore, or ocean, racing is based on rating and measurement rules drawn up
by the Royal Ocean Racing Club, founded in 1925. Typical courses are: Cowes to
Jersey (Channel Islands), Plymouth to La Rochelle (Charente Maritime, France),
and Harwich to the Hook of Holland. . . , ^
The famous yacht race between Britain and America for the America s Cup
(originally given by the Royal Yacht Squadron in 1851 and presented m 1857 to
the New York Yacht Club for competition by the owners of America, the winner
of the cup in 1851) is now held at increasingly long intervals, owing to the expense
involved. The cup has remained in America since the institution of the race, the
last challenger being the British yacht Sceptre, in 1958.
Swimming . ,
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the
seaside, and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people T re
existence of indoor swimming baths makes all-the-year swimming possible for
devotees of the sport. Considerable interest is taken in underwater swimming and
there are several clubs to which enthusiasts may belong. National and Internationa
swimming and diving championships are held annually-the controlling body m
England is the Amateur Swimming Association, and in Scotland the Scottish
Amateur Swimming Association. The association is also the controlling body fm
water polo, a team game played in swimming pools, which originated m Britain
around 1880. The Olympic Games include international water polo mate es.
Attempts to swim the Channel between various points on the coasts of France and
England-some of which are successful-are made by swimmers of many nation¬
alities every summer.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S°6
Other Aquatic Sports
Other aquatic sports enjoyed in Britain are canoeing, for which there are clubs
all over the country, most of them affiliated to the British Canoe Union, the
governing body of the sport; and punting, in which annual amateur championships
are held at Maidenhead on the river Thames.
Racing
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean first and foremost, horse¬
racing. Other forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing, pony-racing,
trotting races, and pigeon-flying.
Horse-racing
The history of the English turf proper began with the formation of the Jockey
Club in 1750, although horse-racing was known in Tudor times and even earlier.
The Jockey Club and the National Hunt Committee (founded in 1866) now
exercise control over all horse-racing in England and indirectly in many other
countries, and their rules are the basis of universal turf procedure.
There are two forms of racing: flat racing carried on from late March till
November under the authority of the Jockey Club; and steeple-chasing, conducted
under the rules of the National Hunt Committee.
The classic flat races are: the Two Thousand Guineas for colts and fillies,
run on the Newmarket course, owned by the Jockey Club; the One Thousand
Guineas for fillies only, also run at Newmarket; the Derby for colts and fillies,
run at Epsom; the Oaks for fillies only, also run at Epsom; and the St. Leger for
colts and fillies, run at Doncaster. The Derby is the outstanding event in the
racing calendar; it takes place annually in early June and the scene on Epsom Downs
on Derby Day is one of the most colourful and exciting of the sporting year. The
most fashionable race-meeting of the flat racing season takes place on the course
at Ascot in Berkshire. This meeting, which is held in mid-June, is known as
‘Royal Ascot’, and is traditionally attended by the Sovereign. The races for the
Gold Cup and the Royal Hunt Cup are run during the June Ascot week.
The best known steeple-chase is the Grand National, first run in 1839, and run
annually since then over the Aintree course near Liverpool. The race, which draws
immense crowds and arouses widespread interest (and some criticism) tests the
skill, stamina and courage of both horse and rider to the utmost. Important
steeple-chase meetings are also held at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire and on
many other courses from November to March.
There is racing on about 70 principal horse-racecourses situated all over the
country. At some of these, races are held on less than ten days in the year (although
the figure excludes courses where there is only one or two days’ racing, and point-
to-point courses), but on almost every weekday, there is racing on some course or
courses, and the total number of meetings in a year (again excluding point-to-point
racing) is about 700.
Horse-racecourses in general must be licensed by the Jockey Club or National
Hunt Committee and approved by the Racecourse Betting Control Board, set up
under the Racecourse Betting Act, 1928. On courses approved by the board, a
totalisator can be provided. From the money staked on the totalisator, the board is
empowered to deduct such percentage (at present approximately 10 per cent of
the total stakes) as it may determine, and the revenue secured in this way is applied,
after payment of the board’s operating expenses and taxation, to the improvement
of racing and horse breeding and the advancement of veterinary science and
education. Betting between bookmakers and members of the public is legal without
SPORT
507
restriction (except that no young person under eighteen years of age may place a
bet) on all courses—provision for such betting must be made on courses approved
by the Racecourse Betting Control Board. On most courses provision is also made
for off-the-course betting with either bookmakers or agents of the board, but
street betting away from the course is illegal.
Greyhound-racing
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926,
when the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester.
There are now some 200 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of which are
situated in or on the outskirts of large towns. Racing usually continues throughout
the year (although betting is limited by the Betting and Lotteries Act, 1934, to
104 days in any year), and meetings (which usually consist of eight races) are
generally held two or three times a week. The licensing authorities for greyhound
racing tracks are the county and county borough councils. Some twenty million
people a year visit the tracks. .
The main authority of the sport is the National Greyhound Racing Club,
founded in 1928; its functions include drawing up the rules of greyhound racing
and exercising strict discipline over all aspects of the sport. The National Grey¬
hound Racing Society—an association of 65 of the leading tracks, which was also
founded in 1928, accepts the rules of the National Greyhound Racing Club. Most
of the classic greyhound races, including the Derby at the White City, the Laurels
at Wimbledon, the St. Leger at Wembley, and the Cesarewitch at West Ham,
take place in the London area, although many other large centres have their big
H^here is a considerable volume of betting at greyhound race-meetings, both with
bookmakers and on the totalisator. Under the 1934 Act, the occupier of any licensed
greyhound track is empowered to operate a totalisator on the 104 ‘appointed days
and to deduct not more than 6 per cent of the stake money for operating expenses
before successful backers are paid, in addition to the 10 per cent tax payable to the
Government in respect of bets placed through the greyhound totalisator.
Other forms of racing
Coursing is an old form of dog-racing that takes place mainly in the north ot
England and among miners, the chief trophy being the Waterloo Cup, first
presented in 1836; pony-racing is generally carried on independently of any racing
authority, although meetings are held at four race-courses under the rules of the
Pony Turf Club; trotting races were introduced into Britain in 1876, and are held
principally in the north of England and in Scotland; and pigeon-flying became
popular after 1871, following the siege of Paris. Most towns in Britain have pigeon¬
racing clubs, many of which are enrolled under the National Homing Union,
formed in 1896.
Riding
Interest in the art of horsemanship continues to increase steadily and many more
people have learned to enjoy riding as a pastime since the end of the second world
war than at any time since the advent of the motor car. There are several hundred
riding schools in Britain, many of a high standard; membership of the British Horse
Society has risen to about 10,000; some 150 riding clubs have been established
since 1945; and the Pony Club (open to young people up to the age of seventeen
years) now has well over 30,000 members. Branches of the Pony Club (of which
there are more than 200) are attached to most hunts in Britain and there are also a
number of overseas branches.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
508
The British Horse Society, as the National Equestrian Federation of Great
Britain, is the authority on all matters relating to horses and ponies, including
breeding, training, riding, show jumping and dressage, and is responsible for
providing equestrian teams for the Olympic Games and all international events.
The society is also the parent body of the Pony Club and the riding clubs, and
in this capacity it organises and provides tests, lectures, demonstrations, courses
and examinations to further the knowledge and raise the standards of British
horsemanship and horsemastership.
Horse trials as well as hunter trials of all kinds are held throughout Britain
during the spring and summer. The three-day trials held each year—in April at
Badminton Park, Gloucestershire, and in September at Harewood, Yorkshire—are
among the outstanding equestrian events of the year. These trials include dressage,
cross-country and steeple-chase riding, and show jumping; some 20 one-day
trials on similar lines are held annually.
Show Jumping
Showjumping competitions are held each year at over 1,000 shows. The main
events take place during the Royal International Horse Show (held at the White
City, London, under the auspices of the British Horse Society towards the end
of July)—the outstanding contest being the individual jumping championship for
the King George V Gold Cup. Jumping competitions are also a feature of the
Horse of the Year Show, which takes place every October (since 1959, at Wembley
Stadium) and is acknowledged to be one of the finest indoor horse shows in the
world.
Since the end of the second world war, showjumping has attracted vast audiences
and has increased greatly in popularity; much credit for this must be given to the
British international show jumping teams who have competed in many countries
with success.
Boxing
Boxing as an English sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modem
form, and the one that has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates from
1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules which eliminated
much of the brutality that had hitherto characterised prize fighting, and made the
basis of the sport a trial of strength and skill.
Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs, and there are
various amateur boxing competitions carried out according to the rules of the
Amateur Boxing Association (ABA), which controls all amateur boxing, includ¬
ing schoolboy boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing in the three
Services.
Professional boxing is covered by the British Boxing Board of Control, founded
in 1929. The board has strict medical regulations which provide for the examina¬
tion of boxers before each contest, and the appointment of inspectors to ensure
that the regulations are observed and that all contests are ‘vetted’ to safeguard
against overmatching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests since the
presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late Lord Lonsdale in
1909. Competitions organised by the ABA are decided at ten weights: flyweight,
bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight, light welterweight, welterweight, light
middleweight, middleweight, light heavyweight and heavyweight. The fixed
weights in professional boxing are the same, except that there are no light welter¬
weight or light middleweight classes.
SPORT
509
Wrestling
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world, dating as far back as 430 B.c.
The style most commonly used in Britain nowadays is the ‘free style, which
evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and
Westmorland wrestling is still practised in the north of England and in Scotland,
and Cornish style wrestling (in which the contestants wear rough canvas jackets
by which all the holds must be taken) takes place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the
free and Graeco-Roman styles are used at the Olympic Games; in the Common¬
wealth Games only free style is wrestled. „T ..
Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British Amateur Wrestling
Association, which is affiliated to the International Amateur Wrestling Federation,
under the rules of which all wrestling is conducted. Professional wrestling is usually
in the ‘all-in’ or ‘free’ style, which is not the same as the free style used in amateur-
wrestling. Judo, a Japanese form of wrestling, has a large following, and is governed
by its own associations; it is an effective form of defence against physical or armed
assault.
Mountaineering
Mountaineering in Britain consists mainly of fell (or hill) walking, rock climbing,
and in winter when conditions are suitable, snow and ice climbing on the higher
bills of Scotland, northern England and North Wales. Rock climbing is practise on
the crags of Snowdonia in North Wales, the Highlands of Scotland, Skye, the English
Lake District, and Derbyshire, as well as on many smaller outcrops. Climbs are
graded from ‘Easy’ to ‘Exceptionally Severe’—the technical difficulties of the
higher grades compare with any that occur in other parts of the world. The popu¬
larity of mountaineering has increased enormously since the end of the second
world war, and a very large number of clubs (ranging from purely local organisations
to large bodies such as the Climbers’ Club, the Scottish Mountaineering Club and
the Fell and Rock Climbing Club) exist throughout the country. The Alpine Club,
founded in London in 1857, is the oldest mountaineering club in the world; the
representative body of the sport is the British Mountaineering Council the
Mountaineering Association organises courses of instruction in climbing bo 1 in
Britain and the Alps. Short courses for boys and girls over twelve years old and
for adults are held at a privately owned mountaineering school opened in 1959 m
NOlTri1tiffiamountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring most of the great
ranges of the world and in climbing their peaks, e.g., the first ascent of the Matter¬
horn in 1865, the first ascent of Everest in 1953, and of Kangchenjunga in 1955.
Motor Racing
Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain; more sports
cars have been built in Britain than in any other country; and British drivers
(including women drivers) have an international reputation second to none
British cars and British drivers take part in the international rallies and world
classic races which are the main features of the sport, and include the Britis
classic races-the British Grand Prix, and the Tourist Trophy for sports cars,
which was first held in 1905 in the Isle of Man and later at Dundrod in Northern
Ireland, and now takes place on the circuit at Goodwood, Sussex. There are also
several British national race meetings (16 in 1958) and British national ra hes
(8 in 1958), as well as a large number (over 2,500 in 1958) of day and night rallies
and trials, endurance tests, hill climbs and other events, arranged by various
driving clubs, of which there are over 400 in Great Britain.
5io
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The best known motor racing circuits (in addition to that at Goodwood) are
those at Silverstone, Northamptonshire; Crystal Palace, London; Brands Hatch,
Kent; Snetterton, Norfolk; Mallory Park, Leicestershire; Oulton Park, Cheshire;
Aintree, near Liverpool; and Charterhall, Berwickshire, in Scotland. The controlling
body of motor racing in Britain is the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), founded in
1897; the RAC is represented on the Federation Internationale de PAutomobile,
which draws up the regulations for international motor racing.
In addition to motor car racing, motor cycle races are held—the most important
contest of the year is that for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy—and motor cycle
speedway racing, which was introduced into Britain in 1928, and is governed by
the Speedway Control Board. The 1959 speedway championship of the world final
was held at Wembley Stadium.
Cycling
The internationally recognised body for cycle racing in the United Kingdom is
the British Cycling Federation—an amalgamation of the British League of Racing
Cyclists and the National Cyclists’ Union, founded in 1878. The federation controls
track racing and massed start racing in Britain, and is concerned with the cycling
events in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games and the annual world champion¬
ship. Time trials are organised by the Road Time Trials Council.
Touring by bicycle is also a popular pastime, and both the British Cycling
Federation and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (CTC) cater for this. The CTC is the
oldest touring club in the world and has a membership of 40,000. It has
consuls in all parts of the United Kingdom to give advice and practical help to
touring cyclists; its fifty district associations arrange holiday and week-end tours, and
competitions, rallies and rides of all kinds; and its special travel department gives
CTC members every facility, both at home and abroad, from the provision of
itineraries to the supplying of tickets, maps and other essential requirements.
Rifle Shooting
Full-bore (-303) rifle shooting is organised by the National Rifle Association,
founded in i860. The Imperial Meeting is held annually at Bisley Camp, Surrey,
and is open to subjects of the Queen, and to all-comers; the latter are restricted
to certain competitions. The meeting extends over 17 days, the first week consists
of team and individual competitions for members of the armed forces, and there
are three days for schools only. The premier award of the meeting is the Queen’s
Prize, which attracts about 1,250 entries.
Small-bore (-22) rifle shooting—carried out either on indoor ranges of 15 to 25
yards in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards—is also widely practised in
Britain. Some 4,000 clubs throughout the country are affiliated to county rifle
associations and the National Small-Bore Rifle Association (NSRA), which arranges
inter-club and inter-county competitions of various kinds for teams and individuals.
The NSRA also organises a National Bisley Meeting (attended by some 1,500
competitors in 1959), a Scottish meeting, and a pistol shooting competition at Bisley.
International small-bore rifle matches are fired against teams from overseas
countries, and British teams are entered for the world championships and the
competitions in the Olympic Games.
Other Forms of Sport
Other forms of sport enjoyed in Britain include:
Archery, for which British and world championships are organised by the Grand
National Archery Society, which held its first meeting in 1895.
SPORT
511
Clay Pigeon Shooting, in which the target is thrown automatically. The sport,
which is carried on according to the code laid down by the Clay Pigeon Shooting
Association, calls for skilled marksmanship, and international and national cham¬
pionships are held annually.
Fencing, which is practised at some schools and universities, and in fencing
clubs. Annual championships are held under the auspices of the Amateur Fencing
Association, founded in 1898.
Flying, which has been fostered as a sport by British flying clubs for the past
thirty years Racing is a feature of most club meetings and displays, the principal
event being the contest for the King’s Cup, first held in 1922. From time to time
alterations have been made in the rules and regulations governing this race, but
with few exceptions, the original intention of keeping it a ‘circuit of Britain has
been maintained.
Gliding, which is carried on under the auspices of the British Gliding Association.
Difficulties in obtaining suitable sites for gliding are somewhat hindering the
development of this sport, but, during 1958, 252 gliders were being operated by
over 4,500 pilots, and hours of flight exceeded 26,000. National gliding champion¬
ships are held bi-annually.
Ice-skating, which is enjoyed as a pastime by many people on indoor skating
rinks in towns, and outdoors in the country when, rarely, the temperature is
sufficiently low. Professional and amateur skating championships are staged in
Britain, and British figure skaters are internationally famous. The governing body
of the sport is the National Skating Association of Great Britain International
ice hockey matches are played under the auspices of the British Ice Hockey
Association.
Pot-holing, which is the exploration of caves. The principal organisation
concerned with the sporting and scientific aspects of this activity is the Bntis
Speleological Association, but there are many clubs operating in various parts of
the country, the oldest of which—The Yorkshire Ramblers Club (1893) and the
Derbyshire Pennine Club (1899)—were pioneers of the sport.
Ski-ing, which is a popular sport among the British, who first developed and
obtained international recognition for the Alpine competitions. Many people from
Britain spend annual winter sports holidays in Switzerland, Austria, France, Italy,
Norway, and elsewhere on the Continent; in recent years an increasing number have
taken advantage of the facilities offered at the Scottish skiing centres in the
Cairngorm mountain area and in Glen Coe. Training facilities are provrdcd at dry
ski-training sessions organised by the Central Council of Physical Recreation
co-operation with the Ski Club of Great Britain (the national governing body of
the sport) at many centres in England, Wales and Scotland.
APPENDIX
BRITISH CURRENCY AND CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATES,
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES, AND CONVERSION TABLES
BRITISH CURRENCY
4 farthings = 1 penny (Id.) 5 shillings —1 crown
12 pence =1 shilling (Is.) 20 shillings = l pound (£1)
2 shillings =1 florin 21 shillings = 1 guinea
2 shillings and 6 pence = 1 half-crown
Coins in common use are: half-penny, penny, threepenny piece, sixpence, shilling,
two shilling piece (florin), and half-crown.1
Bank of England notes are issued in denominations of 10s., £1 and £5. Notes of £1
and 10s. are legal tender in the United Kingdom for the payment of any amount;
notes of £5 are legal tender in England and Wales only.
Notes are issued by Scottish banks in denominations of £1, £5, £10, £20, £50 and
£100; though not legal tender, these notes are generally accepted in Scotland and
in some other parts of the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland banks issue notes
with denominations of £1, £5, £10, £50 and £100; these are legal tender in
Northern Ireland only.
Country
CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATES
Currency Unit
Currency Units
per £1 Sterling
(Par value as at
31st July, 1959)
Argentina. .
Australia . .
Austria
Belgium . .
Brazil
Canada
Ceylon
China (People’s Republic)
Denmark . .
East Africa
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Ghana
Greece
Hong Kong
Peso
Australian Pound
Schilling
Belgian Franc. .
Cruzeiro
Canadian Dollar
Ceylon Rupee
Jen Men Piao (Yuan)
Danish Krone
East African Shilling
Franc ..
Deutsche Mark
British West African
Drachma
Hong Kong Dollar
ound
238-5 (6)
1- 25
72-8
140-0
52-0 {a)
2- 70 (6)
13-33
6-90 (a)
19- 37
20- 0
13-82
11-74
1-0
84-0
16-0
(a) Official rate: other rates are in operation for certain types of transactions.
(b) Average of daily mean telegraphic transfer rates in July 1959.
1 Silver and cupro-nickel coins (3d., 6d., is., 2s., 2s. 6d.) are legal tender for payments up
to £2; nickel-brass threepenny pieces up to 2 shillings; and bronze (^d. and id.) up to i2d.
512
appendix
513
CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATES contd.)
India
Irish Republic . .
Italy
Japan
Malaya, Federation of . .
Netherlands, The
New Zealand
Nigeria, Federation of . .
Norway . .
Pakistan . .
Portugal . .
Rupee . .
Irish Pound . .
Lira
Yen
Malayan Dollar
Guilder (Florin)
New Zealand Pound . .
British West African Pound.
Krone . .
Pakistan Rupee
Escudo
Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Federa¬
tion of . .
Singapore
South Africa, Union of . .
Spain
Sweden . .
Switzerland
Turkey
United States of America
Union of Soviet Socialist Re¬
publics
West Indies, The
Jamaica . . • • • •
Barbados, Leeward Islands, |
Trinidad and Tobago, and j*
Windward Islands J
Rhodesian Pound
Malayan Dollar
South African Pound
Peseta . .
Krona . .
Swiss Franc . .
Turkish Pound
Dollar . .
Rouble
Jamaican Pound
British West Indian Dollar . .
13-33
1-0
1,745-0
1,010-0
8-57
10-6
1-0
1-0
20-0
13- 33
80-0
1-0
8-57
1-0
168-0
14- 5
12-12 (b)
7-87 (a)
2-80
11-20 (a)
1-0
4-80
(a) Official rate: other rates are in operation for certain types of transactions.
(b) Average of daily mean telegraphic transfer rates in July 1959-
BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES AND THEIR METRIC EQUIVALENTS
Measures of Length
1 inch = 2-54 centimetres
12 inches = 1 foot =30-48 centimetres
3 feet =1 yard = 0-914 metre
1,760 yards =1 mile = 1-609 kilometres
Measures of Area
1 square inch = 6-451 square centimetres
1 square inch = 6-451 square centimetres
144 square inches=l square foot =929 03 square centimetres
9 square feet = 1 square yard = 0-836 square metre
4,840 square yards
640 acres
square yard = 0-836 square metre
= 1 acre = 0-405 hectare
: 1 square mile = 2-59 square kilometres
5i4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES AND THEIR METRIC
EQUIVALENTS {contd.)
Measures of Capacity
1 gill =0-142 litre
4 gills —\ pint =0-568 litre
2 pints =1 quart =1-136 litres
4 quarts = 1 gallon = 4-546 litres
2 gallons =1 peck = 9-092 litres
4 pecks =1 bushel =36-37 litres
8 bushels = 1 quarter = 2-909 hectolitres
Measures of Weight (Avoirdupois)
1 ounce (oz.) =28-350 grams
16 oz. pound (lb.) = 0-454 kilogram
141b. =1 stone (st.) = 6-35 kilograms
28 lb. =1 quarter (qtr.) =12-7 kilograms
4 quarters (112 lb.) = l hundredweight (cwt.) = 50-8 kilograms
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.) =1 long ton = 1-016 metric tons
2,000 1b. =1 short ton = 0-907 metric ton
DOUBLE CONVERSION TABLES FOR WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them, as
the case may be—e.g., 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
0-621
1-243
864
485
107
728
350
971
592
214
0-404
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
Kilo¬
grams
Av.
Pounds
Hecto- English
litres Bushels
Litres
Pints
Litres Gallons
per
Hectare
per
Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
841
409
978
546
114
682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
0-898
1-796
695
593
491
389
287
186
8-084
8-982
113
■226
■340
■453
566
•679
•793
8-906
10- 019
11- 132
APPENDIX
515
THERMOMETRICAL TABLE
Water boils
Water freezes
Blood heat
Fahrenheit Centigrade
212° 100°
32° 0°
98-4° 36-9°
Reaumur
80°
0°
29-5°
To convert:
°Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by -§.
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by f, then add 32.
“Fahrenheit into “Reaumur: subtract 32, then multiply by
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide to
further reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers in the United Kingdom are asked to note that the Central Office of Informa¬
tion reference documents marked with an asterisk and listed as free, are only available
free of charge from United Kingdom Information Offices overseas; in the United
Kingdom they may be obtained, on payment of a small charge, from the Central
Office of Information, Reference Division Distribution Unit, Hercules Road, West¬
minster Bridge Road, London, S.E.i.
In the United States, equivalent free material can be supplied by British Information
Services, 45 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, N. Y.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Information can be
purchased from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These pam¬
phlets are listed here with their respective prices {postage extra, as on all H.M.S.O.
publications, if ordered direct).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from
H.M. Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
Publications for which no price is given are known to be out of print.
I. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Physical Background
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
Hoskins, W. G. The Making of the English Landscape
Hodder & Stoughton
Manley, G. Climate and the British Scene Collins
Matthews, L. H. British Mammals Collins
Miller, Terence. Geology and Scenery in Britain Batsford
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Face of Britain. 3rd rev. edn
For the British Council Longmans
 The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse Longmans
 Man and the Land Collins
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a Geographic and
Economic Survey. 4th rev. edn Longmans
Steers, J. A. The Coastline of England and Wales
Cambridge University Press
 The Sea Coast Collins
Tansley, Sir Arthur. The British Islands and their Vegeta¬
tion. 2 vols. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
Witherby, H. F. and others. Handbook of British Birds. 5 vols.
rev. edn Witherby
British Regional Geology Handbooks HMSO
Weather Report of the Meteorological Office Monthly
HMSO
s. d.
1952 22 6
1955 25 o
1952 25 o
1952 25 o
1953 18 o
1957 2 6
1950 60 o
1955 25 o
1954 42 o
1946 35 o
1953 25 o
1950 84 o
1958 240 o
1946 2 6
to to
1954 5 o
516
2 3
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Demographic Background
Bowen, Ian. Population Cambridge University Press/Nisbet
Carr-Saunders, A. M., Jones, D. Caradog, and Moser, C. A.
A Survey of Social Conditions in England and Wales
Oxford University Press
Cauter, T. and Downham, J. S. The Communication of
Ideas: A Study of Contemporary Influences in Urban Life
For The Reader's Digest, Chatto & Windus
Freeman,'T. W. Conurbations of Great Britain
Manchester University Press
Himmelweit, Hilda T., and others. Television and the Child :
An Empirical Study of the Effect of Television on the Young
Oxford University Press
Political and Economic Planning. Britain and Common¬
wealth Migration
  Social Mobility in Britain, edited by D. V. Glass
For PEP Routledge
Scott, J. D. Life in Britain Eyre & Spottiswoode
Young, Michael and Willmott, Peter. Family and Kinship
in East London Routledge
Annual Reports
Registrar General, Northern Ireland
For 1957 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland For i957 HMSO
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
Part I. Medical: Tables 1957
Part II. Civil: Tables 195? uwon
Part III. Commentary 1956 HMSO
Census Reports of Great Britain 1801-1931 (Guides to
Official Sources No. 2) HMSO
Census 1951. England and Wales
General Report
General Tables
Report on Usual Residence and Workplace
Report on Greater London and Five other Conurbations
F HMSO
Census 1951. Great Britain. One Per Cent Sample Tables
Part I. Ages and Marital Conditions, Occupations, Indus¬
tries, Housing of Private Households HMSO
Part II. Characteristics and Composition of Private House¬
holds, Non-Private Households, Education, Birth¬
place and Nationality, Fertility, Welsh and Gaelic
Languages, Conurbation Supplement HMSO
Census of Northern Ireland 1951- Final Report Tr,,rr,^
Belfast, HMSO
Census of Scotland 1951. Preliminary Report HMSO
Vol. I. City and County Reports1
Part 1. City of Edinburgh
Part 2. City of Glasgow HMSU
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
5i7
s. d.
1954 10 6
1958 25 o
1954 25 o
1959 37 6
1958 42 o
1957 2 6
1954 36 o
1956 25 o
1957 25 °
1958 6 o
1958 20 o
1958 20 o
1959 11 6
1958 16 6
1951 3 6
1958 13 o
1957 52 6
1957 65 o
1957 io5 0
1952 U 6
1952 4° 0
1955 *5 °
1951 3 0
1952 7 6
1952 10 o
1 Series of reports are being issued comprising
statistics of predominantly local interest.
518 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Census of Scotland (contd.)
Vol. II. Population of Towns and Larger Villages (excluding
Burghs) and of Urban and Rural Areas HMSO 1952
Vol. III. Population, Age, Sex and Conjugal Condition,
Birthplace and Nationality, Gaelic-Speaking Population
and Housing HMSO 1955
Vol. IV. Occupations and Industries HMSO 1957
Census of Wales (including Monmouthshire) 1951. Report on
Welsh-Speaking Population HMSO 1955
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics 1815-
1950, by N. H. Carrier and J. R. Jeffery HMSO 1953
Internal Migration: Some Aspects of Population Movement
within England and Wales, by Mary Newton and J. R.
Jeffery HMSO 1951
Matters of Life and Death [prepared by the General Register
Office]. 4th edn HMSO 1959
Picture of Wales, A [prepared by COI for the Home Office]
HMSO 1956
Royal Commission on Population. Report Cmd 7695 HMSO 1949
The Status of Married Women in England
Reference Paper R.3527 COI 1957
Women in Britain Reference Paper R.3904 COI 1958
II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
General Survey
Campion, Lord, and others. British Government since 1918
Allen & Unwin 1950
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 3rd edn
Cambridge University Press 1950
 The Law and the Constitution. 5th edn
University of London Press 1959
 The Queen’s Government Penguin Books 1954
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History of Modern
Britain. 5th edn Black 1953
Le May, G. British Government 1914-1953: Select Docu¬
ments Methuen 1954
Morrison, Herbert. Government and Parliament: A Survey
from the Inside Oxford University Press 1954
Wade, E. C. S. and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law.
5th edn Longmans 1955
Wheare, K. C. Government by Committee: An Essay on the
British Constitution Oxford University Press 1955
The Monarchy
Laird, Dorothy. How the Queen Reigns
Hodder Stoughton 1959
Morrah, Dermot. The Work of the Queen Kimber 1959
Nicolson, Sir Harold. King George the Fifth: His Life and
Reign Constable 1952
Pope-Hennessy, James. Queen Mary Allen & Unwin 1959
s. d.
4 o
32 6
120 o
7 6
8 6
1 6
3 6
9 °
free*
free*
16 o
18 o
18 o
3 6
25 o
27 6
37 6
25 o
25 o
21 o
42 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
519
Tanner, Lawrence E. The History of the Coronation Pitkin
Wheeler-Bennett, John W. King George VI: His Life and
j^e-gn Macmillan
British Constitutional Monarchy, by Sir Ernest Barker, rev.
cdn COI
Queen and People, by Dermot Morrah For COI, HMSO
Parliament
Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A Parliamentary
Dictionary Butterworth
Bromhead, P. A. The House of Lords and Contemporary
Politics 1911-1957 Routledge
 Private Members’ Bills in the British Parliament
Routledge
Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor. The Party System in Great Britain
Pheonix House
Butler D. E. British General Election of 1955 Macmillan
■  The Electoral System in Britain 1918-51
Oxford University Press
Campion, Lord. An Introduction to the Procedure of the
House of Commons, 3rd edn Macmillan
■  and others. Parliament: A Survey Allen & Unwin
 Consultant Editor-, Fellowes, Sir Edward and Cocks,
T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas Erskine May’s Treatise on the
Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament
Butterworth
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parliament.5th edn Hansard Society
Hansard Society. The British Party System. 2nd edn
Hansard Society
 The Future of the House of Lords Hansard Society
 Lords and Commons: How Parliament Began and How
it Works, and edn Hansard Society
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Parliament. 2nd edn
Cambridge University Press
Mackenzie, K. R. The English Parliament Penguin Books
McKenzie, R. T. British Political Parties: The Distribution
of Power within the Conservative and Labour Parties
Heinemann
Ross, J. F. S. Elections and Electors Eyre & Spottiswoode
Schofield, A. N. Parliamentary Elections. 3rd edn Shaw
Taylor, Eric. The House of Commons at Work
Penguin Books
‘The Times’. The House of Commons 1955 ‘The Times'^
 Supplement ^he Times
Wilding, Norman and Laundy, Philip. An Encyclopaedia o
t, ,. . Cassell
Parliament
Report from the Select Committee on Procedure HMSU
The British Parliament i_T71TO^
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4157 HMSO
The Organisation of Political Parties in Britain
Reference Paper R.4243 COI
2 L
1952
1958
1958
1959
1956
1958
1956
1953
1955
1953
1958
1952
1957
1958
1952
1954
1954
1957
1950
1955
1955
1959
1951
1955
1957
1958
1959
1959
1959
s. d.
17 6
60 o
free*
2 o
21 o
30 o
25 o
25 o
24 o
25 o
24 o
27 6
105 o
18 o
10 6
10 o
2 o
60 o
3 6
30 o
42 o
84 o
7 6
12 6
2 6
63 o
3 °
2 o
free*
520
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary Elections in Britain
Reference Paper R.3979 COI
1958
s. d.
free*
The Civil Service
Bridges, Sir Edward [now Lord]. Portrait of a Profession:
The Civil Service Tradition Cambridge University Press
30
60
40
3
30
The Privy Council, Her Majesty’s Government, Government Departments
Bridges, Sir Edward [now Lord]. Treasury Control
Athlone Press 1950 2 6
Chester, D. N., Editor, amf Willson, F. M. G. The Organisa¬
tion of British Central Government, 1914-1956
Allen & Unwin 1957
Finer, S. E. A Primer of Public Administration Muller 1950
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Cabinet Government. 3rd edn
Cambridge University Press 1959
Keith, A. Berriedale. The British Cabinet System. 2nd edn
rev. by N. H. Gibbs Stevens 1952
Lee, Sir Frank. Home and Overseas Responsibilities of the
Board of Trade (Stamp Memorial Lecture 1958)
Athlone Press 1959
Mackenzie, W. J. M. and Grove, J. W. Central Administration
in Britain Longmans 1957
Neill, Desmond G., Editor. Devolution of Government: The
Experiment in Northern Ireland
For the Royal Institute of Public Administration
Allen & Unwin 1953
New Whitehall Series For the Royal Institute of Public
Administration
The Colonial Office, by Sir Charles Jeffries Allen & Unwin 1956
The Foreign Office, by Lord Strang and others
Allen & Unwin 1955 18 o
The Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam Allen & Unwin 1954 18 o
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, by Sir
Geoffrey King Allen & Unzvin 1958
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, by Sir
Gilmour Jenkins Allen & Unwin 1959
The Ministry of Works, by Sir Harold Emmerson
Allen & Umvin 1956
The Scottish Office, by Sir David Milne Allen & Unwin 1958
Know Your Ministry: A Description of Government Depart¬
ments Whose Operations Affect the Conduct of Business
Europa Publications 1959
Government Administration in Wales Cmnd 631 LIMSO 1959
Handbook on Scottish Administration HMSO 1956 2 6
Her Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Public Departments
[6 issues a year] HMSO 1 6
How Northern Ireland is Governed: Central and Local
Government in Northern Ireland, by Hugh Shearman
Belfast, HMSO 1951 6
Scottish Administration Reference Paper R.3363 COI 1956 free*
18
18
18
18
IS
21
25
1
1950
3 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Campbell, G. A. The Civil Service in Britain Penguin Books
Dunnill, Frank. The Civil Service: Some Human Aspects
Allen & Unwin
Monck, Bosworth. How the Civil Service Works
Phoenix House
Wheare, K. C. The Civil Service in the Constitution
Athlone Press
British Civil Service 1854-1954, by Wyn Griffith HMSO
Royal Commission on the Civil Service i953_55 (Priestley
Commission). Report Cmd 9613 HMSO
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.4123 CO I
Local Government
Chester, D. N. Central and Local Government: Financial
and Administrative Relations Macmillan
Clarke, J. J. The Local Government of the United Kingdom.
15th rev. edn Pitman
  Outlines of Local Government of the United Kingdom.
iSthrev.edn _ . Pitmar\
The Corporation of London: Its Origin, Constitution and
p)utjes Oxford University Press
Hadfield, E. C. R. and MacColl, J. E. British Local
Government Hutchinson
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of Local Govern¬
ment and Administration. 6th rev. edn Butterworth
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Local Government
Macmillan
Jackson, W. Eric. The Structure of Local Government in
England and Wales. 3rd edn Longmans
Maud, Sir John and Finer, S. E. Local Government in
England and Wales. 2nd edn Oxford University Press
Morrison, Herbert. How London is Governed. 2nd edn
James Barrie
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 3rd edn Shaw
Warren, J. H. The Local Government Service
Allen & Unwin
 The English Local Government System. 3rd edn
Allen & Unwin
Annual Report
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1958 Cmnd 737 HMSO
Local Government Finance (England and Wales) General
Grant Order, 1958 HMSO
Local Government Finance (Scotland) General Grant (Scot¬
land) Order, 1958
Local Government in Scotland [prepared by the Scottish Borne
Department and CO/] HM
Local Government in Britain Tr;i/ro^
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P4154 HMSO
The Corporation of the City of London
Reference Paper R.3654 COl
521
s. d.
1955 3 6
1956 18 o
1952 25 o
1954
1954 I o
1955 6 6
1959 free*
1951 30 o
1956 3° 0
1957 20 o
1950
1948 7 6
1957 45 °
1958 30 o
1957 24 o
1953 7 6
1949 8 6
1954 65 o
1952 18 o
1953 J5 °
1959 10 6
1958 9
1958 4
1958 4 0
1959 2 6
1957 free*
522
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Law
Allen, Sir C. K. Administrative Jurisdiction Stevens
 Law and Orders Stevens
Amos, Sir Maurice. British Criminal Justice
For the British Council Longmans
Archer, Peter. The Queen’s Courts Penguin Books
Cavenagh, W. E. The Child and the Court Gollancz
Denning, Lord. The Changing Law Stevens
 Freedom under the Law Stevens
Devlin, Sir Patrick. Trial by Jury Stevens
Eddy, J. P. The Justices’ Handbook: A Guide to Law,
Evidence and Procedure in Magistrates’ Courts. 3rd edn
Stevens
Giles, F. T. The Magistrates’ Courts Penguin Books
 Children and the Law Penguin Books
Gloag, W. M. and Henderson, A. D. Introduction to the
Laws of Scotland, 5th edn William Green
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law. 3rd edn
Butterworth
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law. 5th edn rev. by
D. J. LI. Davies John Murray
Rubinstein, Ronald. John Citizen and the Law. 4th edn
Penguin Books
Annual Reports
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice Act
For 1957-58 HMSO
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid Scheme
For 1957-58 HMSO
Criminal Statistics for England and Wales Annual
For 1958 Cmnd 803 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, Scotland Annual
For 1958 Cmnd 746 HMSO
Treatment of Offenders
Elkin, Winifred A. The English Penal System
Penguin Books
Fox, Sir Lionel W. English Prison and Borstal Systems
Routledge
Fry, Margery. Arms of the Law Gollancz
Grunhut, M. Juvenile Offenders Before the Courts
Oxford University Press
King, Joan F. S., Editor. The Probation Service Butterworth
The After-Care and Supervision of Discharged Prisoners.
Report of the Sub-Committee of the Advisory Council on
the Treatment of Offenders HMSO
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Prisons For 1958 Cmnd 825 HMSO
Prisons in Scotland For 1958 Cmnd 765 HMSO
Penal Practice in a Changing Society Cmnd 645 HMSO
Prediction Methods in relation to Borstal Training, by Dr.
Hermann Mannheim and Leslie T. Wilkins HMSO
1956
1956
1957
1956
1959
1953
1949
1956
1953
1949
1959
1952
1955
1953
1958
1959
1958
1959
1959
1957
1952
i95i
1956
1958
1958
1959
1959
1959
1955
s. d.
15 °
42 o
2 6
3 6
21 o
11 o
II o
15 °
18 o
2 6
3 6
75 °
17 6
24 o
5 °
3 6
2 6
8 o
4 o
3 6
32 o
8 6
25 o
25 o
2 6
9 6
3 °
2 6
17 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Prisons and Borstals, rev. edn HMSO
The Probation Service, Its Objects and Its Organisation.
rev. edn HMSO
The Probation Service in Scotland HMSO
Report of the Committee on Discharged Prisoners’ Aid
Societies Cmd 8879 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment
1949-53 Cmd 8932 HMSO
Work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office HMSO
The Police Service
Hart, J. M. The British Police Allen & Unwin
Moriarty, C. C. H. Police Procedure and Administration.
6th edn Butterworth
Scott, Sir Harold. Scotland Yard1 Andre Deutsch
Thomas, J. L. Police Administration. 2nd edn
Police Review Publishing Co.
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis
For 1958 Cmnd 800 HMSO
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary, Scotland
For 1958 Cmnd 770 HMSO
H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary (Counties and Boroughs
in England and Wales) For 1957-58 HMSO
Police. Choice of Careers. New Series No. 80 HMSO
The Police Service in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4164 COI
The Fire Service
Eyre, Frank a/zd Hadfield, E. C. R. The Fire Service To-day.
2nd edn Oxford University Press
Annual Reports
Fire Research Board For 1958 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England and Wales)
For 1957 Cmnd 499 HMSO
H.M. Inspector of Fire Services for Scotland
For 1958 Cmnd 747 HMSO
Fire Services in Britain Reference Paper R.2915 COI
1957
1952
1955
1953
1953
1955
I95i
1955
1955
1957
1959
1959
1959
1957
1959
1953
1959
1958
1959
1955
III. DEFENCE
Brassey’s Annual: The Armed Forces Year Book 1958, edited
by Rear-Admiral H. G. Thursneld Clowes 1958
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1958-59, edited by Leonard
Bridgman Sampson Low 1958
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1958-59, edited by Raymond Blackman
Sampson Low 1958
Kemp, Lt.-Cdr. P. K. Fleet Air Arm Jenkins 1954
523
s. d.
5 °
1 o
1 3
3 °
12 6
8 6
15 o
10 6
18 o
3 6
5 6
1 o
1 3
1 9
free*
9 6
5 °
1 3
1 o
free*
63 o
105 o
105 o
16 o
iAlso a Penguin Edition, 1957, price 3s. 6d.
524
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kemp, Lt.-Cdr. P. K. H.M. Destroyers Jenkins 1956
Lewis, Michael. The History of the British Navy
Allen & Unwin 1959
Lipscomb, Cdr. F. W. The British Submarine Black 1954
Sheppard, E. W. A Short History of the British Army. 4th
edn Constable 1950
Taylor, John W. R. C.F.S., Birthplace of Air Power: The
Story of the R.A.F.’s Central Flying School 1912-58
Putnam 1958
Thetford, Owen. Aircraft of the Royal Air Force 1918-58
Putnam 1958
 British Naval Aircraft 1912-58 Putnam 1958
Annual Estimates
Air Estimates 1959-60 HMSO 1959
Memorandum by the Secretary of State for Air
Cmnd 673 HMSO 1959
Army Estimates 1959-60 HMSO 1959
Memorandum of the Secretary of State for War
Cmnd 669 HMSO 1959
Ministry of Defence Estimate 1959-60 HMSO 1959
Navy Estimates 1959-60 HMSO 1959
Statement of the First Lord of the Admiralty
Cmnd 674 HMSO 1959
Defence: Outline of Future Policy Cmnd 124 HMSO 1957
Progress of the Five Year Defence Plan Cmnd 662 HMSO 1959
Defence Statistics 1959-60 Cmnd 661 HMSO 1959
Call Up of Men to the Forces, 1957-60 Cmnd 175 HMSO 1957
Central Organisation for Defence Cmnd 476 HMSO 1958
Official Histories of the Second World War:
United Kingdom: Civil Series.
Civil Defence, by T. H. O’Brien Longmans & HMSO 1955
Civil Defence. Manual of Basic Training [pajnphlets] HMSO 1949
to
1959
Manual of Civil Defence. Vol. I. Pamphlet No. 1. Nuclear
Weapons HMSO 1956
The Future Organisation of the Army Cmnd 230 HMSO 1957
IV. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services
Family Welfare Association. Guide to the Social Services,
1957-58. A Year Book of Information respecting the Statu¬
tory and Voluntary Means of Assistance. 48th edn
Staples Press 1958
PIall, M. Penelope. The Social Services of Modern England.
4th rev. edn Routledge 1959
Haynes, A. H. The Practitioner’s Handbook to the Social
Services Wright & Sons 1955
BIBLIOGRAPHY
525
s. d.
Kuenstler, P. H. K., Editor. Social Group Work in Great
Britain Faber & Faber
Morris, C., Editor. Social Case-Work in Great Britain. 2nd edn
Faber & Faber
Morris, Mary. Voluntary Organisations and Social Progress
Gollancz
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social Ser¬
vices : Handbook of Information and Directory of Organisa¬
tions. rev. edn NCSS
 Public Social Services: Handbook of Information. 10th
edn *CSS
Titmuss, R. M. Essays on the Welfare State Allen & Unwin
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. Problems of Social Policy, by R. M. Titmuss
Longmans & HMSO
 Studies in the Social Services, by S. M. Ferguson and
H. Fitzgerald Longmans & HMSO
Report of the Working Party on Social Workers in the Local
Authority Health and Welfare Services HMSO
The Story of the W.V.S. HMSO
Social Services in Britain
CO I Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4296 HMSO
Children in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4203 HMSO
National Insurance and Related Services
Marsh David C. National Insurance and Assistance in Great
‘ Britain Pjlmr
Rathbone, Eleanor. Family Allowances Allen & Unwin
Shenfield, B. E. Social Policies for Old Age Routledge
Annual Reports
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
For 1957 Cmnd 493 HMSO
National Assistance Board For 1958 Cmnd 781 HMSO
National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland
For 1958 Belfast, HMSO
War Pensioners For 1957 HMSO
Children in the Care of Local Authorities in England and
Wales, March 1958 Annual Statistics Cmnd 632 HMSO
Everybody’s Guide to National Insurance, rev. edn HMSO
Improvements in National Assistance Cmnd 782 HMSO
National Insurance Bill 1959: Report of the Government
Actuary on the Financial Provisions of the Bill
Cmnd 629 HMSO
Reports by the Government Actuary on the First Quinquennial
Review Tjn/ron
National Insurance Act, 1946
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946 HMS
Social Insurance and Allied Services [Beveridge Report]
Cmd 6404 HMSO
Work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office HMSO
1955
1955
1955
1957
1955
1958
1950
1954
1959
1959
1959
1959
i95i
1949
1957
1958
1959
1959
1958
1959
1958
1959
1959
1954
1955
1942
1955
12 6
15 o
18 o
10 6
10 6
20 o
25 o
22 6
15 °
3 6
5 °
not yet
priced
20 O
15 0
25 O
8 O
4 6
1 6
5 °
1 o
2 6
1 3
12 6
8 6
O' vO vO
526
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Health
Acton Society Trust. National Health Services in Great
Britain: Hospitals and the State. Series of 6 Reports.
AST 1955 to 1959
Clarke, J. J. Introduction to Public Health Law
Cleaver-Hume Press 1949
Clegg, Hugh. Medicine in Britain. 4th edn
For the British Council Longmans 1951
National Council of Social Service. Help for the Handi¬
capped, by J. H. Nicholson NCSS 1958
Ross, Sir James Stirling. The National Health Service in
Great Britain Oxford University Press 1952
Annual Reports
Board of Control (Lunacy and Mental Treatment)
For 1957 HMSO 1958
Central Health Services Council For 1958 HMSO 1959
Department of Health for Scotland
For 1958 Cmnd 697 HMSO 1959
General Board of Control for Scotland
For 1957 Cmnd 546 HMSO 1958
Health and Local Government Administration in Northern
Ireland For 1957 Cmd 389 Belfast, HMSO 1958
Ministry of Health
Part I. 1. National Health Service.
2. Welfare, Food and Drugs, and Civil Defence
For 1958 Cmnd 806 HMSO 1959
Part II. On the State of the Public Health
For 1957 Cmnd 559 HMSO 1958
Mental Health in Scotland HMSO 1959
National Health Service Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1957-58 HMSO 1959
National Health Service (Scotland) Summarised Accounts
Annual For 1957-58 HMSO 1959
Report of Committee on Cost of Prescribing (Final) HMSO 1959
Report of Committee of Enquiry into the Cost of the National
Health Service [Guillebaud Report] Cmd 9663 HMSO 1956
Report of Committee on General Practice within the National
Health Service [Cohen Report] HMSO 1954
Report of Committee on Social Workers in the Mental Health
Services Cmd 8260 HM»SO 1951
Report of Committee on Rehabilitation, Training and Resettle¬
ment of Disabled Persons Cmd 9883 HMSO 1956
Report of the Maternity Services Committee HMSO 1959
Report of the Royal Commission on the Law Relating to Mental
Illness and Mental Deficiency, 1954-57 Cmnd 169 HMSO 1957
Report of the Scottish Committee on Prescribing Costs HMSO 1959
Services for the Disabled HMSO 1955
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rehabilitation and
Resettlement HMSO 1958
s. d.
4 o
each
12 6
2 o
7 6
35 o
5 6
2 6
6 o
15 6
13 o
6 o
3 °
1 6
6 o
11 o
2 6
1 6
5 6
6 6
10 6
3 °
4 6
1 3
VO VO
BIBLIOGRAPHY
527
s. d.
Health Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.3991 HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Paper R.4274 COI
Education
Alexander, W. P. Education in England: The National
System, How It Works Newnes
Armfelt, R. The Structure of English Education
Cohen & West
British Council. Higher Education in the United Kingdom:
A Handbook for Students from Overseas, rev. edn Longmans
Cotgrove, Stephen F. Technical Education and Social Change
Allen & Unwin
Curtis, S. J. History of Education in Great Britain. 4th edn
University Tutorial Press
Dent, H. C. British Education. 3rd edn
For the British Council Longmans
 Growth in English Education, 1946-1952 Routledge
 Editor. Year Book of Technical Education and Careers
in Industry For 1959 Black
Dongerkery, S. R. Universities in Britain
Oxford University Press
Lester Smith, W. O. Education: An Introductory Survey
Penguin Books
 Education in Great Britain. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education
in the United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations
National Institute of Adult Education
Peers, R. A. Adult Education Routledge
Venables, P. F. R. Technical Education Bell
Annual Reports
Ministry of Education
Education in 1958 Cmnd 777 HMLO
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland, 1957-58
Cmd 392 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in 1958 Cmnd 740 HMSO
Education in 1900-1950 Cmd 8244 HMSO
Education in Scotland: The Next Step Cmnd 603 HMSO
Further Education (Ministry of Education Pamphlet No. 8)
HMSO
Further Education: A Report of the Advisory Council on
Education in Scotland Cmd 8454 HMSO
Further Education for Commerce. Report of the Advisory
Committee
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Ministry of Education for 1956 and 1957 and
Fifty Years of the School Health Service HMSO
Junior Secondary Education [Scotland] HMSO
1959 3 6
1959 free*
1954 12 6
1955 12 6
1956 5 o
1958 25 o
1957 21 o
1955 2 0
1954 16 o
1959 30 o
1953 10 6
1957 3 6
1958 7 6
1956 5 0
1958 35 0
1955 42 0
1959 12 o
1958 5 6
1959 6 o
1951 12 o
1958 6
1947 6 o
1952 5 °
1959 2 6
1959 10 6
1955 5 °
528 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The New Secondary Education (Ministry of Education
Pamphlet No. 9) HMSO 1947
Public Education in Scotland. 3rd edn HMSO 1958
Report of the Committee on Organisation and Finance of Adult
Education HMSO 1954
Report of the Working Party on the Curriculum of the Senior
Secondary School (Scotland) HMSO 1959
Scope and Content of the Three Year Course of Teacher
Training (Sixth Report of the National Advisory Council on
the Training and Supply of Teachers) HMSO 1957
Secondary Education for All: A New Drive
Cmnd 604 HMSO 1959
The Supply of Teachers in the 1960s HMSO 1958
Technical Education Cmd 9703 HMSO 1956
The Training of Teachers (Ministry of Education Pamphlet
No. 34) HMSO 1957
University Grants Committee
Annual Return from Universities and University Colleges
For 1957-58 Cmnd 832 HMSO 1959
University Development 1952-57 Cmnd 534 HMSO 1958
Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.3798 HMSO 1958
 Supplement 1959 COI 1959
Education and Training for Industry and Commerce in
Britain Reference Paper R.4261 COI 1959
Students from the United Kingdom Dependencies in the
United Kingdom and the Irish Republic
Reference Paper R.4186 COI 1959
Technological Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RE.P.4265 HMSO 1959
Universities in Britain Reference Paper R.4124 COI 1959
Youth Services
Brew, J. Macalister. Youth and Youth Groups Faber & Faber 1957
Eager, W. McG. Making Men: The History of Boys’ Clubs
and Related Movements in Great Britain
University of London Press 1953
Jephcott, Pearl. Some Young People Allen & Unwin 1954
Jordan, G. W. and Fisher, E. M. Self-Portrait of Youth
Heinemann 1955
Kuenstler, P. H. K., Compiler. Youth Work in England:
Extracts from Ministry of Education and other publications
relating to Statutory and Voluntary Youth Work
University of London Press 1954
Citizens of To-morrow: A Study of Influences Affecting the
Upbringing of Young People
For King George’s Jubilee Trust Odhams 1955
 Progress Report The Trust 1958
Purpose and Content of the Youth Service HMSO 1945
Youth Services in Britain [prepared by COI for the Foreign
Office] HMS O 1959
s. d.
3 6
3 6
2 6
3 6
9
1 9
5 °
5 6
3 6
free*
free*
free*
not yet
priced
free*
18 o
20 O
12 6
12 6
4 °
3 o
free
4
free
O' 0 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
529
Youth Services in Britain
Reference Paper R.4200 COI ^959
s. d.
free*
V. HOUSING AND PLANNING
Annual Report
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1958 Cmnd 737 HMSO 1959
Housing
Ashworth, Herbert. Housing in Great Britain Skinner
Councils and their Houses: Management of Estates HMSO
Flats and Houses 1958: Design and Economy HMSO
Houses: The Next Step Cmd 8996 HMSO
Housing in England and Wales: 1951 Census Housing Report
* HMSO
Housing Manual 1949
Supplement. Housing for Special Purposes
— Supplement. Houses 1952
Supplement. Houses 1953
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Cmd 8997 HMSO
Housing Policy, Scotland
Housing Return, England and Wales
Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
Housing Return, Scotland Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
The Rent Act and You
Questions and Answers for Landlord and Tenant [England
and Wales] ^^30
A Simple Guide for Scotland HMSO
Housing in Britain [under revision]
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.2797 COI
Town and Country Planning
Abercrombie, Sir Patrick. Town and Country Planning. 2nd
edn Oxford University Press
Ashworth, William. The Genesis of Modern British Town
Planning . Routledge
Brown, H. L, Editor. Practical Points on Planning Law
Sweet & Maxwell
Crowe, Sylvia. Tomorrow’s Landscape Architectural Press
Gibberd, Frederick. Town Design. 2nd edn
Architectural Press
Heap, Desmond. An Outline of Planning Law. 2nd edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Howard, Ebenezer. Garden Cities of To-morrow. [New edn of
To-morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform, first published
in 1898I . Fab” ^ Faber
Keeble, Lewis. Principles and Practice of Town and Country
Planning Estates Gazette
Lichfield, N. Economics of Planned Development
Estates Gazette
1957
1959
1958
1953
1956
1949
1951
1952
1953
1953
1957
1957
1954
1943
1954
1951
1956
1953
1955
1946
1952
1956
10 6
7 6
2 6
10 o
9
60 o
3 6
2 o
1 o
3 °
6
6
1 3
6
6
free*
7 ^
21 o
16 6
21 o
73 6
25 o
8 6
47 6
47 6
530
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nicholson, E. M. Britain’s Nature Reserves Country Life 1958
Town and Country Planning Association. Town and
Country Planning Monthly T and CPA
Annual Reports
Development Corporations of the New Towns
England and Wales For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
Scotland For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
National Parks Commission For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
Nature Conservancy For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
First Ten Years: Report of the Nature Conservancy HMSO 1959
New Towns in Britain CO I 1959
The New Towns Grow [prepared hy the Ministry of Housing
and Local Government and COT] COT 1957
Town and Country Planning in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4178 HMSO 1959
VI. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union. Baptist Handbook: edited and published under
the direction of the Council of the Baptist Union of Great
Britain and Ireland For 1959 Carey Kingsgate Press 1959
Catholic Directory, 1959 Burns, Oates & Washbourne 1959
Church Assembly. Report by the Board of Social Responsi¬
bility on the Task of the Church in relation to Industry
Church Information Office 1959
Church of England. Official Yearbook of the National
Assembly of the Church of England
For 1959 For the Church Assembly,
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 1958
Church of Ireland. The Irish Church Directory and Year
Book
For 1959 Church of Ireland Printing <Sf Publishing Company 1959
Church of Scotland. Year Book
For i960 Church of Scotland Committee of Publications 1959
Church in Wales. Official Handbook 1959
Representative Body of the Church in Wales, Cardiff 1959
Congregational Union of England and Wales. Congrega¬
tional Year Book For 1959 Independent Press 1959
Congregational Union of Scotland. Year Book
For 1959-60 Congregational Union of Scotland 1959
Episcopal Church in Scotland. The Scottish Episcopal
Church Year Book and Directory
For 1959-60 Representative Church Council of the
Episcopal Church in Scotland 1959
The Lambeth Conference, 19581
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 1958
Mayfield, Guy. The Church of England
Oxford University Press 1958
s. d.
30 o
2 o
22 o
7 o
5 6
6 6
1 6
free
free
not yet
priced
17 6
18 O
I 6
10 o
5 °
15 o
42 o
3 o
8 6
7 6
18 o
1 Also in an abridged edition, price is. 6d.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual Conference of
the Methodist Church, 1959 Methodist Publishing House 1959
Presbyterian Church of England. Official Handbook
For 1959-60 Presbyterian Church of England 1959
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book
For 1959 Presbyterian Church of Wales 1959
Salvation Army. Year Book
For 1959 Salvationist Publishing & Supplies 1959
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Year Book of the
General Assembly For 1959 Lindsey Press 1959
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook
For 1959 United Free Church of Scotland 1959
s.
15
5
3
5
2
VII. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Sciences
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great
Britain: A Handbook compiled from Official Sources. 59th
ejn Allen & Unwin
Cardwell, D. S. L. The Organisation of Science in England
Heinemann
Crowther, J. G. Nuclear Energy in Industry Newnes
Dukes, J. D. Man-Made Sun: The Story of Zeta
Abelard-Schuman
Edwards, R. S. Co-operative Industrial Research Pitman
Horder, Lord. Fifty Years of Medicine Duckworth
Hudson, Derek and Luckhurst, K. W. The Royal Society
of Arts, 1754-1954 Murray
Jaramillo-Arango, Dr. Jaime. The British Contribution to
Medicine Livingstone
Jay, K. E. B. Atomic Energy Research at Harwell
Butterworth’s Scientific Publications
 Calder Hall: The Story of Britain’s First Atomic Power
Station Methuen
Martin, T. The Royal Institution
For the British Council Longmans
Royal Society of London. Report of Empire Scientific Con¬
ference 1946. 2 vols. Cambridge University Press
 The Year Book of the Royal Society of London, 1959
Royal Society
Turrill, W. B. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Past and
Present _ Jenkins
Combining for Research: The Work of the Industrial Research
Associations in the Government Scheme DSIR
Annual Reports
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
For 1957-58 Cmnd 597 HMSO
Agricultural Research Council
For 1957-58 Cmnd 750 HMSO
1952 22
1958 35
1957 18
1956 17
1959 10
1950 20
1953 5
1954 30
1953 25
1955 5
1956 5
1948
1948 42
1959 21
1959 25
1956 fn
1958 1
1959 8
532
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports (contd.)
Atomic Energy Authority Fifth Report
For 1958-59 HMSO 1959
Medical Research Council For 1957-58 Cmnd 792 HMSO 1959
Meteorological Office For i957-58 HMSO 1958
National Physical Laboratory For 1958 HMSO 1959
National Research Development Corporation
For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
Research Council of the Department of Scientific and Indus¬
trial Research For 1958 Cmnd 739 HMSO 1959
Research for Industry, 1958 HMSO 1959
Hazards to Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiation (Medical
Research Council Report) Cmd 9780 HMSO 1956
Jubilee Book of the National Physical Laboratory, by John
Langdon-Davies HMSO 1951
Science Museum: The First Hundred Years HMSO 1957
Scientific Research in British Universities, 1958-59 HMSO 1959
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4192 HMSO 1959
Some British Records and Achievements in Science, Industry
and Technology Reference Booklet RF.P.3984 COI 1959
The Arts
Arts Council of Great Britain. The First Ten Years.
Eleventh Annual Report 1955-56 Arts Council 1956
 A New Pattern of Patronage. Thirteenth Annual
Report 1957-58 Arts Council 1958
British Council. Annual Report 1957-58 British Council 1958
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Help for the Arts:
Report to the Foundation The Foundation 1959
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. Annual Report
Dunfermline, Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 1958
Government and the Arts in Britain HMSO 1958
Visual Arts
Directory of Museums and Art Galleries in the British Isles
Museums Association 1948
Gardner, A. H. Outline of English Architecture. 3rd edn
Batsford 1949
Hendy, Sir Philip. The National Gallery, London
Thames & Hudson 1955
Lamb, Sir Walter. The Royal Academy. 2nd edn Bell 1951
Lees-Milne, James, Editor. The National Trust: A Record of
Fifty Years’ Achievement, 1895-1945. 3rd edn Batsford 1948
Museum Calendar Annual Museums Association 1959
The National Gallery, July 1956-June 1958 National Gallery 1958
Read, Sir Herbert. Contemporary British Art Penguin Books 1951
Rothenstein, Sir John. An Introduction to English Painting
Cassell 1952
 Modern English Painters: Lewis to Moore
Eyre & Spottisucoode 1956
s. d.
5 o
13 o
3 6
8 o
1 6
3 6
7 6
5 6
4 °
15 °
25 o
not yet
priced
free*
2 6
2 6
1 o
3 °
free
2 o
21 o
15 °
126 o
6 o
10 o
21 o
35 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
533
Who’s Who in Art. 9th edn Art Trade Press
Annual Reports
Ancient Monuments Boards for England, Scotland and
Wales For 1958 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for England For 1958 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for Scotland For 1958 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for Wales For 1958 HMSO
Royal Fine Art Commission For 1957 Cmnd 447 HMSO
Tate Gallery For 1957-58 HMSO
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries
Report for 1954-58 HMSO
Literature
British National Bibliography Annual
The Council of the British National Bibliography
Library Association Year Book 1959 Library Association
Scott-James, R. A. Fifty Years of English Literature, 1900-
1950, new edn with Postcript, IPS1-55 Longmans
The Structure of the Public Library Service in England and
yyaies Cmnd 660 HMSO
s. d.
1958 60 o
1959 1 6
1959 1 3
1959 9
1959 6
1958 1 o
1959 4 o
1959 4 o
1959 190 o
1959 21 o
1956 21 o
1959 3 6
Drama
Findlater, R. The Future of the Theatre Fabian Society
The Stage Year Book, 1958 Annual The Stage
Who’s Who in the Theatre, edited by John Parker, 12th rev.
edn Pitman
Films
Field, Mary. Children and Films
Dunfermline, Carnegie United Kingdom Trust
Manvell, Roger. The Film and the Public Penguin Books
Political and Economic Planning. The British Film In¬
dustry: A Report on the History and Organisation of the
Industry
 The British Film Industry, 1958 PEP
Rotha, Paul and others. Documentary Film. 3rd edn
Faber & Faber
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency For 1957-58 HMSO
Cinematograph Films Council For 1958—59 HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of
Accounts) For 1958-59 Cmnd 799 HMSO
The Cinema in Britain Reference Paper R.3645 COI
Music, Opera and Ballet
Ballet Annual i960, edited by Arnold L. Haskell Black
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book
British Federation of Music Festivals
Clarke, Mary. The Sadler’s Wells Ballet: A History and an
Appreciation Black
1959 2 6
1958 12 o
1957 105 o
1954 10 6
1955 3 6
1952 18 o
1958 5 o
1952 42 0
1959 6
1959 6
1959 1 3
1957 free*
1959 30 o
1959 6 o
1955 21 o
534
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S. d.
Music Book Hinrichsen 1956 25 o
Walker, Ernest. A History of Music in England. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press 1952 40 o
VIII. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Cairncross, A. K., Editor. The Scottish Economy: A Statis¬
tical Account of Scottish Life by Members of the Staff of
Glasgow University Cambridge University Press
Clapham, Sir John. A Concise Economic History of Britain:
From Earliest Times to 1750 Cambridge University Press
 An Economic Elistory of Modern Britain. 3 vols
Cambridge University Press
Court, W. H. B. A Concise Economic History of Britain from
1750 to Recent Times Cambridge University Press
Devons, E. An Introduction to British Economic Statistics
Cambridge University Press
Jones, G. P. and Pool, A. G. A Hundred Years of Economic
Development in Great Britain 1840-1940. 2nd zdn Duckworth
Lewis, W. Arthur. Economic Survey 1919-1939
Allen & Unwin
Seers, Dudley. The Levelling of Incomes since 1938 Blackwell
Stamp, L. Dudley and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a
Geographic and Economic Survey Longmans
Worswick, G. D. N. and others. The British Economy,
1945-5° Oxford University Press
Economic Review Bi-Monthly from January 1959
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. British War Economy, by W. K. Hancock and
M. M. Go wing Longmans & HMSO
Annual Abstract of Statistics. No. 95, 1958 HMSO
Council on Prices, Productivity and Incomes, First Report
[Cohen Council] HMSO
 Second Report HMSO
 Third Report HMSO
Economic Survey Annual from 1947
For 1959 Cmnd 708 HMSO
Economic Survey of Northern Ireland (Report prepared by
K. S. Isles and N. Cuthbert) Belfast, HMSO
Enquiry into Household Expenditure in 1953-54 HMSO
National Income and Expenditure of the United Kingdom
1938-46 Cmd 7099 HMSO
1958 (prepared by the Central Statistical Office) HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice yearly from April 1953
HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice Yearly from March
1954 Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics Annual from 1954 HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
1954 30 o
1949 25 o
1938 165 o
1954 25 o
1956 22 6
1948 21 o
1953 18 o
1951 5 °
1954 46 6
1952 35 °
8 o
1949 30 o
1958 21 o
1958 2 o
1958 2 O
1959 2 O
1959 3 o
1957 35 o
1957 37 6
1947 1 o
1958 7 6
4 °
5 °
7 6
5 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
IX. INDUSTRY
Organisation and Production
Allen, G. C. British Industries and their Organisation. 3rd
ecjn Longmans
British Standards Institution. Year Book BSI
Burn, Duncan, Editor. The Structure of British Industry: A
Symposium. Vol. I Cambridge University Press
Vol. II Cambridge University Press
Goodman, L. Landon. Man and Automation Penguin Books
Hutton, Graham and others. We Too Can Prosper: The
Promise of Productivity Allen & Unwin
Oakley, C. A., Editor. Scottish Industry: An Account of what
Scotland makes and where she makes it Scottish Council
Political and Economic Planning. Industrial Trade Asso¬
ciations : Activities and Organisation Allen & Unwin
Robson, W. A. Problems of Nationalised Industry
Allen & Umvin
Distribution of Industry Cmd 7540 HMSO
Report of the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices Com¬
mission. Collective Discrimination: A Report on Exclusive
Dealing, Collective Boycotts, Aggregated Rebates and Other
Discriminatory Trade Practices Cmd 95°4 HMSO
Report on the Census of Production for 1954
Introductory Notes HMSO
12 Volumes [in progress] HMSO
Review of Highland Policy Cmnd 785 HMSO
Industry and Employment in Scotland and Scottish Road
Report Annual For 1958 Cmnd 706 HMSO
Wales and Monmouthshire: Report on Developments and
Government Action for the period 1.7-57 to 31.12.58
Cmnd 684 HMSO
Nationalised Industries in Britain
Reference Paper R.4298 COI
Productivity in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.3294 COI
Agriculture
Cooper, D. W. Farmers’ Co-operation in England
Agricultural Co-operation Association Ltd.
Digby, Margaret. Agricultural Co-operation in Great Britain
Crosby Lockwood
Ernle, Lord. English Farming Past and Present Longmans
Hirsch, G. P. ayid Hunt, K. E. British Agriculture: Structure
and Organisation
For the National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs Evans
Political and Economic Planning. Agriculture and Land
Use
Sykes, Frank. Living from the Land Geoffrey Bles
535
s. d.
1951 21 o
1959 15 o
1958 45 o
1958 50 o
1957 3 6
1953 12 o
1953 25 o
1957 30 o
1952 25 o
1948 1 9
1955 3 6
1956 1 o
1957 1 6
to
3 6
1959 9
1959 3 6
1959 5 6
1959 free*
1956 free*
1954 1 o
1949 6 o
1936
1958 3 6
1957 2 6
1957 21 o
2M
536
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S. d.
Watson, Sir James Scott and More, J. A. Agriculture: The
Science and Practice of British Farming. 10th edn
Oliver & Boyd 1956
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. Agriculture, by Keith A. H. Murray
Longmans & HMSO 1956
Agricultural Research Service HMSO 1953
Agricultural Statistics, United Kingdom 1957-58 HMSO 1959
Annual Reports
Animal Health Services in Great Britain For 1957 HMSO 1959
Department of Agriculture for Scotland
Agriculture in Scotland 1958 Cmnd 699 HMSO 1959
National Food Survey Committee: Domestic Food Con¬
sumption and Expenditure 1957 HMSO 1959
Annual Review and Determination of Guarantees
For 1959 Cmnd 696 HMSO 1959
Crofters Commission: Report For 1958 HMSO 1959
Crofting Conditions: Commission of Enquiry
Cmd 9091 HMSO 1954
Guides to Official Sources, No. 4. Agricultural and Food
Statistics HMSO 1958
Horticultural Marketing, Report of the Committee on
Cmnd 61 HMSO 1957
Long-term Assurances for Agriculture Cmnd 23 HMSO 1956
National Agricultural Advisory Service Report: The First
Eight Years 1946-1954 HMSO 1955
Report on Agricultural Marketing Schemes
For 1938-55 HMSO 1957
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual
For 1956-57 HMSO 1959
Farming Britain, by A. N. Duckham COI 1958
Rural Industries in Britain Reference Paper R.3334 COI 1956
Fisheries
Fisheries Year Book and Directory 1958
British Continental Trade Press 1958
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For 1958 Cmnd 704 HMSO 1959
Herring Industry Board For 1958 Cmnd 787 HMSO 1959
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1958-59 HMSO 1959
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For 1958 HMSO 1959
Sea Fisheries For 1957 HMSO 1958
Forestry
Champion, H. G. Forestry Oxford University Press 1954
Edlin, H. L. England’s Forests Faber & Faber 1958
The Forestry Commission in Scotland Forestry Commission 1953
The Role of State, Communities and Private Enterprise in
the National Forest Policy of Great Britain, by W. H.
Guillebaud Forestry Commission 1952
31 6
30 o
2 6
3 6
6 o
6 o
8 6
1 3
1 9
5 6
4 6
6 o
8
3 6
5 6
6 6
free*
free*
20 o
4 6
3 °
2 6
5 °
4 o
7 6
30 o
free
free
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Statement presented by the Forestry Commission of Great
Britain to the Seventh British Commonwealth Forestry Con¬
ference, Australia and New Zealand, 1957
Forestry Commission 1957
Annual Reports
Forestry Commissioners For i957—5^ HMSO 1959
Forest Research For i957—5$ HMSO 1959
Britain’s Forests [13 booklets} HMSO 1948
to
1953
Census of Woodlands 1947-49: Summary Report HMSO 1951
Forestry, Agriculture and Marginal Land. Report by the
Natural Resources (Technical) Committee HMSO 1957
Marketing of Woodland Produce, Report of Departmental
Committee on HMSO 1956
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission Guides
[9 booklets] HMSO 1946
to
1958
Fuel and Power
Capital Investment in the Coal, Gas and Electricity Industries
Annual For 1959 Cmnd 713 HMSO 1959
Ministry of Power Statistical Digest Annual
For 1958 HMSO 1959
Report of the Committee on National Policy for the Use of
Fuel and Power Resources [Ridley Report] Cmd 8647 HMSO I952
Coal
National Coal Board. British Coal, The Rebirth of an
Industry NCB 1957
 Investing in Coal: Progress and Prospects under the
Plan for Coal NCB 1956
 Report of the Advisory Committee on Organisation
NCB 1955
Nef, J. U. Rise of the British Coal Industry. 2 vols Routledge 1932
Townshend-Rose, H. The British Coal Industry
Allen & Unwin 1951
Annual Report and Accounts
National Coal Board
Vol. I. Report For 1958 HMSO 1959
Vol. II. Accounts and Statistical Tables For 1958 HMSO 1959
Coal Mining: Report of the Technical Advisory Committee
[Reid Report] Cmd 6610 HMSO 1945
United Kingdom Coal Industry Reference Paper R.34°3 COI 1956
Petroleum
Longhurst, Henry C. Adventure in Oil Sidgwick & Jackson 1959
United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Advisory Committee.
UK Petroleum Industry Statistics Relating to Consumption
and Refinery Production Annual
Petroleum Information Bureau 1958
537
s. d.
free
5 °
9 6
6
to
1 3
9
4 °
4 6
1 6
to
5 °
6
37 6
6 6
free
3 °
2 6
56 o
12 6
3 6
9 6
3 6
free*
21 o
free
2 M*
538
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Industries: Oil Cassell 1953
The Oilfields of Britain The British Petroleum Company 1956
Our Industry The British Petroleum Company 1959
Electricity and Gas Supply
The Electricity Council. Power for the Future
Electricity Council 1959
The Gas Council. The Rise of the Gas Industry in Britain
Gas Council 1949
Self, Sir Henry and Watson, Elizabeth M. Electricity
Supply in Great Britain Allen & Unwin I952
Annual Reports and Accounts
Central Electricity For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
Gas Council For 1957-58 HMSO 1958
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board For 1958 HMSO 1959
The Gas Industry: Report of the Committee of Enquiry
[Heyworth Report] Cmd 6699 HMSO 1945
A Programme of Nuclear Power Cmd 9389 HMSO 1955
Proposals for the Reorganisation of the Electricity Supply
Industry Cmnd 27 HMSO 1956
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Electricity Supply
Industry [Herbert Committee] Cmd 9672 HMSO 1956
Report of the Committee on Hydro-Electric Development in
Scotland Cmd 6406 HMSO I942
Town Gas: Its Manufacture and Distribution HMSO 1958
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4192 HMSO 1959
Water Supply
Metropolitan Water Board. London’s Water Supply 1903-
53 : A Review of the Work of the Metropolitan Water Board
Staples Press 1953
Veal, T. H. P. The Supply of Water. 2nd edn
Chapman & Hall 1950
Walters, R. C. S. The Nation’s Water Supply
Nicholson C? Watson 1936
Annual Reports
British Rainfall For 1956 HMSO 1959
Department of Health for Scotland
For 1958 Cmnd 697 HMSO 1959
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1958 Cmnd 737 HMSO 1959
Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain 1956-57 HMSO 1959
Water Pollution Research, 1958 HMSO 1959
Central Advisory Water Committee. Report of Sub-Com¬
mittee on Information on Water Resources HMSO 1959
 Sub-Committee on Growing Demand for Water,
First Report HMSO 1959
National Water Policy Cmd 6515 HMSO 1944
River Boards: Guide to their Powers and Functions HMSO 1950
s. d.
8 6
free
free
free
15 °
20 o
14 o
10 6
5 °
2 o
9
4
6 6
9
5 6
not yet
priced
15 °
30 O
31 6
27 6
5 6
10 6
15 °
7 °
1 3
1 3
6
3 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
539
s. cL
Building and Contracting
Briggs, M. S. A Short History of the Building Crafts
Oxford University Press i925
Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors. The British
Civil Engineering Contracting Industry
Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors 1956
Norrie, C. M. Bridging the Years Arnold 1956
British Contributions to Civil Engineering
Reference Paper R.3386 COI 1955
63 o
21 o
free*
Manufacturing Industries
Association of British Chemical Manufacturers. Report
on the British Chemical Industry 1949 The Association
 Supplement 1953 The Association
Burn, D. L. Economic History of Steelmaking 1867-1939
Cambridge University Press
Donnithorne, Audrey G. British Rubber Manufacturing
Duckworth
Dunning, J. H. American Investment in British Manufacturing
Industry Allen & Unwin
Glass Manufacturers Federation. This is the British Glass
Industry GMF
Hague, Douglas C. The Economics of Man-Made Fibres
Duckworth
Robson, R. The Cotton Industry in Britain Macmillan
 The Man-Made Fibres Industry Macmillan
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. rl he Motor
Industry of Great Britain SMMT
Williams, T. I. The Chemical Industry: Past and Present
Penguin Books
Development of the Iron and Steel Industry I953—HMSO
Special Report, 1957 HMSO
Reorganisation of the Cotton Industry Cmnd 744 HMSO
Report of the Iron and Steel Board For 1958 HMSO
Post-War Industrial Progress in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.3908 COI
United Kingdom Agricultural Engineering Industry
Reference Paper R.4126 COI
United Kingdom Motor Vehicle Industry
Reference Paper R.3694 COI
United Kingdom Shipbuilding Industry
Reference Paper R.3660 COI
United Kingdom Steel Industry
Reference Paper R.4027 COI
1949 5 o
1953 1 0
1940 27 6
1958 25 o
1958 35 °
1955 2 6
1957 30 o
1957 60 o
1958 21 o
1958 50 o
1953
1955 2 6
1957 4 6
1959 9
1959 3 6
1958 free*
1959 free*
1958 free*
1957 free*
1959 free*
X. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Shipping
Bown, A. H. J. and Dove, C. A. Port Operation and Adminis¬
tration Chapman & Hall
1950
21 O'
54°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual
Report 195 8“5 9
Chamber of Shipping o f the United Kingdom
Corporation of Lloyd’s. Lloyd’s List Annual Review 1958
Corporation of Lloyd's
Course, Capt. A. G. The Merchant Navy To-day
Oxford University Press
Ford, P. and Bound, J. A. Coastwise Shipping and the Small
Ports Blackwell
Mead, Cdr. Hilary P. Trinity House Sampson Low
Merchant Ships: World Built. 1958 Adlard Coles/Harrap
Port of London Authority. 50th Annual Report 1958-59
PLA
Rees, Henry. British Ports and Shipping Harrap
Rodrigo, Robert. Search and Rescue Kimber
‘Shipping World’ Year Book and Who’s Who 1959-60, edited
by Sir Archibald Hurd ‘Shipping World'
Seafarers and their Ships HMSO
Inland Transport
Sargent, J. R. British Transport Policy
Oxford University Press
Annual Report and Accounts. British Transport Commission
Vol. I. Report For 1958 HMSO
Vol. II. Financial and Statistical Accounts
For 1958 HMSO
Railways
British Transport Commission. Facts and Figures: British
Railways, 1958 BTC
Nock, O. S. British Railways in Action Nelson
 The Railway Engineers Batsford
Rolt, L. T. C. Red for Danger Bodley Head
British Transport Commission: Proposals for the Railways
Cmd 9880 HMSO
  Re-appraisal of the Plan for the Modernisation and
Re-equipment of British Railways Cmnd 813 HMSO
Roads
Buchanan, C. D. Mixed Blessing: The Motor in Britain
Strong, L. A. G. The Rolling Road
Annual Reports
Roads in England and Wales
Road Research Board
The Highway Code. 4th edn
Leonard Hill
Hutchinson
For 1957-58 HMSO
For 1957 HMSO
HMSO
London Transport
London Transport Executive. London General: The Story
of the London Bus 1856 to 1956 LTE
 London Travel Survey, 1954 LTE
1959
1958
1956
i95i
1947
1959
1959
1959
1958
1959
1955
1958
1959
1959
1958
1956
1955
1955
1956
1959
1958
1956
1958
1958
1959
1956
1956
s. d.
25 o
1 o
12 6
10 6
35 o
1 o
18 o
21 O
60 O
15 °
6 o
15 o
free
25 o
18 o
16 o
1 9
3 o
30 o
30 o
6 o
5 6
6
5 o
5 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Report
London and Home Counties Traffic Advisory Committee:
London Traffic 1958 HMSO
London Traffic Congestion: Report by the London and Home
Counties Traffic Advisory Committee HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into London Transport
^ HMSO
Inland Waterways
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals: An Illustrated History,
rev edn Phoenix House
 1 The Canals of Southern England Phoenix House
Rolt, L. T. C. The Inland Waterways of England
Allen & Unwin
Inland Waterways. Government Proposals following the Report
of the Committee of Inquiry Cmnd 676 HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Inland Waterways
[Bowes Report] Cmnd 486 HMSO
Public Transport in Northern Ireland
Annual Report
Ulster Transport Authority
For 1957-58 Belfast, UTA
Civil Aviation
British Independent Air Transport Association. Annual
Report For 195 8-5 9 BIATA
Harvey, D. G. T. British Civil Aviation Adlard Coles/Harrap
Pudney, John. The Seven Skies Putnam
Aeroplane Directory of British Aviation Annual Temple Press
Annual Reports
Air Transport Advisory Council (and Statement by the
Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation)
For 1958-59 HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1958-59 HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1958-59 HMSO
London Airport [prepared by COI for the Ministry of Transport
and Civil Aviation] HMSO
Report of the London Airport Development Committee to
the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation HMSO
The Post Office
Kay, F. G. Royal Mail. 2nd edn Rockliff
Robinson, Howard. Britain’s Post Office
Oxford University Press
Annual Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. (with Report of Directors)
For 1958-59 Cmnd 839 HMSO
Post Office Report and Commercial Accounts
For 1957-58 HMSO
1959
i95i
1955
1959
1955
1950
1959
1958
1959
1959
1955
1959
1959
1959
1959
1959
1956
1957
1955
1953
1959
1958
54i
s. d.
3 6
2 o
5 °
36 o
36 o
21 o
6
6 6
1 o
free
15 °
30 o
15 °
2 o
9 °
4 6
4 °
2 o
10 o
25 O
1 3
2 3
542
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Monarchs of All They Surveyed: The Story of the Post Office
Surveyors HMSO 1952
Post Office Capital Expenditure 1959-60 Cmnd 690 HMSO 1959
Telephone Policy: The Next Steps Cmnd 436 ii/M-SO 1958
XI. LABOUR
Department of Social Science University of Liverpool.
The Dock Worker University of Liverpool Press 1955
Flanders, Allan. Trade Unions Hutchinson 1952
 and Clegg, H., Editors. The System of Industrial
Relations in Great Britain Blackwell 1954
Heginbotham, H. The Youth Employment Service Methuen 1951
National Institute of Industrial Psychology. The
Foreman Staples 1951
 Joint Consultation in British Industry Staples 1952
Roberts, B. C. Trade Union Government and Administration
Bell 1956
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. Building
Regulations Handbook. 5th edn RSPA 1959
Silbertson, D. M. Youth in a Technical Age Parrish 1959
Thompson, Laurence. The Challenge of Change
Oxford University Press 1957
Williams, Gertrude. Recruitment to Skilled Trades
Routledge 1958
Annual Reports
Chief Inspector of Factories For 1958 Cmnd 810 HMSO 1959
Industrial Health. Report by the Chief Inspector of Factories
Cmnd 811 HMSO 1959
Ministry of Labour and National Service
For 1958 Cmnd 745 HMSO 1959
For 1939-46 Cmd 7225 HMSO 1947
Automation: Report on the Technical Trends and their Impact
on Management and Labour HMSO 1956
Census 1951. England and Wales. Occupational Tables HMSO 1956
Directory of Employers’ Associations, Trade Unions, Joint
Organisations, etc. HMSO 1958
Employment Policy Cmd 6527 HMSO 1944
Industrial Relations Handbook, rev. edn HMSO *953
Positive Employment Policies HMSO 1958
Report of the Committee of Enquiry on the Rehabilitation,
Training and Resettlement of Disabled Persons
Cmd 9883 HMSO 1956
Report of the Committee of Enquiry on the Training of
Supervisors HMSO 1954
Report of the Industrial Safety Sub-Committee of the National
Joint Advisory Council HMSO 1956
Report of the National Advisory Committee on the Employ¬
ment of Older Men and Women Cmd 8963 HMSO 19 54
Second Report Cmd 9628 HMSO *955
s. d.
2 6
6
1 o
17 6
8 6
30 o
8 6
12 6
21 o
31 6
10 o
21 o
5 °
23 o
5 6
3 6
8 o
7 o
6 o
147 o
8 o
1 o
5 °
1 6
5 6
2 o
1 6
2 o
1 9
BIBLIOGRAPHY
543
s. d.
Report of the National Youth Employment Council on the
Work of the Youth Employment Service 1953-56 HMSO
Resettlement Advisory Board. Progress Report 1957-59
Cmnd 789 HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Services for the Disabled
Time Rates of Wages and Hours of Labour
Training for Skill
Ministry of Labour Gazette Monthly
Labour Relations and Working Conditions in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.3814 HMSO
Education and Training for Industry and Commerce in
Britain Reference Paper R.4261 COI
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Paper R.4274 COI
The Trade Unionist in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RE.P.3829 COI
XII. FINANCE
Armstrong, F. E. The Book of the Stock Exchange. 5th edn
Pitman
Brittain, Sir Herbert. The British Budgetary System
Allen & Unwin
Chubb, B. The Control of Public Expenditure: Financial Com¬
mittees of the House of Commons Oxford University Press
Clapham, Sir John. The Bank of England: A History
Cambridge University Press
Dacey, W. Manning. The British Banking Mechanism. 2nd
ecjn ? Hutchinson
Gibb1) D. E. W. Lloyd’s of London Macmillan
Henderson, R. F. The New Issue Market and the Finance of
Industry Bowes & BowesA
Hicks Ursula K. British Public Finances: Their Structure and
Development, 1880-1952 Cxford University Press
Hobson, Sir Oscar. How the City Works, rev. edn
News Chronicle
Horne, H. O. A History of Savings Banks
Oxford University Press
Macrae, Norman. London Capital Market Staples Press
Morrah, Dermot. History of Industrial Life Assurance
Allen & Unwin
Raynes, H. E. A History of British Insurance Pitman
Sayers, R. S. Modem Banking. 4th edn
Oxford University Press
Annual Reports
Bank of England For year ended 28th February, I959
Cmnd 801 HMSO
Commissioners of Customs and Excise
For 1957-58 Cmnd 613 HMSO
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1957-58 Cmnd 628 HMSO
1956
1959
1955
1959
1958
1958
1959
1959
1958
1957
1959
1952
1944
1958
1957
i95i
1954
1956
1947
1955
1955
1950
1958
1959
1958
1959
2 6
1 3
4 6
16 o
2 o
2 o
3 6
free*
free*
free*
30 o
25 o
30 o
18 o
25 o
25 o
7 6
7 6
21 o
25 o
15 o
35 0
21 o
1 3
9 6
9 6
544
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Report of the Committee on the Working of the Monetary-
System [Radcliffe Committee] Cmnd 827 HMSO
Statements of Life Assurance and Bond Investment Business
deposited with the Board of Trade. 2 vols For 1957 HMSO
Summary of Statements of Assurance Business deposited with
the Board of Trade For 1957 HMSO
Civil Estimates and Estimates for Revenue Departments
Annual For 1959-60 HMSO
Finance Accounts of the United Kingdom for the Financial
Year Annual For 1957-58 HMSO
Financial Statement Annual For 1959-60 HMSO
National Debt Annual For 1957-58 Cmnd 574 HMSO
British System of Taxation
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.3867 HMSO
Short Guide to United Kingdom Taxes
Reference Paper R.4273 COI
United Kingdom Financial Institutions
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.3534 HMSO
1959
1959
1958
1959
1958
1959
1958
1958
1959
1957
XIII. TRADE
Overseas Trade and Payments
Bareau, Paul. The Future of the Sterling System
The Institute of Economic Affairs
Clarke, William M. The City’s Invisible Earnings
The Institute of Economic Affairs
Conan, A. R. The Sterling Area Macmillan
Gillett Brothers Discount Company. The Bill on London
Chapman & Hall
Political and Economic Planning. Trade Fairs and Exhibi¬
tions PEP
Customs and Excise Tariff of the United Kingdom HMSO
United Kingdom Balance of Payments Twice Yearly
1946-1957 (No. 2) HMSO
1956-1958 Cmnd 700 HMSO
Accounts Relating to the Trade and Navigation of the United
Kingdom Monthly HMSO
Board of Trade Journal Weekly HMSO
Report on Overseas Trade Monthly HMSO
Trade Fairs and Exhibitions in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.3828 COI
United Kingdom Commodity Markets
Reference Paper R.3655 COI
Internal Trade
Jefferys, J. B. and others. Distribution of Consumer Goods.
A Factual Study of Methods and Costs in the United
Kingdom in 1938 Cambridge University Press
 Retail Trading in Britain 1850-1950
Cambridge University Press
1958
1958
1952
1959
1957
1958
1959
1959
1958
1957
1950
1954
s. d-
15 o
231 o
7 6
3 °
5 6
2 o
2 o
3 6
free*
2 3
5 °
5 °
16 o
21 o
3 6
12 6
10 o
1 3
21 o
1 o
2 6
free*
free*
50 o
60 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Stacey, N. and Wilson, A. The Changing Pattern of Distribu¬
tion Business Publications I Batsford 1958
Co-operative Independent Commission Report
Co-operative Union 1958
Britain’s Shops: A Statistical Summary of Shops and Service
Establishments HMSO 1952
Census of Distribution and Other Services 1950
Vol. I. Retail and Service Trades: Area Tables HMSO 1953
Vol. II. Retail and Service Trades: General Tables iifikfiSO 1954
Vol. III. Wholesale Trades HMSO 1955
Census of Distribution and Other Services 1957 HMSO 1959
XIV. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
British Broadcasting Corporation. British Broadcasting:
A Bibliography BBC 1954
 BBC Handbook 1959 BBC 1958
 The BBC Television Service: A Technical Descrip¬
tion. 3rd edn BBC I952
Crozier, Mary. Broadcasting Oxford University Press 1958
Gorham, Maurice. Broadcasting and Television since 1900
Dakers 1952
Paulu, Burton. British Broadcasting: Radio and Television
in the United Kingdom
University of Minnesota {Oxford University Press 195^
Political and Economic Planning. Television in Britain PEP 1958
Simon of Wythenshawe, Lord. The BBC from Within
Gollancz 1953
Swift, J. Adventure in Vision: The First Twenty-Five Years
of Television Lehmann 195°
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation
For 1957-58 Cmnd 533 HMSO 1958
Independent Television Authority For i957—58 HMSO x958
Copy of a New Charter of Incorporation Granted to the BBC
Cmd 8605 HMSO I9S2
Copy of the Licence and Agreement between the Postmaster
General and the BBC Cmd 8579 HMSO 1952
Copy of an Agreement Supplemental to the Licence and
Agreement Cmnd 80 HMSO 1957
Copy of the Licence granted on April 6 1955 by H.M. Post¬
master General to the Independent Television Authority
Cmd 9451 HMSO 1955
Memorandum on Television Policy Cmd 9005 HMSO !953
Overseas Broadcasting: Report from the Select Committee on
Estimates HMSO I952
Report of the Broadcasting Committee 1949
Cmd 8116 HMSO 1951
Appendix H. Memoranda Submitted to the Committee
Cmd 8117 HMSO 1951
546
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S. d.
Sound and Television Broadcasting Services in the United
Kingdom Reference Paper R.3946 COI 1958
free*
XV. THE PRESS
Abrahams, Gerald. The Law for Writers and Journalists
Jenkins
General Council of the Press. The Press and the People:
Fifth Annual Report The Council
Herd, Harold. The March of Journalism: The Story of the
British Press from 1622 to the Present Day Allen & Unwin
Lee per, W. J. Copyright and Performing Rights Stevens
Mass Observation. The Press and Its Readers Art & Technics
Political and Economic Planning. Balance Sheet of the
Press PEP
 Ownership of the Press PEP
 What’s in the News ? PEP
 The Work of Newspaper Trusts PEP
Robbins, Alan Pitt. Newspapers To-day
Oxford University Press
Williams, Francis. Dangerous Estate Longmans
Business and Specialised Publications of Great Britain
Council of Trade I Technical Press
Kemsley Manual of Journalism. 2nd edn Cassell
The National Readership Survey
Institute of Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising
Newspaper Press Directory Annual Benn Bros.
Willing’s Press Guide 1959 Annual Willing's Press Service
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book i960 Annual Black
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press 1947-49
Cmd 7700 HMSO
Training of Journalists UNESCO/HMSO
The British Press Reference Paper R.3572 COI
1958 21 o
1958 2 6
1952 21 o
1957 25 o
1949 7 6
1955 2 6
1955 2 6
1956 2 6
1959 3 6
1956 12 6
1957 24 o
1958 free
(limited)
1954
1954 210 o
1959 5° °
1959 30 o
1959 10 6
1949 9 6
1958 10 o
1958 free*
XVI. SPORT
Abrahams, Harold, and Crump, Jack, Editors. Athletics
Naldrett Press
Achilles Club. Modern Athletics, edited by H. A. Meyer
Oxford University Press
Altham, H. S. and Swanton, E. W. A History of Cricket.
4th edn Allen & Unwin
Green, Geoffrey. Soccer: The World Game Phoenix House
Lonsdale, Lord, and Parker, Eric, Editors The Lonsdale
Library [30 vols. on various sports] Seeley Service
1951 12 6
1958 21 o
1948 15 o
1953 12 6
1929 15 o
to to
1958 35 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
547
s. d.
Owen, L. O. History of the Rugby Football Union
Playfair Books
Amateur Athletic Association Handbook For 1959 AAA
Football Association Year Book For 1959—60 Heinemann
Playfair Rugby Football For i958~59 Playfair Books
Ruff’s Guide to the Turf For 1959 Sporting Life
Records and Champions. Eagle Series For 1959 Hulton Press
Wisden’s Cricketers’ Almanack For 1959 Sporting Handbooks
1956 18 o
1959 10 6
1959 3 6
1958 7 6
1959 40 o
1959 6 o
1959 17 6
Most of the organisations concerned with sport publish year books covering results
and records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or monthly
periodicals on sport are also published. In addition, some newspapers issue annual
surveys of sport.
INDEX
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references
Index entries do not include references to the administrative changes announced in
October 1959, which are enumerated in the addendum inserted between pages 46 and 47.
Page
AAA see Amateur Athletic Association
ASLIB see Association of Special Libraries
Aberdeen 165, 209, 253, 287, 288, 290, 491
Accession Council .. . . . . 27
Accident Prevention Movement . . 419
Accidents:
industrial .. . . . . 412, 420
road users .. .. . . . . 373
Admiralty 48, 109, in, 114, 116-7, 212,
214, 215, 258, 323, 362
constabulary .. . . . . 100
See also Research, naval
Adoption see under Children
Advertising . . .. .. .. 475
on television . . . . . . 484
Advertising Advisory Committee . . 484
Advisory Committee on Fishery
Research .. .. .. 215
Advisory committees on home grown
timber .. .. .. .. 298
Advisory Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (former) 205, 208
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
203, 207, 218, 220
Advisory Council on Treatment of
Offenders . . . . . . . . 92
Advocates . . . . . . . . 88
Aerodromes . . . . 126, 380, 384-5
After-care :
prisoners .. . . . . . . 96
young offenders . . . . . . 97
After-Care Council (Scotland) .. 96
Age distribution see under Population
Agricultural Central Co-operative
Association Ltd. . . .. . . 278
Agricultural colleges . . 286, 287-8
Agricultural departments 179, 272, 286
Agricultural Executive Committees
see under Scotland and see County
Agricultural Executive Committees
Agricultural Improvement Councils . . 286
Agricultural Land Commission 275, 286
Agricultural Land Service .. 263, 286-7
Agricultural Land Tribunals . . . . 275
Agricultural Loans Fund . . 285-6
Page
Agricultural machinery industry 251, 258,
289, 328-9
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
Ltd. . . .. .. .. 285, 440
Agricultural Research Committee
(Privy Council) . . . . 207, 210
Agricultural Research Council 207, 208,
210-11, 212, 221, 287
Agricultural Research Fund .. .. 210
Agricultural research institutes 211, 276,
287
Agricultural wages boards . . . . 408
Agricultural workers:
earnings and wages . . 408, 415
numbers employed 239, 265, 394-5,
396, 397
protective legislation . . . . 413
Agriculture .. . . 265-89, 296
advisory services . . 273, 286-7, 288
allotments .. . . .. . . 269
annual reviews . . 272, 273, 279-80
artificial insemination (ai) . . . . 276
bloodstock . . . . 265, 276, 277
control of animal diseases . . . . 277
co-operative societies .. 265, 278-9
crofts and crofters . . 274-5, 282, 284
crops 266-71, 272, 276, 280, 281, 282,
287
education and training . . 288-9
employment in . . . . 239, 265
exports . . . . 265, 276, 277
farm drainage . . . . . . 282
Farm Improvement Scheme . . 284
farm incomes and expenditure . . 272
farm management .. 273, 275, 286
farm tenure . . . . 265, 273, 275-6
farming, types of . . 6, 266, 268, 269
farms, number of .. . . . . 265
feedingstuffs 266, 270, 272, 273, 288
fertilisers . . . . 270, 282, 288, 340
grass . . 6, 266, 267, 272, 276, 282
hill farming . . .. 266, 268, 276, 282
horticulture . . 266, 268-9, 271, 279,
284-5, 287, 288
land use . . .. 179, 265-70
livestock 265, 266, 267, 269, 271, 272,
276-7, 279, 280, 282, 296, 377
548
INDEX
549
Page
Agriculture—contd.
loan facilities 269, 284, 285-6, 440
marginal production scheme (Scot¬
land) .. .• •• •• 284
marketing schemes . . 272, 277-9, 280-1
mechanisation 271, 272, 328-9, 466
milk and dairying 266, 268, 269, 271,
272, 273, 276, 279, 280
policy . . • • 272—6, 279—80
price guarantees . . 273, 278, 279-82
production . . 262, 266, 270-1, 446
research see under Research
shows .• •• •• •• 289
small farmers’ assistance schemes . . 284
smallholdings .. • • • • 269
subsidies and grants 272, 273, 274, 276,
279-85, 287, 433
veterinary services . . 263, 277, 287
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
Ministry of 48-9* 210, 212, 214, 215,
258, 263, 269, 272, 285, 286, 287,
292, 293, 296, 298
Aid to overseas countries see under
Finance
Airbrokers Association .. • • 384
Air Companies, Independent and Cor¬
porations see under Civil Aviation
Air Council . . . . 49> io9> I24
Air Force see Royal Air Force
Air Ministry 49-50, 105, 109, in, 214, 385
constabulary . . . . . . 100
Air pollution, prevention of 145, 208, 300
Air Registration Board . . • • 379
Air Safety Board . . • • 379_8o
Air, Secretary of State for 49, 109, 124, 385
Air Traffic Control Board . . . • 385
Air Traffic Control Service and Centres 385
Air Training Corps .. . . 127, 177
Air Transport see Civil Aviation
Air Transport Advisory Council 379, 381
Aircraft:
civil . . 206, 336-7, 379, 380, 381, 382,
383, 385
industry 220, 251, 253, 257, 325, 336-7,
379
Service 114, 118-9, I22, 124-6, 336, 379
Aircraft and Armament Experimental
Establishment .. . • . . 115
Aircraft carriers .. •• ..117
Airmail services see under Civil Aviation
Airports see under Civil Aviation
Aldermen .. .. • • 7°, 73
Aliens . . .. .. • • • • I4
Allotments .. .. • • • • 269
Almoners .. .. •• IS1, I56
Amateur Athletic Association 501-2
Page
Amateur Rowing Association . . 505
Ambulance services:
civil defence .. • • . . 129
National Health Service . . -.154
Ancient Monuments Boards .. . . 226
Anglican Communion. . . . I95_6
See also Church of England
Anglo-American Productivity Council 262
Anti-Locust Research Centre • • 216
Apollo Society . • • • • • 229
Apparel and Fashion Industry’s Asso¬
ciation .. •• •• •• 345
Appeal Committee of Quarter Sessions 85
Appeal, Court of .. • • 82, 89-90
Appellate courts 42, 82, 83, 84-5, 86
Approved schools (young offenders). . 97
Approved Woodlands Scheme . . 297
Arbitration Boards .. . . • • 4°8
Archbishops:
Canterbury . . 44, 194, I96, 200, 227
Westminster, Cardinal Archbishop
of 198
York  44, 194
Archery. . . . •• •• •• 510
Architects’ Registration Council . . 227
Architecture and architects . . 225-7, 321
226-7
• • 227
• • 307, 308, 311, 3i2
3i4,3i5,3i6
 367
Area Consultative Councils:
electricity . . . • • • • • 3°7
gas .. .• •• •• •• 3X4
Armament Research and Development
Establishment . . • • .. 115
Armed Forces . . . • 108—27, 13°
commissioned ranks in .. .. 114
equipment 114-6, 117, 118—9, 121—2,
124-6, 258
national service in .. .. no, 111-3
overseas commitments and deploy¬
ment 108, 109, 113—4, 118, 121, 124
participation in civil defence .. 13°
pre-Service organisations 120, 124, 127,
177
recruitment and training .. 112,119,
122-3, 126
research and development 114-6, 118,
125, 213
reserves 112, 120, 123-4, 126-7
resettlement service. . .. 112, 399
sea and air transport 358, 377, 383
staff colleges .. •• .. 114
strength .. 109-10, in—2, 394
institutions ..
schools of
Area Boards:
electricity
gas . .
railways
55°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Armed Forces—contd.
voting at elections .. . . . . 32
Army 108, 109, 112, 113, 114, 120-4, 130
Army Cadet Force . . . . 124, 177
Army Council . . . . .. 109, 120
Army Emergency Reserve .. . . 124
Arrest, law relating to. . .. . . 78
Art collections . . .. 217, 221, 223, 224
Art colleges and schools . . 221, 225
Art exhibitions and galleries 222-3, 224-5
Art Exhibitions Bureau . . . . 224
Art societies . . . . . . . . 224
Arts Council of Great Britain 221, 222,
224, 225, 227, 228, 230, 236, 237, 238
Arts, promotion of . . . . 221-38
expenditure on and grants for 221, 222,
223, 224, 229, 230, 233, 234, 235,
236, 237
Assay Offices .. .. .. ..351
Assizes . . . . . . . . . . 84
Associated British Picture Corporation 232
Associated Newspapers Ltd. . . 488, 489
Associated Press . . .. . . 493
Association football see under Football
Association for the Preservation of
Rural Scotland . . .. 191-2
Association of British Chambers of
Commerce .. .. . . 258, 262
Association of Special Libraries and
Information Bureaux (aslib) 221, 229
Association of Specialised Film Pro¬
ducers .. .. .. .. 233
Athletics . . .. .. 501-2
Athlone Fellowship Scheme . . . . 172
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
Atomic Energy Authority 115, 207, 211,
212-3, 310, 328, 331
Attendance centres (young offenders) 98
Attested herds . . . . . . 277, 283
Attorney-General . . 43, 55, 79, 89
Audience research (broadcasting) 483, 484-5
Auditor General see Comptroller
Auxiliary Fire Service 128, 129, 130
Aviation see Aircraft, Civil Aviation
and Royal Air Force
B
BBC see British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration
BEA see British European Airways
BOAC see British Overseas Airways
Corporation
Badminton .. . . . . . . 504
Bail .. .. . . .. . . 78
Balance of payments . . 241, 354, 460-5
Ballet and ballet companies
Baltic Exchange
Air Section of
Bank Holidays
Bank notes
Bank of England
Bank rate
Banking system
Baptist Church
Barristers
Basket-ball
Beer, consumption of
Belfast:
airport (Nutt’s Comer)
art, drama and music
College of Technology
Fire Brigade
Harbour Commissioners
industries . . • • 253
newspapers . .
passenger transport in
population ..
port of
university
Betting . .
‘pools’ (football)
Page
235. 237, 238
• • 358, 458
383-4
418-9
435, 436, 512
425, 435-6, 439, 44°,
44L 454, 459
248, 435
435-8
•• 197
88—9, 9®
.. 504
347-8
384
223, 231, 236
.. 170
106, 107
• • 362
308, 327, 348
•• 49i
•• 376
• • i7
361, 362
165, 167, 228, 287, 288
21, 506, 507
21, 497
Beveridge Report (social insurance) . . 133
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billiards .. .. .. .. 504
Bills, parliamentary:
36, 37-8, 425, 427
37,7i
• • 37-8, 47-8
• • 37
28, 38
. . 191
6-7, 503
Money Bills ..
Private Bills ..
procedure
Public Bills . .
Royal Assent to
Bird sanctuaries
Birds
Birmingham:
airport (Elmdon) .. .. .. 384
art and music .. 224, 236, 237
College of Technology .. . . 169
industries 251, 316, 338, 347, 351, 419
Museum of Science and Industry . . 217
newspapers . . .. . . . . 490
population . . .. .. 16, 17
public transport .. . . . . 372
University . . . . 165, 167, 203
Birthrate .. .. .. 9-10, 11
Births, registration of . . .. .. 8
Biscuit industry . . . . . . 346
Biscuits, consumption of . . . . 346
Bishops . . .. 194, 196, 198
Blind persons:
broadcast receiving licences for . . 477
employment and training . . . . 403
INDEX
551
Page
Blind persons—contd.
National Library for . . I41* 22^
welfare 131, i4°> I4I> 228, 4°3) 477
Blood transfusion service . . • • 151
Bloodstock . . • • 265, 276, 277
Board of Trade see Trade, Board of
Boilers and boilerhouse plant . . 331
Book Society . . • • • • • • 230
Books:
numbers published . . . . • • 229
production and distribution .. 229
reviews . . • • • • • • 227
sales of . • • • • • • • 353
See also Libraries
Booksellers’ Association . . • • 229
Borough Councils (Northern Ireland) 70,
7I> 76-7
See also County borough councils
and Non-county borough councils
Borstal institutions . . 92, 93> 98-9
Bowls .. • • • • • • • • 501
Boxing . . • • • • • • • • 5°8
Boy Scouts Association . . i74» I7o
Boys’ Brigade . . • • • • I74> *76
Bradford . . • • 16, 17, 169, 252
Bread and flour confectionery industry 346
Brewing industry . . 251, 253> 347-8
Brickmaking . . . • • • • • 349
Bristol . . . • • • • • i89> 204
art and drama . . 224> 230, 232
College of Technology . • .. 169
industries . . • • 251, 34^, 349> 351
Physics Laboratory . • • • 2°4
population .. • • • • • • r7
port of . • • • • • 362
University . . . • 165, 232, 287, 288
Bristol Steamship Owners’ Association 357
British Academy . . • • • • 229
British Actors’ Equity •• ..231
British Amateur Athletic Board .. 5°2
British Association for the Advance¬
ment of Science . . • • 202-3
British Association of Industrial Editors 494
British Bankers’ Association . . • • 43^
British Board of Film Censors . . 235
British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades
Research Association .. • • 351
British Boxing Board of Control . . 5°8
British Broadcasting Corporation . . 163,
216, 233, 255, 477. 478-9. 48o_3>
484, 485. 486
Board of Management . . • • 479
orchestras .. . . • • • • 23^
British Cast Iron Research Association 326
British Commonwealth International
Newsfilm News Agency Trust . . 486
Page
British Commonwealth Scientific
Offices .. •• •• •• 2I8
British Cotton Industry Research
Association (Shirley Institute) 205, 342
British Council 50, I72> 173, 2I9. 22I>
222-3, 227, 23°. 235. 237
British Council of Churches . . . . 200
British Cycle and Motor Cycle Indus¬
tries Association Ltd. . . .-336
British Dental Association . . . . 156
British Drama League . . 228, 231
British Egg Marketing Board 278, 280-1
British Electrical and Allied Industries
Research Association . . . . 312
British Electricity Authority (former) 307,
308
British Empire Cancer Campaign 157, 201
British Employers’ Confederation . . 258,
260, 262, 405. 4°9, 42i
British European Airways 336, 377, 378,
379, 380, 382-3, 384, 388
British Film Academy (former) .. 234
British Film Fund Agency . . 234, 235
British Film Institute . . 221, 233
British Film Production Fund . . 234
British Food Manufacturing Industries
Research Association . . • • 347
British Glass Industry Research
Association . . . • • • • • 35°
British Horse Society . . . . 5°7> 5°8
British Independent Air Transport
Association .. . . • • • • 383
British Institute of Management .. 263
British Iron and Steel Federation .. 326
British Iron and Steel Research Asso¬
ciation
British Isles
area ..
climate
fauna
flora
 205
 i-7
1
.. 4-5, 6, 265, 295
6-7, 191, 207, 211, 297
6, 191, 207, 2x1, end papers
geology and topography . . • • I~4
population . . • • 7—8. 9. I2> I4—18
soil and vegetation . . . . 5-6. 294-5
British Jute Trade Research Association 345
British Leather Manufacturers’ Re¬
search Association .. . • • • 351
British Legion . . . . • • ■ • I44
British Medical Association 156, 202, 421
British Museum . . 223> 227> 228
Natural History . . • • 2I7> 228
British National Committee on Space
Research .. • • • • • • 220
British Overseas Airways Corporation 255,
336, 377. 378, 380, 381-2
British Overseas Fairs Ltd. . . 258, 457
552
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
British Productivity Council 233, 262, 263
British Railways 337, 362, 365, 366-9, 375
area boards .. .. . . .. 367
modernisation schemes 365-6, 368-9
British Rayon Research Association . . 343
British Red Cross Society 132, 154, 156,
British Road Services (haulage) 365, 372
British Rubber Manufacturers, Re¬
search Association of . . • • 353
British Shipbuilding Research Associa¬
tion . . . . .. . . . . 328
British Standards Institution 262-3, 476
Consumer Advisory Council . . 476
British Sugar Corporation . . . . 281
British Transport Commission 255, 256,
362, 364-6, 367, 368, 372, 374, 375
divisions .. . . .. . . 365
police . . . . . . . . 100
British Transport Docks . . 362, 365
British Transport Hotels and Catering
Services . . . . . . 365, 368
British Travel and Holidays Associa¬
tion . . . . .. .. ..451
British United Press . . . . . . 493
British Waterways .. . . 365, 374
British Wool Marketing Board 278, 281
Broadcasting . . .. 163, 477-86
advertisements . . . . . . 484
advisory councils and committees 478-9,
480, 484, 485, 486
international relations . . 483, 485-6
parliamentary summaries . . . . 40
relations with Government depart¬
ments 478, 479, 480, 483, 484, 485
research .. .. . . 216, 485
to schools . . 163, 478, 479, 481, 484
sound  480-3, 486
television . . . . 334, 483-4, 486
transmitting stations and studios 479,
480, 481, 483-4
wire 484
See also under Employment and Licences
Buddhist Community . . 199-200
BudSet  427-8,431-3
Building and contracting 257, 259, 262,
263, 321-4, 326
contractors’ plant . . . . • • 330
employment in . . 257, 321, 395
industrial . . .. .. 253-4, 322
by local authorities . . 180, 181, 321
new towns, progress in . . 188-9
overseas . . . . . . 321, 323
prefabricated buildings . . . . 322
private .. . . 180, 181, 257, 321
production .. .. 180-1, 321-3
Page
Building and contracting—contd.
reconstruction .. .. 180,189
of schools . . . . .. 164-5, 226
See also Housing and Research
Building Research Station . . • • 323
Building Societies . . 182, 184, ^^3
Burghs see Scotland, local government
Burnham Committees. . .. 163,418
Bus and coach services 365, 372—3, 376,
377
By-elections . . .. . . 32, 34
By-laws . . . . 53, 69, 145
CEMA see Northern Ireland, Council
for the Encouragement of Music
and the Arts
CENTO see Central Treaty Organisa¬
tion
CERN see European Organisation for
Nuclear Research
COSPAR see Committee on Space Re¬
search
Cabinet .. 25, 28, 44-5, 46, 108
Office .. .. 45, 47, 259
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . . . 390
Cables and wires (insulated) industry 334
Calder Hall .. . . .. 213, 310
Calico Printers’ Association . . . . 344
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation 221, 222
Cambridge University 41, 122, 165, 166,
167, 203, 288
Cavendish Laboratory .. .. 204
dramatic society . . .. . . 232
Institute of Criminology .. .. 91
Library .. .. .. . . 228
museums . . . . .. .. 224
Press 229
sport . . . . . . 498, 499, 504
Canada, aid from . . .. . . 465
Canals see Inland waterways
Cancer research .. 157, 201, 216
Canning industry .. 251, 347, 348
Canoeing .. .. .. .. 506
Canteens . . . . .. . . 421
Capital Issues Committee 440, 441, 468
Capital punishment .. .. .. 92
Cardiff 17, 165, 169, 223, 252, 358, 362,
491
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 204, 221,
222, 224, 236
Carpets industry . . 251, 252, 345-6
Catholic Child Welfare Council . . 143
Catholic Marriage Advisory Council. . 132
Catholic Young Men’s Society . . 176
INDEX
553
Page
Cement and Concrete Association . . 323
Cement industry . . • • 257, 350
Censorship:
broadcasting • . • • • • 47^
films .. • • •- • • 234-5
plays . . . • -■ • • . . 231
press’s freedom from . • • • 4^7
Census of Distribution 59, 47It 472, 473
Census of Population . . 9, I4-I8> 395~6
Census of Production . . 59, 324* 33&
Central Advisory Water Committee 317-8,
318-9, 320
Central After-Care Association . . 96
Central Council of Physical Recreation 178,
496, 511
Central Criminal Court . . • • 84
Central Electricity Authority (former) 307,
308
Central Electricity Board (former) 255, 3°7
Central Electricity Generating Board 307,
308, 309, 311> 313
Central Fire Brigades Advisory
Councils . . • • • • • • io4
Central Health Services Council . . 148
Central Institutions (Scotland) 170, 204
Central Office of Information 54, 62, 233
Central Religious Advisory Committee
(bbc) .. • • •• •■ 479, 480
Central School of Arts and Crafts . . 225
Central School of Speech Training
and Dramatic Art .. • • • • 232
Central Statistical Office .. 47, 259
Central Treaty Organisation (cento) 108,
172
Central Youth Employment Executive 401
Chamber of Shipping • • 356, 357
Chambers of Commerce . . 204, 258
Scottish Council of • • • • 258
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 43> 88
Chancellor of the Exchequer 42, 47, 51,
54, 221, 259, 260, 426, 427, 440
Chancery Division (High Court) . . 82
Channel Islands:
air services . .
area ..
holidays, statutory
horticulture . .
language
legislature
population . .
press
383, 384
1
. . 418
267, 269
.. 18
• • 29
• • 15
491
relationship with UK and Crown 24, 27,
29, 41. 53, 359
social security . . • • • • J34
telephone system . . . • • • 389
temperature . . • • - • 5
Page
Channel Islands—contd.
war pensioners . . • • • • 53
Chapelcross reactor .. •• 213,310
Chemical plant industry . . • • 332
Chemicals industries 220, 262, 324, 325,
339-41, 447
Chiefs of Staff Committee . . . . 109
Child’s Special Allowance . . • • 137
Children:
adoption of . . . • • • 83, 143
art, drama and music 225, 230-1, 237
broadcasts for . . 480, 481, 484
cinema attendance and clubs 22, 235
deprived of home life, care of 69, 142—4
employment .. •• .. 411
handicapped . • • • 164
numbers attending school . . 158-9
25L
nurseries • •153
publications for . . 227, 228, 491, 495
welfare services .. i42_4> I52-3> I^4
See also Families, Family Allowances,
Juvenile Courts, Schools, Young
Offenders and Youth
Children’s Film Foundation
China manufacture
Chocolate, consumption of
Choral societies
Christian Scientists
Church Army . .
Church Assembly
legislative measures
Church Commissioners
Church in Wales (Anglican)
Church Lads’ Brigade
Church of England
• • 235
349-50
• • 346
. . 236
. . 198
.. 132
194, 195
194-5
• • 195
195, 196
. . 176
193-5. 200
appointment of senior clergy 28, 44,
archbishops 31, 44, I94» t96, 200, 227
bishops • • • • 31. 44. I94» I96
Ecclesiastical Courts .. 86, 195
finance . . •■ •• •• J95
relations with Monarchy 27, 28, 194, 195
relations with State 95, i93> I94> I95
schools . • • • 164, 165, 195
Church of England Children’s Society 132,
143
Church of England Moral Welfare
Council . . • • • • .. 132
Church of Ireland (Anglican).. 195-6
Church of Scotland (Presbyterian) 132, 143,
196, 200
Church of Wales (Presbyterian) .. 197
Church schools . . 159, 164, 165, 195
Churches . . • • • • 193-200
co-operation between . . • • 200
preservation of historic . . • • 227
554
BRITAIN I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Churches—contd.
welfare work
95, 131, 132, 143, 150,
174, 176
See also Clergy and the individual
denominations
Churches of Christ .. . . . . 198
Cinemas . . 22, 232, 233, 234, 235
Cinematograph Films Council . . 234
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux . . . . 132
Citizenship . . .. . . . . 14
Civic Trust (architecture) . . . . 227
Civil Aviation .. 59, 255, 259 377-86
airmail services 377, 378, 382, 383, 388
airports . . .. 380, 382, 384-5
charter operations .. 377, 380, 383
Colonial coach class services . . 383
constabulary . . . . . . 100
corporations 261, 377, 378, 380, 381-3
ferry services (for cars) . . . . 383
helicopter services .. . . .. 383
independent airline companies 377, 378,
379, 380-1, 383
international co-operation 379, 380, 386
labour relations . . . . . . 380
licences . . . . . . 379, 380
meteorological information . . 385
ministerial powers . . 379“8o, 381
navigational aids 379, 380, 383, 385-6
safety measures 379-80, 385-6, 391, 413
scheduled services 377, 378, 380-1, 382,
383
tourist and economy services 381, 382,
383
traffic control . . . . 380, 385-6
school of ..
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil Defence see under Defence
Civil Service ....
Arbitration Tribunal
classes and grades
Commission
conditions of service
numbers employed
salaries
staff associations 67
Clay pigeon shooting
Clean Air Council
386
64-9, 93
. . 410
65, 386
64, 66
67-9, 409-10
64, 65-6
68, 416
406, 409-xo
.. 511
300
Clergy . . 28, 44, 95, 193, 194, 195, 196
membership of House of Lords 31, 194
non-membership of House of Com¬
mons   33, 194
training .. .. .. 196, 197
Climate . . . . 4-5, 6, 265, 295
Clock and watch industry .. . . 333
Clothing industry .. 252, 344, 345, 395
Clyde Navigation Trust . . . . 362
Page
Clydeside 17,252, 253, 290, 322, 325, 327
354, 363
Coal:
coalfields and mines 2, 250, 251, 252,
253, 300, 3OI> 302, 304, 3x6, 419
consumers’ councils . . . . 301
consumption . . 302-3, 309
distribution .. . . . . .. 302
exports and imports 300, 302, 303, 447
industry . . 252, 256, 258, 300-5
mechanisation . . . . 302, 304
National Coal Board 255, 256, 301,
302, 303, 304, 316
opencast workings . . 301, 302, 419
production and marketing 300, 302, 304
research .. .. .. 304-5,316
See also Mines and quarries
Coal Industry Social Welfare Organi¬
sation .. . . . . . . 303
Coal Utilisation Council .. 316-7
Coalminers:
earnings
medical and welfare services
303,
4i5
4i3»
421
numbers employed . . 255, 300, 302
Coastal Shipping Advisory Committee 365
Coastguard Service .. . . 358-9
Coffee bars .. . . . . . . 23
Coinage.. .. .. .. 436,512
Coke consumption and production 309,
3i4, 315
Colleges:
for adult students . .
Advanced Technology
agricultural . .
art
Civil Defence
for disabled . .
Fire Service . .
management training
music
police
Services’
teachers’ training
technical 169-70, 203
Technical Staff
theological
See also Universities
Colombo Plan . . 172, 469, 470-1
Colonial Development Corporation . . 469
Colonial Office . . 50, 173, 360, 379
Colonial Service see Overseas Civil
Service
Colonies:
aid for . . 216, 467-8, 469, 470-1
Secretary of State for 50, 210, 469
.. 171
169-70, 204
. . 286, 287-8
. . 225
.. 130
••399
.. 106
263-4
• • 237
102-3
114, 119, 122, 126
163, 195
204, 205, 208, 263
.. .. 400
• •195
INDEX
555
Page
Page
124, i77
.. 188
. . 101
.. 220
458-9
of
Combined Cadet Force
Commission for New Towns.
Commissioners of Police
Committee on Space Research
(cospar)
Commodity markets . .
Commons, House of see House
Commons
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths
Preservation Society . . . . 192
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux
and Institutes . . 218-9, 221, 287
Commonwealth citizens . . . . 14
Commonwealth co-operation:
in air services .. 381
for broadcasting . . . • 485-6
for defence .. 50, 108, 114, 115, 116
in education . . . . 52> I63> I72
financial and trade 49, 50, 281—2, 342,
391, 437. 449, 452, 459-6o, 467-71
see also individual Manufacturing
Industries
for research . . . . 218-9, 287, 299
social service agreements . . .-134
Commonwealth Development Finance
Company Limited . . . • 44°, 468
Commonwealth Games 502, 504, 509,
Commonwealth Institute . . 52,
Commonwealth Institute of Biological
Control
Commonwealth Mycological and Ento¬
mological Institutes. .
Commonwealth, Queen as Head of 24, 25
Commonwealth Relations Office S0-1,
66, 173, 211, 379
Commonwealth Relations, Secretary of
State for . . . . 42, 51, 210
Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Ex¬
pedition .. .. •• 219-20
Communications see Post Office, Re¬
search and Transport
Community centres . . • • . . 171
Company of Nine . . . . • • 229
Comptroller and Auditor General 46, 210,
212, 426
Concert halls . .
Confectionery industries
Congregational Church
Consolidated Fund
Constabulary^, Inspectors of
Consumer Consultative Councils and
Committees:
agricultural marketing schemes
coal . .
electricity . . . . • • 3°7
gas 
5io
228
219
219
Consumer Consultative Councils and
Committees—contd.
nationalised industries
Post Office . .
transport
Consumer expenditure
Consumer protection . .
Consumers’ Association Ltd
Contemporary Art Society
Contractors’ plant industry
Conurbations
236
• • 346
• • 197
285, 425
. . 101
278
•tor
308
314
. . 261
• • 387
• • 366
242, 247
475-6
• • 476
.. 224
• • 33°
16, 17, 18, 251
Convenors (Scotland) . . • • 7°
Convocations of Canterbury and York 194,
196
Co-operative banks . . . . • • 438
Co-operative societies 171, 255, 438, 472,
474
agricultural and horticultural 265,
278-9
forestry . . • • • • • • 298
Co-operative Youth Movement . . 176
Copenhagen Agreement (broadcasting
wave lengths) . . . . 480-1
Coronation . . . • • • 27, 194
Coroners’ Courts . . . . 80, 85-6
Corporations, public see Public cor¬
porations
Corrective training . . 91, 93, 94, 95
Cotton Board . . . . . . • • 342
Cotton Exchange . . . . 342, 459
Cotton industry . . 25 L 257, 341-2
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research see Research Council (dsir)
Council for the Preservation of Rural
England . . . • • • • • I9I
Council of Christians and Jews . . 200
Council of Industrial Design 221, 225,
263, 476
Council of Legal Education . . . . 89
Council of Repertory Theatres .. 231
Council of Scottish Chambers of
Commerce . . . . • • • • 258
Council on Tribunals .. ..86-7
Scottish Committee of . . . . 87
Counsellors of State . . . . 29-30
Counties . . 1, 69-70, fold-in map
County Agricultural Executive Com¬
mittees . . • • 273-4, 275, 286
County borough councils 70, 71-2, 74,
75, 76, 77, 187, 269, 370
County councils 70, 71-2, 74, 75, 76, 77,
187, 190, 269, 370
County Court Rule Committee . . 88
County courts • • • • 81-2, 90
County district councils 70, 71, 72, 74,
76, 190
556
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
County farm institutes .. . . 288
County Music Committees .. . . 236
County Naturalists’ Trusts .. . . 191
Court of the Presbytery .. . . 196
Court of Session (Scotland) 76,83, 85, 87,88
.. 196
.. 225
Trust
. . 204
56, 87
•• 409
Court of the Synod
Courtauld Institute
Scientific and Educational
Fund
Courts-martial
Courts of Inquiry
Courts of Law see under Law
Covent Garden Opera Trust
Coventry . . .. 1.7,
Cricket ..
Criminal Appeal, Court of
Criminal Investigation Department
Criminal proceedings see under Law
Criminal records
Criminals, treatment of
•• 237
189, 230, 251
498-9
.. 85
. 103
. 103
.91-9
Crofters’ Commission . . 274-5,
Croquet
Crown see Monarchy
Crown Agents for Oversea Govern¬
ments and Administrations
Crown Courts . .
Crown Office (Scotland)
Crusade of Rescue
Curling . .
Currency exchange .. 454-5, 459, 512-3
Customs and Excise Department 51, 234,
431
Customs and Excise duties see under
Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry . . 338
Cycle and motor cycle industry 257, 336
Cycling .. .. .. ..510
284
501
50
84
62
132
501
D
DSIR see Research, Scientific and
Industrial, Department of
Dancing:
ballet . . . . . . 22, 237, 238
ballroom
folk * .
22
236
Highland . . . . . . . . 502
in schools . . . . . . . . 496
Death benefit . . . . . . 139-40
Death, causes of . . . . . . 11
Death duty see estate duty under
Taxation
Death grant .. . . . . . . 139
Death rate . . . . . . 9-10, 11
Death sentence . . . . 84,92
Deaths, registration of . . . . 8
Page
Decca navigational aid . . . . 385
Deer stalking . . .. .. . . 503
Defence.. .. .. .. 108-30
Board . . . . .. .. 109
Civil .. . . . . . . 127—30
Committee . . . . . . 108-9
expenditure .. .. 110-1,243,462
Ministry of .. 51,108-9,111,127
policy   108-9
supply .. .. .. 114-6
US aid . . . . . . 115, 463
See also Armed Forces and under
Research
Defence Bonds. . .. . . 437, 438
Defence Research Policy Committee. . 207
Delegated legislation . . . . . . 38-9
Dental services. . . . 149, 150, 164
Dentists:
in National Health Service 147, 149, 150
qualifications and training . . 148, 156
Departments see Government, depart¬
ments of also individual titles and
Civil Service
Derby:
industry . . . . . . 251,349
Social Survey . . . . 21,23
Design Centre . . . . . . . . 225
Design and Industries Association . . 225
Detention centres (young offenders) 92, 98
Devaluation of sterling . . .. 464
Development areas . . 253-4, 333> 345
Development Areas Treasury Advisory
Committee . . . . . . .. 254
Development Commission 206-7,214-5,
254,288-9, 292
Development Corporations of New
Towns . . . . 179,187, 188, 189
Development Councils (in industry). . 233,
254, 342
Development Fund . . 207, 215, 289, 310
Development plans . . . . . . 187
Dioceses .. .. 194,195,198,199
Diphtheria immunisation . . . . 155
Director of Public Prosecutions 55, 79
Disablement:
benefit .. .. .. .. 139
employment of disabled .. 399, 402-3
pensions (war) . . .. . . 144
rehabilitation . . 150-1, 399, 402-3
Disablement Resettlement Service 402-3
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies . . 96
Discount market . . .. 438-9
Distributive trades . . . . 396,471-5
District Councils (Scotland) 70, 71, 72, 76
Dock and Harbour Authorities’ Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. .. 360
INDEX
557
Page
Dock workers . . . . . • 362-3, 415
Docks .. 360,362,363,364,366,368
Dockyards, naval . . 100, 114,118
Doctor Barnardo’s Homes . . . . 143
Doctors:
Appointed Factory . . 412,420
in industry . . . . • • • • 42°
in National Health Service. . 148, 149,
150,156
qualifications and training . . 148, 156
Dollar area, trade with 248, 448, 452, 454,
457, 458, 463
See also individual manufacturing
industries
Dollar Exports Council . . • • 45^
Domesday Book . . . • • • 223
Domestic Coal Consumers’ Council . . 301
Domestic electrical appliances in¬
dustry . . . • • • 334_5
Domestic Help Service . . 141, I53“4
Domestic proceedings (court) 84,494
Domestic service see under Employ¬
ment
Dounreay . . • • • • • • 2I3
212, 213
230-2, 481
231-2
221, 232
324, 347-8
• • 43
175-6
Education—contd.
adult . .
agricultural
architecture
art
commercial
drama
examinations, school
Page
.. 171
.. 288
. . 227
222,225
. . 170
• ■ 232
158,161,162, 237
Ministry of
music. .
physical
prisoners
schools
teachers
Dragon (reactor)
Drama . .
amateur dramatics
schools of
Drinks industries
Duchy of Lancaster
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award .
Dundee 165, 253, 329, 345, 49L 492
Durham 165, 203, 252, 288, 302, 316, 345
Dyestuffs industry . . 203, 315, 339
E
Eady Fund see British Film Production
Fund
Earnings . . • • 21—2, 414-8
Ecclesiastical Committee . . .-194
Ecclesiastical Courts . . • ■ 86, 195
Economic Planning Board . . • • 260
Economy, national . . • • 239-49
See also Balance of payments and
Finance
Edinburgh:
administrative departments in . . 60
industry .. .. 253,305,347,351
International Festival . . • • 236
museums and art galleries . . • • 223
National Library" of Scotland 227-8
newspapers and periodicals. . 490-1, 492
population . . . . • • . . 17
University . . . . 103, 165, 228, 288
Education . . . . • • 157-73
finance 159, 160, 165, 166, 167—8,170
forestry . . • • • • 298—9
grants and scholarships 159-60, 166-7,
170, 172
51-2, 158, 166, 173, 221,
223,228, 496
 237
164,178,496
 94
.• 158-65, 195, 199
  162-3,418
technical and technological 167-70, 203-4
university . . • • ^S-8, 203—4
Egg Marketing Board, British. . 278, 280-1
Eisteddfodau . . • • • • 229,236
Elections:
local government . . • • 53, 73
parliamentary . . 32-3,33, 34, 53
Electrical appliances industry 21, 334—5
Electrical plant industry" . . 333_4
Electricity Board for Northern Ireland 255,
308,311
Electricity Council . . 307, 308, 312, 313
Electricity supply • • 255, 262, 272, 300,
306-13
consumers, number of .... 272, 3 12
employment in . . • • • • 3°7
hydro-electric . • • •3°8,3°9-I(>
nuclear power stations .. 310—1
see also under Research
Electricity Supply Research Council. . 312
Electronic equipment industry 252, 325,
334
Emigration . . • • • • • • I3
Employers’ organisations 257—8, 260,
262, 357, 363, 405
Employment . . 243, 250, 255, 259, 261—2,
321,393-8
239,265,272, 394-5, 396
111-3, 394
agricultural
armed forces,
broadcasting
children
Civil Service. .
civil, statistics
disabled persons
distributive trades
domestics
earnings
479, 480
.. 411
64,65-7, 395
• •395
• • 399,402-3
395,396,471,472
20, 395-6,401
414-8
558
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment—contd.
exchanges and offices
in factories . .
in fisheries . .
foreigners
in local government
in managerial posts
Page
398-9, 401
. . 412
. . 291
20, 400-1
74-5, 395
264
manufacturing industries 253, 256, 325,
328, 333, 335, 339, 341, 346, 349, 394-5
Merchant Navy . . . .357,359-60
older workers . . . . 393,400
police. . . . . . 100, 101, 103
ports . . . . . . . . 362-3
Post Office . . . . . . . . 386
prisoners . . . . . . . . 94
in research . . . . 203, 208, 220
services (Ministry of Labour)
112,398-403
terms and conditions of 360, 380, 403-23
training centres . . . . 399,403
in transport . . . . 364, 367, 376
welfare and safety in 303, 358, 360, 380,
403-4,411-4,419-21
see also Industrial injuries insurance
women 393-4,395-6,412,415,418
see also under Women
young persons . . 401-2, 411-2, 414,
4i5, 418
See also individual industries, Labour,
Unemployment and Work, hours of
Engines, industrial . . . . . . 329
Engineering 203, 251, 252, 253, 262, 447
civil .. .. 257,258,259,321,322-4
electrical . . 220,252,325,333-5
marine 203, 250, 252, 253, 327-8
mechanical . . . . . . 328-33
England:
area and counties 1, 251-2, fold-in map
industries, location of . . 250-2
population . . . . . . 15, 17
English Association . . . . . . 229
English Children’s Theatre . . 230-1
English Folk Dance and Song Society 236
English Stage Company . . . . 230
Episcopal Church in Scotland 196, 200
Equal pay .. .. 415,418
Estate duty see under Taxation
Estimates (Exchequer) 425-6, 427, 432-3
Select Committee on . . . . 427
European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) . . . . . . 212-3
European Broadcasting Union 485, 486
European Economic Community 449, 453
European Monetary Agreement (for¬
merly European Payments Union)
45L459,46o
Page
European Nuclear Energy Agency . . 218
European Organisation for Nuclear
Research (cern) . . . . 213,218
European Recovery Programme . . 465
European Volunteer Workers Scheme 401
Eurovision . . . . . . . . 486
Evidence, law of . . . . 79, 80
Exchange control . . 51, 435, 454, 459
Exchange Equalisation Account
430, 459-6o
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. 492
Exchequer see under Finance
Exchequer and Audit Department . . 46
Excise duties see under Taxation
Expenditure:
public authorities 242, 243, 246, 425-7,
431-4
see also under Defence, Finance,
Research and Subsidies
personal . . 242, 247, 272, 474, 475
Export Credits Guarantee Department
456-7,468
Exports . . 239, 240, 248, 324, 354, 444-9,
453, 455-7, 458,461
controls . . . . . . 259, 454—5
Government assistance to see under
Trade
re-exports . . . . . . . . 449
See also individual industries
Extradition . . . . . . . . 53
F
Factories, legislative provisions 253-4,
412-3
Factory Inspectorate . . 403, 404, 412,414,
419, 421
Faculty of Advocates . . . . . . 89
Families:
average size of .. .. 11,19-20
welfare services for . . . . 131, 143—4
See also Households
Family Allowances . . . . 134,392
Family Service Units . . . . . . 144
Family Welfare Association .. . . 131
Farm Improvement Scheme . . . . 284
Farm Institutes . . . . . . 288
Farming see Agriculture
Fatstock Marketing Corporation . . 279
Fauna . . . . 6-7, 191, 207, 211, 297
Federation of Agricultural Co-opera¬
tives .. .. .. .. .. 279
Federation of British Carpet Manu¬
facturers .. .. .. .. 345
Federation of British Industries 258, 260,
262,457-8
INDEX
559
Page
Fencing . . . • • • • • 511
Fertilisers . . . . 282, 288, 291, 340
Festivals (arts) . . . . 229, 232, 233, 236
Fighting Vehicles Research and
Development Establishment . . 115
Films 232-5, 250
Finance . . • • • • 424~43
aid from overseas countries 463, 465-6
aid to overseas countries . . 440, 466-71
banks .. •• •• 435_8
capital issues . . • • 440-1
Exchequer . . . . •• 424-35
financial institutions . . 435_43
financing of international trade 458-60
inflation, counter measures 241,248,428
local government . . 75~7i 246, 424
in Northern Ireland . . 434-5
parliamentary control of public
finance .. 35. 36, 37~8,46, 424^7
public corporations 255, 260-1, 301, 304,
308, 312, 313, 314, 3i5, 365-6,368, 380
See also Balance of payments,
Budget, Estimates, Exchange con¬
trol, Expenditure, Income, Invest¬
ment, National Debt, Sterling,
Taxation and under Trade
Finance Corporation for Industry Ltd. 439
Finance corporations
Fire Offices’ Committee
Fire prevention research
Fire Service
See also Auxiliary Fire Service
Fishing:
grounds
industry
ports . .
research
sport . .
Fives
Fleet:
Air Arm
Merchant Navy
Royal Navy . .
Fleetway Publications
439-40
106, 208
106,323
103-7
Page
Food—contd.
imports 239, 265, 269, 270, 291, 446, 447
industries 251, 252, 258, 291, 292, 293,
346-7
ministerial responsibility for 48-9
production . . 269, 270—1, 273, 276—7
purity . . 49, 72, 146, 279, 288, 292
rationing, end of . . • • • • 273
research .. .. 208,211,215
subsidies . . • • • • 280-1,283
See also Agriculture, School Meals
Service and Welfare Foods Service
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(United Nations) . . . . . . 49
Football:
association . . . . • • 497_8
rugby.. . . •• • • • • 498
seven-a-side . . . . • • • • 498
Football Association . . . . .. 497
Football League . . • • • • 497
Footpaths . . • • • • • • I9°
Footwear industry . . . . 251,351-2
Ford Foundation . . • • • • 204
Foreign Affairs, Secretary of State for 52
• • 459
52 379
66,456
20, 400-1
• • H
21, 451
289-90
258,289-94,471
251,252,253,290
.. 209,214-5
•. 292,503-4
• • 504
.. 118-9
354-6
. . 117
• • 489
Flora . . 6, 191, 207, 211, end-papers
Flying see Civil Aviation
sport .. .. .. •• .-511
Fog dispersal apparatus (fido) . . 385
Food:
biscuits, consumption of . . • • 346
bread, consumption of . . • • 346
chocolate and confectionery, con¬
sumption of .. •• •• 346
consumer expenditure on . . . • 247
distribution methods 277-9, 280-1, 292,
47L473,475
Foreign Exchange Market
Foreign Office . .
Foreign Service
Foreigners:
employment of
naturalisation of
visitors
See also under Students
Forest:
area . . . . 6, 294-5, 296-7, 298, 299
Nature Reserves . . • • . . 191
Parks  190-1, 192
Forest Products Research Laboratory 208,
298,299, 323
Forestry . . • • • • 294—99
commission . . 52, 215, 295, 296-7, 298,
299
committees and societies . . 297, 298
Commonwealth Conference . . 299
education and research 208, 215, 296,
298-9
Fund   296,297
See also Timber
Free Church of England . . . . 198
Free Church Federal Council . . 200
Free Churches .. • • 196-8,200
Free trade area, proposed . . 45 2—3
Freezing industry . . 291, 292, 293, 347
Friendly Societies . . • • • • 441
Friends, Society of . . • • i97> I98
Fruit, production and marketing 266, 267,
269, 271, 471, 475
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
560
Fuel . .
consumption
efficiency
policy
research
sources of
Page
299-306, 316-7, 446, 447
302-3, 305-6
302,304, 316-7
300,302, 304, 316-7
208,215,300, 304-5, 306
299-300
See also Electricity and Gas
Fulmer Research Institute . . . . 205
Furniture Development Council . . 352
Furniture industry . . 250, 251, 352
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
GPO see Post Office
Gaelic . .
Gambling see Betting
Games ..
Highland
Gas Council
Gas supply
by-products
consumption
employment in
Gatwick airport
General Agreement
Trade (gatt)
General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland
General Certificate of Education
General Council of British Shipping . .
General Council of the Bar .
General Council of the Press .
General Dental Council
General Medical Council
General Nursing Council
General Optical Council
General Post Office see Post Office
General Practitioner Services . . 149
General Register Division, Northern
Ireland . . . . . . . . 8
General Register Office . . 8, 53, 216
General Registry Office, Edinburgh 8, 62
Geological Museum . . 217, 320, 323
Geological Survey 49, 206, 217, 320, 323
.. 18
497-50x
. . 502
314,315,316
.. 262,313-6
315,3x6
314,315
• • 315
. . 384
Tariffs and
•• 451,452
196
162
•• 357
.. 89
•• 494
• • 156
86,156
• • 156
• • 156
Geology .. .. .. .. 2,4
Georgian Group . . . . . . 227
Gin industry . . . . .. . . 347
Girl Guides Association . . 174, 176
Girls’ Friendly Society . . . . 174
Girls’ Life Brigade . . . . . . 176
Girls’ Nautical Training Corps 176—7
Girls’ Training Corps .. 176-7
Glasgow:
airport (Renfrew) . . . . . . 384
Page
Glasgow—contd.
art gallery and museum . . . . 224
design centre . . . . . . 225
fire service . . . . . . . . 104
industry 252, 311, 322, 329, 331, 345,
348, 351
. 489, 490-1
. . 103
. . 17
361,362
••372
of Science and
 203
Royal Scottish Academy . . . . 237
University .. 103, 165, 167, 203, 228,
288
Glass industry . . . . . . 252, 350
Glass Technology Department,
203, 204, 350
. . 511
. . 237
240,248, 249,
435-6, 464
350-1
• -459, 459-6o
•• 35i
. . 501
newspapers . .
police. .
population
port of
public transport
Royal College
Technology
Sheffield University
Gliding . .
Glyndebourne (opera). .
Gold and dollar reserves
Gold and silver ware . .
Gold Market (London)
Goldsmiths’ Company
Golf 
Government:
departments of 24, 25, 42, 44, 45, 46-64,
228, 258-9
organs of .. .. . . . . 25
See also Civil Service, Finance,
Local Government, Ministers,
Monarchy, Parliament and Privy
Council
Government Actuary, Department of 46
Government Chemist, Laboratory of
206, 209
Gramophone records, sale of
Grangemouth, port of. .
Great Britain:
composition of
population of
See also British Isles
Great Seal
Greenwich see Royal Observatory and
National Maritime Museum
Grids, electricity .. 307,310,311
• • 237
362,363
15
28, 30
Grids, gas
Guardian’s allowance . .
Guernsey:
family allowances agreement with
UK  
language
population . .
See also Channel Islands
316
137
134
18
15
INDEX
561
Page
Guided weapons 115—6, 117, 118, II9>
122, 125
Guild of British Newspaper Editors . . 494
H
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus . . . • . . 78
Hall-mark (gold and silver) . . • • 351
Hand tools industry . . . . ••338
‘ Hansard ’   36,40
Hansard Society . . • • ■. 4°
Harwell:
Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment .. •• 115,212-3,341
isotope school .. •• ..213
reactor school . . • • . . 213
Rutherford High Energy Laboratory 213
Health   •• 144-57
air pollution, prevention of 145, 208, 300
centres . . •• • • • • I55
control of infectious diseases
145-6, 154, 155
in industry .. 303,411,4x2,420-1
Ministry of 53, 128, 146, 147, 148, 212,
216,259,292
in prisons . . • • • • 94-5
research 146, 157, 20I> 209—xo, 216,
3°3,421
sanitation . . • • • • 71-2, 145
school children . . • • . . 164
visiting . . • • • • • • I53
See also National Health Service
Helicopters .. 119,122,126,337,383
Hermes .. •• •• ..212
Herring Industry Advisory Council . . 293
Herring Industry Board • • 292,293
High Court of Justice 78, 81, 82, 84, 88
Hich Court of Justiciary (Scotland) 78, 85,
88
 502
 373
• • 436, 474-5
182, 186, 191, 221,
226, 227
.. 226
191,226
Page
Honours . . • • • • 28, 44, 53
Hops Marketing Board . . • • 278
Horace Plunkett Foundation . . . . 279
Elorticultural co-operatives . . • • 278
Horticultural Marketing Advisory
Council . . • • • • • • 279
Horticulture 23, 258, 266, 271, 279, 284-5,
287,288
Hosiery and Allied Trades Research
Association . . . . • • • • 344
34L 344
• • 154
146, 147, 148, 150-1, 157
• • 149
• • 151
. . 189
• • 155
150,155
148, 150
149, 150
47,148,150
145,150
• • 156
29, 32-40, 43, 46,
194-5
• .32-3,34, 68
35,36,424-7
32,426
••33-4
33
Hosiery and knitwear industry
Hospital Car Service
Hospitals
finance
mental
in new towns
Northern Ireland
number of
Scotland
staff . .
teaching
voluntary
voluntary help in
House of Commons
election to
financial control
officers
party composition
privileges
Highland Games
Highway Code
Hire purchase ..
Historic buildings
bureau
councils
Historic Churches Preservation Trust 227
Historical Manuscripts Commission . . 228
Hobbies . . • • • • 23,338
Hockey . . . . • • • • • • 499
Holidays . . • .21, 360, 408, 418-9
Hollow-ware industry . . . . • • 338
Home Office and Home Secretary 29, 53-4,
83,88,92-3,97,100-1, 104, 106, 128,
210, 212, 235, 272, 293
See also Parliament, Speaker, and
Whips
House of Lords 29, 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 43,
46,194
as Court of Appeal . . • • 82, 83, 85
officers . • • • • • 31,35
privileges . . • • • • • • 33
See also Parliament, Speaker, and
Whips
Households . • • • • • x9-2°> 346
Houses, preservation of historic 182, igL
192, 221, 224, 226, 227
Housewives . • • • • • 20-1
Housing
associations . .
authorities
building costs
finance
for forestry workers..
investment . .
local authorities’ responsibilities 180, 321
ministerial responsibilities for 54, 179
in new towns .. • • tSS, 189
number of dwellings . . 19, 180
progress in building 180, 189, 321—2
purchase schemes .. •. . . 184
179-85
180, 181
179-80
. . 182
182-5
• • 297
244, 245
562
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing—contd.
rent control . .
repairs
slum clearance
standards
subsidies
types of houses
Page
184-5
181,182,183,185, 321
. . 181
181,183, 226
182-3
 19
See also Building
Housing and Local Government,
Ministry of .. 54, 69, 179, 186, 187, 188,
191, 212, 215, 226, 259, 300, 317
Hovercraft . . . . . . . . 206
Hull 17, 165, 189, 252, 290, 361, 362, 389
Hulton Press . . . . . . . . 489
Human Relations in Industry,
Committee on . . . . . . 423
Human Sciences, Committee on 209, 423
Hunting . . .. . . 5 02-3
Hydraulics Research Station . . 320, 323
Hydro-electric power . . . . 308, 309
I
IBRD see International Bank for Re¬
construction and Development
IGY see International Geophysical Year
ITA see Independent Television
Authority
ITU see International Telecommuni¬
cation Union
ITV see Independent Television
Ice-skating . . . . . . . . 511
ICSE . . . . . . . . . . 2X2
Immigration . . . . 7, 13, 14, 401
Immunisation . . . . . . . . 155
Imperial Cancer Research Fund . . 201
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd 204,
255, 344
Imperial College of Science and
Technology . . . . 167, 203, 324
Imperial Defence College . . . . 114
Imperial Forestry Institute . . 215, 299
Imperial War Museum . . . . 223
Imports 239, 248, 354, 444-9, 452-3, 461
control of . . .. 259, 282, 454-5
See also Food, individual industries
and Raw materials
Improvement grants:
agricultural . .
housing
Income:
Government. .
national
personal
See also Earnings
Income Tax see under Taxation
282-5
 183
. 246, 429-33, 434
241, 245, 259
21-2, 247, 259, 272
Page
Incorporated Society of London
Fashion Designers . . . . . . 345
Independent Television 163, 477, 478,
483 484, 485
Authority 216, 477, 478, 479-80, 483,
484, 485
programme companies 221, 233, 479,
480
Independent Television Companies
Association . . . . .. 480, 485
Independent Television News Ltd. .. 480
Indictible offences . . . . . . 79
Individual Efficiency in Industry,
Committee on . . . . . . 423
Industrial and Commercial Finance
Corporation Ltd. . . . . 439-40
Industrial Civil Defence Service 128, 129
Industrial Coal Consumers’ Council. . 301
Industrial Court
Industrial design
Industrial Estate Companies . .
Industrial films
Industrial Grants Committee (dsir)
Industrial injuries insurance 133, 134,
135, 139-40
Industrial Training Council . . . . 422
408
225
253
233
205
Industry
associations
automation
221, 250-353
. . 257-8, 260
325, 333, 335, 350, 388,
389, 390
 225
253-4
. . 254
187, 250, 253-4
design in
development areas . .
development councils
distribution policy
health and welfare services 412-4, 420-1
human relations in . . . . 421-3
location . . . . .. 250-3, 259
management . . 263-4 421-2
manufacturing 242, 250, 251, 252, 253,
256-7, 324-53
organisation . . . . . . 250—64
production and productivity in 233,
241, 242-3, 245, 258-9,
261-3, 324-5
Regional Boards . . . . . . 260
relations with Government 258-61, 409
restrictive practices, control of .. 264
trading estates . . . . 252, 253
See also Employment, Exports, indi¬
vidual industries, Investment,
Labour, Nationalisation, Public
corporations, Research, Safety,
Training schemes and Trade
Infectious diseases:
control of .. .. 145-6, 154, 155
mortality from .. .. 11, 155
INDEX
563
Page
Inflation see under Finance
Information, Central Office of 54, 62, 233
Injury benefit (industrial injuries) . . 139
Inland Revenue:
Board of
Commissioners of
sources of
Inland transport
Inland waterways
54. 429
.. 86
246, 429-33,
434-5
255, 363-77
252, 361, 363, 364,
366, 373-5
• • 374
• • 375
374-5
Advisory Com-
 375
 89
403, 404, 412, 419, 421
. . 104
303, 413, 419
. . 92
145-6
51, 158, 496
. . 202
Board of Survey
Committee of Inquiry'
development. .
Redevelopment
mittee
Inns of Court . .
Inspectorates:
Constabulary
Factory
fire services . .
Mines and Quarries
prisons
public health
Schools
Institute of Biology
Institute of Incorporated Practitioners
in Advertising . . . . • • 475
Institute of Industrial Administration 263
Institute of Journalists . . 493, 494
Institute of Physics . . . . . . 202
Institution of Chemical Engineers . . 202
Institution of Civil Engineers 202, 324
Institution of Electrical Engineers . . 202
Institution of Mechanical Engineers. . 168,
202
Institution of Metallurgists . . . . 202
Instruments industry . . 250, 252, 332-3
Insurance . . . . . . 106, 441-3
export . . . . • • • • 456
marine . . . . 356, 442, 443
See also National Insurance
Intergovernmental Maritime Consul¬
tative Organisation (imco), United
Nations
International Aeradio Ltd.
International Atomic Energy Agency
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (ibrd) 380, 463,
467, 469-70
International Civil Aviation Organisa¬
tion (icao) . . . . . • • • 379
International Convention for Preven¬
tion of Pollution of Sea by Oil . . 358
International Finance Corporation 469,
470
358
386
218
Page
International Fisheries Conservation
Convention . . . . . . . . 293
International Geophysical Year . . 219
International Labour Organisation 55, 400,
405
International Monetary Fund 249, 451,
463, 464
International Police Commission
(Interpol) . . . . . • • • i°3
International Telecommunication
Union . . . . • • 391, 486
International Union of Forest Re¬
search Organisations . . . . 299
International Whaling Commission 293-4
Investment . . . . 243-6, 439-40
in fuel and power industries 304, 312,
3i5, 318
overseas . . • • 240, 248—9, 460
trusts . . • • • • • • 441
United States, in Britain . . . . 466
See also Savings
Invisible transactions see under Trade
Ireland see Irish Republic and Northern
Ireland
Ireland, churches see under Northern
Ireland
Irish Football Association . . . . 497
Irish Republic . . . . . . • • 1, 24
airmail service . . . . • • 388
census . . . • ■ • 9, I4, I5
citizens’ employment in UK . . 401
citizens’ status in UK . . . . 14
citizens’ voting rights in UK 32, 73
exports to . . . • • • • • 449
insurance reciprocity . . ■ • I34
population . . . . • • • • I5
relations with UK Government . . 51
war pensioners . . • • 53, 57
Iron and Steel Board . . . . • • 326
Iron and Steel Flolding and Realisa¬
tion Agency . . . . • • • • 326
Iron and steel industry . . 325-6
Iron founding industry . . . . 326
Isle of Man:
airport . . • • • • • • 384
area . . . . • • • • • • 1
language . . • • • • 7> ^
legislature . . . • • • . . 29
national insurance . . . . • • !34
newspapers . . . . • • • • 491
population . . . . • • • • x5
relationship with UK Government
and Crown . . 24, 27, 29, 41, 53
war pensioners . . . . • ■ 53
Isotope School see under Harwell
Isotopes see Radioactive materials
564
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
J
Jams and marmalades industry 346-7
Jersey:
language .. .. . . . . 18
national insurance agreement with
UK  134
population . . . . . . . . 15
See also Channel Islands
Jewellery industry . . . . 350-1
Jewish Board of Guardians . . . . 132
Jewry 193, 199
Jockey Club . . .. . . . . 506
Jodrell Bank radio telescope . . 204, 220
Joint consultation in industry 407-8,
409, 423
Joint Electronic Research Committee 216
Joint Exchequer Board . . . . 434
Joint Fire Research Organisation 106, 208
Joint Industrial Councils 75, 407, 409
Journalists . . . . . . 493, 494
Judge Advocate General’s Department 56
Judge Advocate of the Fleet . . . . 56
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council 42
Judiciary see under Law
Judo see under Wrestling
Jury, trial by see under Law
Justices of the Peace . . 83-4, 88, 100
Jute industry . . . . 344, 345, 453
Juvenile Courts 83-4, 85, 96, 142, 494
Juvenile delinquency see Young
offenders
K
Kew Gardens . . . . . . 49, 216-7
King George VI Foundation 142, 175, 178
King George’s Jubilee Trust . . 175
Kirk Session . . . . . . . . 196
L
Labour:
conciliation in disputes . . 408-9
deployment of . . . . 394-6
industrial relations 263, 380, 404-11
protective legislation . . 404, 411-4
working conditions 257-8, 380, 411-23
See also Employment, Safety
measures, Trade Unions, Wages
and Work, hours of
Labour and National Service, Ministry
°f 55> 96, 112, 113, 212, 256, 259, 260,
263, 398-403, 408-9, 422
See also Inspectorate, Factory
Lacrosse . . .. . . . . 500
Page
Lambeth Conference .. . . . . 196
Lancaster, Duchy of . . . . • . 43
Land Registry . . . . . . . . 56
Land Settlement Association Ltd. . . 269
Land use:
agriculture . . 179, 265-70, 275, 287
armed forces . . . . . . 179
control of . . . . 179, 185-7, I92
town and country planning 179, 185-92,
215, 253-4
Lands Improvement Company . . 285
Lands Tribunal . . . . 76, 86
Lands Valuation Appeal Court . . 76
Language . . . . .. 7, 18
Law . . .. . . . . 77—91
arrest, law of . . . . . . 78
civil and criminal . . . . . . 78
courts . . 56, 78, 79, 81-7, 88
criminal proceedings 78-9, 83-5, 90
equity system . . . . . . 77
evidence, law of .. .. 79, 80-1
judiciary 25, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85, 87-8
jury system . . 79-80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 96
legal advice . . . . . . . . 90-1
legal aid . . . . 79, 89-90, 140
legal profession . . .. . . 88-9
legislation see under Parliament
penalties for contravention of . .91-2
press (legal requirements) . . 494_5
sources of . . . . . . . . 77
subjects’ right of appeal to the Crown
42, 53, 92
Law Officers’ Department . . . . 55
Law Officers of the Crown . . 43, 55, 62
Law Reform Committee . . . . 88
Law Society .. . . . . 86, 89, 90
Lawes Agricultural Trust .. . . 206
Lawyers . . . . . . 88-9, 90
Learned societies . . . . 201-3
Leather industry .. .. 203,351
Lee Conservancy Catchment Board . . 319
Leeds 17, 165, 167, 203, 204, 224, 236,
252, 288, 316, 345
Legal aid see under Law
Legal system see Law
Leicester 17, 165, 224, 251, 329, 351
Leisure activities . . 21-3, 171, 173-8
See also Arts, promotion of and Sport
Leverhulme Fellowships . . . . 204
Libraries 94, 156, 202, 219, 220, 226,
227-9, 23L 233, 235
Library Association . . . . . . 229
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft . . 379, 380
broadcast receiving 21, 392, 477, 479
broadcast transmitting 477, 478, 484
INDEX
565
Page
Licences—contd.
cinemas and films . . . . . . 234
dog  76, 392
driving . . . . . • • • 373
eggs, sale of . . .. . . . . 281
export . . . . . • • • 455
gun and game . . 76, 392, 503
herring industry . . . . . . 293
house-building, abolition of . . 180
import . . . . . • • • 455
issue of, by Post Office . . . . 392
livestock breeding . . . . . . 276
local authorities’ revenue from . . 76
milk (special designations) . . . . 279
motor vehicles 21, 364, 371-2, 375, 392
road transport ... . . 366, 371-2
telephone systems (local) . . • . 3^9
theatres and plays . . . . ..231
tree felling . . . . . . • • 296
Life assurance . . . . . . • . 442
Life, expectation of . . . . 9> 10
Life imprisonment . . . . 92, 95
Life peerages . . . . . • • • 31
Lifeboats . . . . • • • • 359
Lighthouses .. .. •• •• 359
Linen industry. . . . . . 253, 344-5
Linen Industry Research Association 345
Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine 201
Literary prizes . . . • • • 227
Literary societies . . 227, 229-30
Literature .. . . . . 227-30
Liverpool:
commodity exchanges . . 342, 459
Crown Court . . . . . . 84
industry . . . . . • 252, 348
museum and art gallery • • • • 224
newspapers . . . . . . 49°> 491
orchestra and choir . . . . 236
population . . . . . . • • 18
port of . . . . 252, 361, 362
University . . . . . . 165, 203
Liverpool, Employers’ Association of
Port of . . . . . . ■ • 357
Liverpool Steamship Owners’ Associa¬
tion . . .. .. . . • • 357
Livestock see under Agriculture
Lloyd’s .. .. • • 356, 357> 442, 443
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping. . 35^-7
Local Government . . . . 25, 69-77
arts, promotion of 221, 222, 230, 231,
236
authorities, types of . . 69-70
Commissions .. .. .. 7°
councils, constitutions of . . 7°» 74
education authorities 94, 158, 166,
288, 373
Page
Local Government—contd.
elections . . .. .. 53> 73
employment in .. 74-5* 395. 4*8
finance . . 75-7, 246, 424, 432, 434
functions and services 71-2, 3i7-8»
373, 374
internal organisation . . .. 74
officers . . . . . . 74~5
regulation of working conditions .. 411
relations with central Government 53, 69
responsibility for:
aerodromes . . . . • • 384
amenities in new towns . . . . 189
approved schools . . . . 97
civil defence . . . . .. 129
health services 145-6, i51_5, 3°°
housing . . 179-80, 181, 184, 321
• 234
• 151
• 496
. 228
• 370
• 179
317-8
licensing of films
mental defectives
playing fields
public libraries
roads
town and country planning
water supply, purity of . .
Locomotives:
industry . . . . 251, 253, 256, 337
types in use . . . . 368, 369, 376
London:
airports . . . . 384, 385, 386
art galleries . . . . 223, 224, 225
art schools and colleges . . . . 225
City of London Corporation 70, 71, 72,
76, 179
civil defence . . • • • • 72
Colleges of Advanced Technology 170
commodity markets 358, 383-4, 458-9
concert halls, orchestras and choirs 236
County Council 70, 71, 74, 77, i°4,
161, 179, 225, 230
courts of law . . . • 82, 83, 84
drama and music colleges . . 232, 237
as financial and trading centre 437, 438,
440, 441, 442-3, 458-60,
467-8
Fire Brigade . . . • . . 104
food markets . . . . 292, 471
Gold Market .. 459, 459-6o
Greater London 16, 17, 250-1, 375
industries 250-1, 329, 335 338 345,
347, 348, 35L 352, 353, 369
libraries . . • • • • 227, 228
local government .. 70, 71, 76, 77
museums . . . . • • 217, 223
newspapers .. 487, 488-9, 490, 493
Passenger Transport Board (former)
255, 375
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
566
Page
London—contd.
police forces 72, 99-100, 101, 103, 375
population . . . . 16, 17, 375, 376
port of and docks . . 360, 361, 362, 368
rebuilding of war damaged areas . . 189
Stock Exchange .. .. .. 440
taxicabs .. . . . . .. 375
teaching hospitals . . . . ..150
telephone information service . . 390
Television Centre . . . . . . 483
theatres and opera house . . 230-1, 237
traffic. . . . 20, 364, 367, 373, 376
transport 20, 255, 364, 365, 367, 373,
375-6
Transport Executive 365, 366, 375-6
University . . 165, 167, 225, 228, 288
water supply .. .. 318,3x9
‘London Gazette* .. .. . . 41
London General Shipowners’ Society 357
Lord Advocate. . . . . . 43, 62, 88
Lord Advocate’s Department . . 62
Lord Chamberlain . . . . . . 231
Lord Chancellor 42, 43, 55-6, 82, 83, 87,
88, 89, 193, 275
as Speaker of the House of Lords 31, 35
Lord Chancellor’s Departments . .55-6
44, 82, 85
. . 196
83, 85, 88
83, 85, 88
44, 83
4i, 42-3,
Lord Chief Justice
Lord High Commissioner
Lord Justice Clerk
Lord Justice General . .
Lord Lieutenants of Counties
Lord President of the Council
207, 208, 209, 220, 320
Office of . . .. .. .. 218
Lord President of the Court of Session
see Lord Justice General
Lord’s (cricket ground) . . 498, 499
Lords, House of see House of Lords
Lords Commissioners (Treasury) . . 47
Lords Justices of Appeal . . 42, 82, 88
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary. . 31, 42, 82
Lutheran churches .. . . . . 199
M
MCC see Marylebone Cricket Club
Machine Tool Trades Association . . 329
Machine tools industry . . . . 329
Magistrates’ courts . . 78, 83-4, 85, 88
Mail order firms . . . . . . 474
Malting industry . . . . 347-8
Man, Isle of see Isle of Man
Management see under Industry
Manchester:
airport (Ringway) . . . . 384, 385
Crown Court . . . . . . 84
Page
Manchester—contd.
industries 251-2, 316, 333, 342, 343,
344, 345, 348
Joint Research Council . . . . 204
library . . . . . . . . 228
museum and art gallery . . . . 224
newspapers . . . . 488, 489, 490, 491
orchestra . . . . . . . . 236
population . . . . . . . . 18
port of . . . . . . 361, 362
public transport . . . . . . 372
Royal College of Music . . . . 237
University . . .. 165, 167, 203, 204
Manchester Ship Canal 252, 361, 363, 371
Manchester Ship Canal Company .. 362
Man-made fibres . . 341, 342, 343-4
Manpower see Employment
Manufacturers’ associations . . . . 258
Manufacturing establishments, size of
250-1, 256-7
Manufacturing industries see under
Industry
Marketing Boards, agricultural 272, 276,
278, 280-1
Markets:
agricultural (local) . . . . . . 277
Baltic Exchange . . 358, 383-4, 458
commodity . . . . . . 358, 458-9
financial . . 438-9, 440, 441-3, 459
food (London) . . . . 292, 471
Marriages, registration . . . . 8-9
Marshall Scholarships . . . . 172
Marylebone Cricket Club . . 498, 499
Mass radiography . . . . . . 154
Master of the Rolls . . . . . . 82
Maternity benefit . . . . 136-7
Maternity services .. .. 152,153
Mayor’s and City of London Court 82, 84
40, 70, 83
Mayors and Lord Mayors
Meals, provision of:
for old people
for school children . .
Medical Practices Committee
Medical profession see Doctors
Medical Research Committee
Council)
Medical Research Council 157, 206, 207,
209-10, 212, 216, 421, 423
Medical services:
in coalmines
general practitioners’
in National Health Service.
for ships
supplies see Pharmaceuticals
Mental health services
Merchant Fleet
. . 142
. . 164
• • 149
(Privy
207, 210
•• 303
149-50
149-55
•• 39i
146, 151
354-6
INDEX
567
Page
Merchant Navy 117, 120, 357, 359-60
Established Service Scheme 357, 360
Establishment Administration . . 357
organisations . . . . • • 357
training . . . . 357, 359-6o
Training Board . . . . . . 359
Welfare Board . . . . . . 360
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board . . 362
Merseyside . . . . 17* 252, 327, 363
Metal manufacture 324, 325-7, 338, 447
Metallurgical Equipment Export Com¬
pany Ltd.(meeco) . . . . • • 332
Meteorological Office . . 49-50, 206, 214,
320
Methodist Association of Youth Clubs 176
Methodist Churches . . . . 197, 200
Metropolitan borough councils 70, 71,
72, 76, 179
Metropolitan Police Force 99-100, 101,
103
Metropolitan Water Board .. ..318
Middlesbrough . . 252, 325, 361, 362
Midwives .. .. .. 152, 156
Migration . . . . . . 7, I3* I4
Milford Haven Conservancy Board . . 363
Military Courts see Courts-martial
Milk:
for children and mothers
marketing and subsidy
• • 153
272, 276, 278,
279, 280
271, 273, 276
. . 164
276, 279
production . .
in schools
tuberculin tested
Milk Marketing Boards 272, 276, 278, 280
Mines and quarries:
employment statistics 256, 300, 302, 395
fatal accidents in . . . . . . 420
industry 243, 252, 256, 259, 30°-S, 327
Inspectorate . . 303, 413, 419
research . . . . . . 3°4”5
safety measures . . 215, 303, 413, 419
Ministers (of the Crown) 25, 28, 33, 41,
42-6
of State . . . . . . • • 43
ministerial responsibility 28, 39, 41,
42-4, 45-6, 64, 260-1
See also Prime Minister and indivi¬
dual Government departments
Ministries see Government, departments of
Mirror Group (press) . . . • 489
Moderator of the Church of Scotland 196
Modular Society . . . . . • 227
Monarchy
accession
ceremonial
coronation
24, 25-9, 40
26, 27
. . 29
26, 27
Page
Monarchy—contd.
relations with:
armed forces . . . . 27, 28
churches . . 27, 28, 194, 195, 196
Commonwealth . . . . 24, 25
courts of law . . . . 28, 42, 87
ministers . . . . 28, 43, 44, 45
Parliament 28, 29, 30, 33, 38, 424-5
Privy Council . . . . 28, 41
Royal Prerogatives . . . . 28, 92
Royal Proclamations . . 28, 41
Royal title . . . . . . . . 25
subjects’ right of appeal to Crown 42, 53
succession . . . . . . 26, 27
See also Royal Family
Monetary system, Radcliffe Com¬
mittee on .. . . . . . . 436
Monopolies Commission . . . . 264
Moravian Church .. . . . . 198
Mortality see Death, causes of
Moslem community . . . . 199-200
Motor Industry Research Association
205, 335
Motor racing:
car .. .. .. .. 509-10
cycle and speedway . . . . 510
Motor vehicles:
air ferry service . . . . . . 383
industry 251, 257, 325, 326, 335-6
numbers licensed . . 21, 364, 371, 375
postal vans . . . . . . . . 388
research . . . . . . . . 335
taxation . . . . . . . . 429
tests . . .. . . • • • • 373
See also Road transport
Motorways . . . . 322, 370-1, 373
Mountaineering . . . . . . 509
Mountains, heights of. . . . • • 2, 3
Murder, law relating to . . . . 92
Museums 44, 52, 62, 217, 221, 223-4,
228, 289
Museums and Galleries, Standing
Commission on . . . . 221, 224
Museums Association . . . . 224
Music . . . . 235, 236-7, 481, 484
colleges and schools of . . 221, 237
festivals . . . . . • • • 236
See also Opera
Mutual Defence Assistance Pro¬
gramme .. .. .. •• 466
Mutual Security Programme . . no, 466
N
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty Or¬
ganisation
568
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
National Advisory Committee on the
Employment of Older Men and
Women . . . . . . . . 400
National Agricultural Advisory Service
263, 286
National and Local Government
Officers Association. . . . . . 406
National Assembly see Church Assembly
National Assistance . . . . 133, 140
National Assistance Board 56, 133, 140,
149
National Association for Mental
Health . . . . . . . . 132
National Association of Boys’ Clubs . . 177
National Association of Discharged
Prisoners’ Aid Societies . . . . 96
National Association of Mixed Clubs
and Girls’ Clubs . . . . . . 177
National Association of Port Em¬
ployers .. .. .. .. 363
National Association of Prison Visitors 95
National Blood Transfusion Service. . 151
National Book League . . 228, 229
National Broadcasting Councils 478-9
National Buildings Record . . . . 226
National Central Library . . . . 228
National Certificates . . . . 168, 169
National Coal Board 255, 256, 301, 302,
303, 304, 316
medical services . . . . • • 303
research . . . . . . 215, 304—5
National Colleges . . . . 170, 288
National Corporation for the Care of
Old People . . . . . . . . 142
National Council for Domestic Food
Production . . . . . . . . 269
National Council for Technological
Awards . . . . . . . . 169
National Council for the Training of
Journalists . . . . . . . . 493
National Council of Associated Chil¬
dren’s Homes . . . . 132, 143
National Council of Labour Colleges. . 171
National Council of Social Service 131, 142
National Debt . . . . 47, 425, 434
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 435
Office .. . . .. . . 46
National Dock Labour Board. . . . 363
National Economy see Economy,
national
National Farmers’ Union . . 265, 278
National Federation of Community
Associations . . . . . . . . 171
National Federation of Gramophone
Societies . . .. . . . . 237
National Federation of Music Societies 236
Page
National Federation of Women’s
Institutes . . . . . . 22-3, 171
National Federation of Young Farmers’
Clubs . . . . . . 177, 288
National Film Archive . . . . 233
National Film Finance Corporation . . 234
National Film Theatre . . . . 233
National Food Survey . . . . 49
National Forest Parks . . 190—1, 192
National Gaelic Mod . . . . . . 236
National Gallery . . . . . . 223
National Gas Turbine Establishment 115,
214, 337
National Health Service . . 146—55
administration . . . . 146-8
charges . . .. . . . . 149
finance . . 135, 148-9, 246, 433
general practitioner services 149-50
hospital services .. 146, 148, 150-1
local health services .. 151-5
mental health services .. 146, 151
Northern Ireland . . . . • • 155
specialist services . . . . 150—1
National Hospital Service Reserve . . 129
National Hunt Committee
National income see under Income
National Industrial Development
Council of Wales and Monmouth¬
shire ..
National Industrial Fuel Efficiency
Service . . .. . . 263, 317
National Institute for Medical Research 210
National Institute for Research in
Nuclear Science . . . . . . 213
National Institute of Adult Education 171
National Institute of Agricultural
Botany .. . . . . .. 276
National Institute of Oceanography 48,
506
254
214
National Insurance . . . . 133-40
benefits . . . . . . 134, 136-7
contributions . . . . 135-6, 246
Ministry of Pensions and 56, 133, 144
reciprocal agreements . . . . 134
stamps, sale by Post Office 136, 392
supplementation by private firms . . 420
National Insurance Fund . . 246, 424
National Joint Advisory Council
(industry) . . . . 260, 409, 4x9, 422
National Joint Council for Chief
Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire
Brigades . . .. . . . . 104
National Joint Council for Civil Air
Transport . . . . . . . . 380
National Joint Council for Local
Authorities’ Fire Brigades . . . . 104
INDEX
Page
National Lending Library for Science
and Technology . . . . . . 220
National Maritime Board . . 357, 360
National Maritime Museum . . . . 223
National Marriage Guidance Council 132
National Old People’s Welfare Council 142
National Parks . . .. .. 189-90
Commission . . . . . . . . 189
National Physical Laboratory 206, 209,
323, 324, 337
National Playing Fields Association 178,
496
National Portrait Gallery . . . . 223
National product (gross) . . . . 241
National Production Advisory Council
on Industry . . . . . . . . 260
National Register of Archives . . 228
National Research Development Cor¬
poration see under Research
National Savings Certificates. . 437, 438
National Savings Committee . . 46, 437
National Sea Training Schools 357, 360
National Service see under Armed
Forces
National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children . . . . 144
National Society of Operative Printers
and Assistants (natsopa) . . . . 494
National Stud .. . . . . . • 277
National theatre, scheme for . . . . 230
National Trusts . . 192, 224, 227
National Union of Journalists 493, 494
National Union of Manufacturers 258,
262
National Union of Teachers . . . . 406
National Union of Townswomen’s
Guilds  22-3, 171
National Whitley Council . . 67, 409-10
National Wool Textile Export Cor¬
poration .. .. .. .. 343
National Youth Employment Council 401
National Youth Orchestra . . . . 237
Nationalisation 25, 255-6, 260-1, 410-11
air corporations . . 378, 379, 380
Bank of England .. . . • • 435
cable and wireless services . . • • 39°
coal industry . . . . . . 301
electricity supply . . . . • • 3°7
gas supply .. .. .. ..314
inland transport . . . . 364-5, 367
labour relations of nationalised in¬
dustries .. . . . . 409, 410-1
Select Committee on the National¬
ised Industries .. . . . . 261
Nationality law . . . . . . 14
Naturalisation .. . . . . . . 14
569
Page
Nature Conservancy . . 191, 207, 211
Nature Conservation, Committee for
(Privy Council) .. .. 207,211
Nature Reserves .. .. 191,211
Navy see Merchant Navy and Royal
Navy
Navy League . . . . .. . . 120
Netball . . . . . . . . . . 500
New towns .. . . . . 187-9, 432
Newcastle 18, 165, 170, 348, 361, 490
Newnes Group (periodicals) .. . . 489
News agencies . . . . . . 492-3
Newspaper owners . . 488-90, 493
Newspaper Proprietors’ Association. . 493
Newspaper Society . . . . . . 493
Newspapers . . . . 487-91, 494-5
Newsprint, supply of . . . . 352, 487
Nonconformists, definition of 196-7
Non-county borough councils . . 70
See also County district councils
Non-ferrous metals industry . . 326-7
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
49, 108, no, in, 115, 118,
121, 122, 124, 125
North of England Shipowners’ Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. .. 357
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board . . 308, 309-10, 312, 313
Northampton, industry .. 251,351
Northcliffe Newspapers Group Ltd. 489
Northern Ireland:
Agricultural Loans Fund .. 285-6
agricultural research .. 214, 287-8
agriculture 265, 266, 268, 272, 274, 276,
277, 279, 282, 286, 287-8, 289, 397
Agriculture, Ministry of 63, 272, 274,
276, 277, 281, 285, 287-8, 299
airmail service and airport . . 384, 388
Amateur Athletic Association . . 502
ancient buildings, preservation of 226,
227
architects and architecture . . 226
area and counties . . 1, fold-in map
art gallery and museums .. . . 223
banks and banknotes .. 436, 512
broadcasting. . 478, 479, 480, 481, 483
building and civil engineering 322-3
child care . . . . .. • • 143
churches . . i95_6, 197, 198, 199
cinemas .. .. . . • • 232
civil defence .. . . 128, 129
Commerce, Ministry of . . 63, 259,
292, 377
Council for the Encouragement of
Music and the Arts (cema) 221-2,
223, 230, 236
5?o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Northern Ireland—contd.
courts of law
Development Council
drama
Education, Ministry of
.. 85
• • 254
230, 231
63, 158, 167,
170, 174, 222
elections . . . . 32-3, 34. 73
electricity . . . . 255, 308, 309
employment 254, 393, 397-8, 400, 414
examinations, school . . . . 162
Exchequer and Audit Department 63
family allowances . . . . . . 134
finance . . . . .. 434_5
Finance, Ministry of 8, 63, 226, 259, 434
fire services . . . . . . 106-7
fishing . . . . 290, 291, 292
Football Association . . . . 497
Football League . . . . .. 497
forest park . . . . . . .. 192
forestry . . . . . . . . 299
gas supply 3I4.3I5
Government departments 24, 62-4, 259
Governor . . . . . . . . 40
Grand Opera Society . . . . 238
Health and Local Government,
Ministry of 63. 179, 192, 215, 226, 317
health services . . . . • • 155
holidays, statutory . . . . . . 419
Home Affairs, Ministry of 63, 73, 93,
97, 99, 104, 143
Hospitals Authority . . 155, 216
housing . . 179, 180, 181, 183, 185
industrial development . . 254, 259
industries . . 253, 327, 329, 344-5, 348
Irish Ballet . . . . . . .. 238
Labour and National Insurance,
Ministry of . . 63, 402, 411
labour relations
language
legal aid
lighthouses . .
local government
. . 411
. . 18
. . 90
•• 359
70, 7L 73, 75, 76-7,
141, 143, 155, 179
279, 280, 288
. . 280
. . 133, 140-1
133, 134
491, 492, 493
milk . .
Milk Marketing Board
National Assistance
National Insurance . .
newspapers . .
nuclear power station (proposed) . . 311
orchestra .. . . . . .. 236
Parliament . . . . . . 24, 40, 85
Parliamentary Draftsmen, Office of 63
Pig Advisory Committee . . . . 277
police . . . . . . 99, 103
population . . . . . . 15, 17
ports . . . . . . 290, 361, 362
Page
Northern Ireland—contd.
Post Office, directorate for. . . . 386
prison system . . 93, 94, 95, 96
probation . . . . . . . . 99
railways . . . . . . 376-7
Registrar-General . . . . . . 63
relations with UK Government . . 53
representation in UK Parliament 24, 40
research in . . . . 2x4, 216, 287-8
Road Fund .. . . . . .. 377
roads . . . . . . .. 377
Royal Ulster Academy of Arts . . 224
savings movement . . . . . . 437
scholarships . . . . 160, 167, 170
schools . . 159, 160, 161, 162, 164
shipyards . . . . . . 253, 327
sport . . . . 497-9, 501-4, 509
teachers’ training colleges . . . . 163
technical education . . . . . . 170
trade unions . . . . . . 411
town and country planning . . 192
transport . . . . . . 255, 376-7
university . . 165, 167, 228, 287, 288
vital statistics, registration of . . 8-9
war pensioners . . . . • • 57
water supply .. .. ..319
welfare services .. 141,143,155
Women’s Rural Institutes . . . . 23
working population . . • • 397
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . . . 288
young offenders, treatment of 96, 97, 98
Youth Employment Service . . 402
youth hostels . . . . . . 178
youth services . . . . 174-5
Northern Ireland Council of Social
Service . . . . . . ..131
Northern Ireland Electricity Board 255,
308, 311
Northern Ireland Fire Authority 104, 106,
107
Northern Ireland Housing Trust 180, 183
Northern Ireland Joint Electricity
Committee . . . . . . . . 308
Northern Ireland Road Fund . . 377
Northern Ireland Road Transport
Board . . . . . . •• 255
Jforwich . . . . . . 224, 251
rwttingham 18, 165, 204, 214, 230, 251,
288, 330, 344, 348
Nuclear energy:
international agencies . . 213, 218
for marine propulsion 115, 118,212,
218, 328, 331, 354-5
power station plant . . 331-2
power stations 300, 310-11, 312, 331
pumped storage . . . . . . 311
INDEX
571
Page
Nuclear energy—contd.
research . . . . . • 212-3
responsibility for . . 57, 211-2, 258
weapons .. no, 115-6, 122, 124,
211-2, 213
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nuclear Energy Trade Associations’
Conference .. .. .. 331-2
Nuffield Foundation 142, 157, 201, 204,
288
Nurseries . . . . • • • • 153
Nursing . . . . 150, 153. 156, 396
• . 398
119, 121, 126
. . 129
141, 153
. . 420
343-4
Appointments Offices
in armed forces
in civil defence
Home
in industry . .
Nylon industry
488, 489
9i-9
253, 330, 466
291, 293, 294
358
84
11-12
• • 430
141-2
393, 400
o
OEEC see Organisation for European
Economic Co-operation
Odhams Press Ltd.
Offenders, treatment of
Office machinery industry
Oil:
fish . .
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by
Old age pensions see under Pensions
Old Bailey
Old people:
proportion in population . .
tax concessions for . .
welfare
in work
See also Pensions
Old Vic Theatre Company and School
230, 232
Olympic Games 502, 504, 505, 508,
509, 510
Opera and opera companies . . 235, 237-8
Ophthalmic services . . 148, i49> J-S0
Opposition, parliamentary 33-4> 35, 39
Opticians . . . . H9, I5°, J56
Orchestras . . . . 235, 236, 237
Orders in Council, definition of 28, 41
Ordnance factories see Royal Ord¬
nance Factories
Ordnance Survey Department 49, 217
Organisation for European Economic
Co-operation 49, 212, 218, 448, 451,
452, 453, 463
Orthodox Churches (Christian) . . 199
Outward Bound Trust . . . . 177
Page
Overseas Civil Service . . . . 50
Overseas countries, aid to see under
Finance
Overseas Liaison Division of DSIR . . 218
Overseas Research Committee (Privy
Council)  207, 219
Overseas Research Council . . 207, 219
Overseas Scientific Relations, Standing
Committee on . . . . 207, 218
Oxford University 41, 165, 166, 167, 288
Bodleian Library . . . . 227-8
Clarendon Laboratory . . . . 204
dramatic society . . . . . . 232
Imperial Forestry Institute 215, 299
museums . . . . . . 217, 224
Press . . . . . . . . • • 229
sport  498, 499, 5°4
P
PAYE (income tax scheme) . . . . 429
Packaging . . , . . . . 34°, 475
Paint industry . . . . . . . • 341
Paper and board industry 203, 262, 352
Parish councils and meetings 70, 71, 73
Parishes (Church of England) 194, 195
Parliament 24, 25, 29-40, 43, 44, 45-6,
78, 87
committees 36-7, 39, J94, 2I7, 26i»
425, 426-7
control of:
armed forces .. . . . . 108
finance 35, 36, 37-8, 47, 424-7
Government in power 35, 39-4°, 43, 4&
local authorities . . . . . . 69
marketing boards, agricultural .. 278
public corporations . . 255, 261
dissolution of . . • • 28, 30
duration of . . . . • • • • 3°
election results . . . . • • 34
electoral system . . 32-3» 33~4> 53
functions and powers 29-30, 35-4°
‘Hansard’ . . . • • • 36, 4°
legislation 29-30, 35, 36, 37-9, 47-8
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 40
party system. . . . • • 3°, 33-5
privileges . . . . • • • • 33
procedure .. .. •• 35“4°
prorogation of . . • • • • 3°
public interest in . . . . . . 40
questions to ministers 39, 43, 44, 46, 261
relations with Monarchy 28, 29, 30,
33, 38, 424-5
relationship with Church of England 194
secret sessions . . • • 33, 3^
sessions . . . • • • 3°—1
20
572
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Parliament—contd.
State opening of . . 28, 29, 425, 484
See also Speakers and Whips
Parliamentary and Scientific Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 217
Parliamentary Boundary Commissions 32
Parliamentary Counsel, Office of . . 47-8
Parliamentary Secretaries 35, 43, 46, 47, 60
Parochial church councils . . . . 195
Parsons and Marine Engineering Tur¬
bine Research and Development
3i»
• 328
• 52
• 56
33, 73
.91-9
. 86
• 363
392
Association . .
Passports
Paymaster-General’s Office
Peers
Penal system . .
Pensions:
appeal tribunals
for dockers . .
payment of, by Post Office
Ministry of, and National Insurance
56, 133, 144
old age . . . . . . 133, 140
public service . . . . 56, 67, 68
retirement . . . . . . 137-8
war  57, 133, 144
widows . . . . 137, 139-40, 144
Periodical Proprietors’ Association . . 493
Periodicals . . . . . . 227, 491-2
Personnel management . . 421-2
Personnel Management Advisory
Service . . . . . . 263, 422
Pesticides . . . . . . 270, 340
Petroleum and petroleum products
299-300, 305-6, 446
chemicals industry . . . . 339-40
consumption . . . . 305-6, 309
equipment industry. . . . . . 332
exports . . . . . . 306, 447
gasification . . . . . . ..316
imports . . . . . . . . 305
indigenous production .. . . 305
refineries and refining industry 252,
305, 306, 316, 322, 339, 363
tankers . . . . 305, 354, 355, 356
terminals . . . . . . . . 363
Petty Sessional Courts see Magistrates’
courts
Pharmaceuticals . . . . 259, 341
Pharmacists .. .. 149, 150, 156
Pig Industry Development Authority
276-7
Pilgrim Trust . . . . 192, 221, 222
Pilotage  359
Planning, town and country 54, 72, 179,
185-92, 215, 253, 259
Plastics . .
Playing fields, provision of
Poetry:
festivals
societies
Poles, resettlement
Police
cadets
Page
252, 340
72, 178, 496
.. 229
229, 230
140, 401
72, 78, 79, 99-103, 130, 373
102
101
102
103
i55
478, 481, 484
• • 30, 33-4
. . 177
Council for Great Britain
Federation . .
Gazettes
Poliomyelitis vaccination
Political party broadcasts
Political party system . .
Political party youth groups
Pollution, prevention of:
air
rivers..
sea (by oil) . .
water supply
Polo
Pony club
‘Pools’ (football) see under Betting
Poor’s Roll
Population
age distribution
birth rate
censuses
death rate
density
expectation of life
fertility trends
households . .
increase in ..
language
migration
mortality, causes of.
nationalities . .
new towns . .
racial composition .
regional distribution
Royal Commission on
sex ratio
social organisation . .
urbanisation.. 16-18, 179, 185,239
working . . . . 250, 393-4, 397“8
Port of London Authority . . . . 362
police . . .. . . . . 100
Ports . . . . . . . . 360-3
fishing .. ..251,252,253,290
Post Office 57, 212, 256, 386-92, 479, 486
Advisory Council and committees 386-7
automation . . . . 388, 389, 390
Cable and Wireless Services . . 390
finance . . .. . . 387,479
mail services 377, 378, 382, 383, 387-8
145, 208, 300
319-20
•• 358
317, 320
. . 500
5°7, 508
. . 90
. . 7-18, 239
9-10, 11-12
. . 9-10, 11
8, 9, 14-18, 395-6
9-10, 11
9, 239
9, 10
11
19-20
7, 9, 14-18
..7,18
7, 13, 14, 401
11
.. 14
188, 189
7, 13-14
14-18
9
.. 13
18-23
INDEX
573'
Page
Post Office—contd.
money and postal orders . . 387, 392
postage rate (minimum) . . • • 387
research . . 57. 212, 216, 388, 485
Savings Bank . . 57> 437> 43$
submarine cables . . . . 334) 391
See also under Traffic
Postmaster General 57, 360, 386, 389, 477,
478, 479, 480, 484, 485
Potato Marketing Board . . 278, 281
Pot-holing . . . . • • • • 511
Pottery industry . . 251, 315, 349-50
Power, Ministry of 57, 212, 215, 258, 263,
300, 303, 308, 312, 314, 326
Power stations . . . . 308, 309-11, 312
nuclear . . . • • • S10-1) 3I2
Prefabricated buildings industry . . 322
Premium Savings Bonds 57, 392, 437, 438
Presbyterian Churches 196, 197-8, 200
Pre-Service organisations see under
Armed Forces
Press .. .. .• •• 4°) 487-95
General Council of . . . . • • 494
Press Association Ltd. . . • • 492
Preventive detention . . . • 91) 93> 95
Prices:
guarantees (agricultural) . . 279-82
regulation by traders 257, 258, 264
trends in . . .. 241, 247-8,4x6
Prime Minister 33 42, 43-4* 45) 65 67, 88,
108, 211, 212
Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service .. . . . . 126
Printing and publishing industry 256, 262,
352-3
Prison Commission . . . . 92> 94> 95
Prison system .. .. •• ..91-6
Private International Law Committee 88
Privy Council . . 27, 28, 29, 30, 40-2, 233
'Committees . . . . . . 4I-2> 207
Counsellors .. . . . . . . 41
Office .. . . •• •• 41
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Divi¬
sion (High Court) . . . . . . 82
Probation . . . . • ■ • • 99
officers .. . . • • 96, 99
Procurator General . . ■ • • • 58
department of . . • • . . 58
Procurators, Fiscal . . . . 62, 86
Production and productivity, trends in
see under Industry
Production departments . . 258-9, 264
Production Engineering Research
Association . . . . . . • • 205
Professional and Executive Register 398,
399
Page
Profits tax see under Taxation
Promenade Concerts . . . . . . 236
Provincial Agricultural Economics
Service .. .. • • • • 287
Provincial Newspapers Ltd. . . . . 489
Psychiatric social workers . . 94, 151
Public Accounts, Select Committee
on . . .. • • • • 426—7
Public corporations 25, 212, 255-6, 260-1,
409-11
See also individual public corpora¬
tions (listed on p. 256), National¬
isation and Finance
Public Health Laboratory Service 157, 210
Public houses . . . . • • • • 23
Public libraries . . • • • • 228
Public Prosecutions, Director of 55, 79
Public Record Office . . . . 56, 228
museum . . • • • • • • 223
Public schools . . 159, 162, 164, 496, 501
Public Trustee Office . . . . . . 56
Public Works Loan Board 46, 77, 182, 434
Publishers’ Association .. • • 229
Publishing . . • • 58, 229, 352-3
Puisne judges . . . • • • . . 82
Punting. . . . • • • • • • 5°6
Purchase tax see under Taxation
Q
Quakers see Friends, Society of
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying machinery industry . . 330
Quarter Sessions . . • ■ 84, 85
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nurs¬
ing Corps . . .. • • 121, 123
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval Nurs¬
ing Service .. .. •• .. 119
Queen’s Bench Division (High Court) 78,
82, 84, 85, 88
Queen’s Counsel . . ■ • . . 89
Queen’s Proctor see Procurator General
R
RAC see Royal Automobile Club
RAF see Royal Air Force
Racecourse Betting Control Board 506, 507
Racing:
coursing . . • • • • • • 5°7
greyhound . . . • • • • • 5°7
horse . . . . • • • • • • 5°6
pigeon .. •• •• •■ 5°7
point-to-points . . • • • • 5°3
pony . . . . •• • • • • 5°7
574
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
506
507
378, 385-6
. . 122
385, 386
39°. 391
215, 216
390, 391
258, 334
204, 220
Racing-—contd.
racecourses . .
trotting races
See also Motor racing
Rackets . . . . . . . . . . 504
Radar 115, 117, 125,214,334,378,385,420
Radio communications:
air
Army
navigational aids
Post Office . .
research
sea
See also Broadcasting
Radio equipment industry
Radio telescope (Jodrell Bank)
Radioactive materials . . 212, 213, 341
Radioactive Substances Advisory Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 212
Radiochemical Centre . . 213, 341
Railways 362, 363-4, 366-9, 374, 376-7
modernisation . . 365-6, 368-9, 376
safety measures . . . . 369, 414
underground (London) . . 375, 376
vehicles industry . . . . • • 337
workers’ earnings . . . . . . 415
workshops .. ..251,252,256,337
Rainfall.. .. .. .. 5,319,320
Ramblers’ Association . . . . 192
Rank Organisation . . . . 232, 486
Rates . . . . . . 76-7, 246, 424
water. . . . . . . . . . 3x7
Rationing (food), end of . . • • 373
Raw materials:
commodity markets. . .. 458-9
imports . . 239, 444, 446-7, 453
see also individual manufacturing
industries
re-exports . . . . . . . . 449
Rayon industry . . . . . . 343
Reactor School see under Harwell
Reactors .. .. 212,213,3x0
Rearmament .. .. .. ..no
Recorder (Quarter Sessions) . . 84, 85
Recorder of London . . . . . . 84
Records, gramophone. . . . 228, 237
Recreations see Leisure activities and
Sport
Recruitment:
to armed forces 112, 119-20, 122-3, 126
to Civil Service . . . . 64, 65, 66
Refineries see under Petroleum
Refractories . . . . . . . . 349
Refrigeration machinery industry . . 330
Refrigerators . . . . 21, 253, 330
Refugees . . . . . . 13,401
Page
Regattas . . .. . . 504, 505
Regent, appointment of . . . . 28
Regiments, Regular Army . . . . 121
Regional Advisory Councils (broad¬
casting)  479
Regional Boards for Industry . . 260
Regional Hospital Boards . . . . 148
Registrar General .. .. • •8,53
Registrar-General of Shipping and
Seamen . . . . . . .. 358
Registrar of Restrictive Trading
Agreements . . . . . . . . 264
Regular Forces Resettlement Service 112,
399
Rehabilitation of disabled 150-1, 399,
402-3
Religion:
in broadcasting 478, 479, 480, 481, 482,
484
freedom of . . . . . . . . 193
• • 95
. . 164
150, 199
•-96-7
•• 403
184-5, 275-6
86, 185
230, 231
257, 258, 264
in prisons
in schools
See also Churches
Religious Orders
Remand homes
Remploy Ltd. . .
Rent control
Rent tribunals . .
Repertory theatre companies
Resale price maintenance
Rescue services:
civil defence . . .. 128, 129, 130
sea and air . . . . 126, 358-9, 391
Research Council (dsir) . . 208, 209
Research, scientific and industrial 201-21
advisory councils and committees 203,
205, 207, 208, 212, 215, 216, 218, 220
agricultural 206, 207, 210-1, 214, 218,
221, 276, 277, 286, 287-8, 340
aircraft . . 114-5, 337, 379, 385
airport operations .. .. 215,385
anti-locust . . . . . . . . 216
botanical . . . . . . . . 217
building and civil engineering 213, 215,
323-4
chemistry
coal . .
Colonial development
communications
defence 114-6, 118, 207, 211, 213, 214
Department of 58, 204, 205, 206, 208-9,
215, 217, 220, 229, 263, 292, 299, 300,
304, 312, 320, 323, 335, 343, 421, 423
Development Fund, grants for 207, 215,
289
ecological .. .. .. 191,211
209, 340, 341
215, 303, 304-5
.. 216
216, 388, 485
INDEX
575
Research, scientific and industrial
economics of
electricity
electronics
employment in
entomological
expenditure on
fellowships . .
fire prevention
fisheries
flora and fauna
food . .
forestry
fuel . .
gas . .
geological
Page
-contd.
. . 209
.. 215, 312-3
214, 216, 334, 485
203, 220
. . 214
204, 205, 209, 210, 220,
299
. . 166, 204, 210, 211
106, 208, 323
209, 214-5, 289, 292
.. .. .. 211
. . 211, 215, 287, 288
215, 299
208, 215, 300, 304-5
2X5,316
215, 217
Government responsibility for 41—2, 201,
206-17, 219, 220
human sciences . . • • 209, 422—3
industrial associations 204, 205—6,
208-9, 304, 3i2
industrial health . . . . 3°3> 42i
information, dissemination of 205, 220-1
land use and planning . . . . 215
learned societies . . • • 201—3
marine navigation . . . . . . 215
medical 146, 157, 201, 206, 209-10, 216,
219
meteorological . . 5°) 206, 214
mines, safety in . . 57> 215, 303, 304
National Research Development
Corporation . . . . 205-6
in nationalised industries . . 205, 215
naval.. .. 114—5» 116, 118, 214, 215
nuclear 115-6, 118, 211-3, 331, 354-5
overseas liaison 115, 202, 203, 210, 211,
213, 216, 217-20, 287, 299
pest control . . . . 208, 214, 286
petroleum technology . • • • 3°6
plant pathology . . ■ • 214, 286
postgraduate 203, 204, 208, 211, 219
Privy Council Committees for 4I~2>
207, 208, 210, 211, 219
roads.. .. •• •• 215, 323
space.. .. •• 204, 219—20
timber . . . . • • 208, 298
in universities and technical colleges 167,
169, 203-4, 208, 287, 299, 306, 316,
323, 35°, 42i
veterinary .. .. 211,214,277,287
water supplies . . . • . . 320
See also individual manufacturing
industries
Restrictive Practices Court . . 86, 264
Retail trade . . . . . • 472-5
Page
Reuters Ltd. . . . . . . . . 492
Revenue . . 246, 425, 429-33, 434-5
Riding . . . . . . .• 5°7-8
horse and hunter trials . . . . 508
Rifle shooting .. .. .. ..510
River boards . . . . . . 319-20
River pollution, prevention of 319-20
Rivers 3, 4, 3l8> 3I9, 32o, 327-8, 362,
363, 374, 504
Road haulage services 364-5, 371-2
Road Research Laboratory . . ..323
Road transport. . 363-4, 37I-3> 376, 414
Roads 59, 61, 215, 259, 363, 369-73, 377
modernisation . . 322, 324, 370-1
Rocket Propulsion Establishment . . 115
Roman Catholic Church 33, 95, 198-9, 200
schools . . • • 97, i64, 165, 199
Rope-making . . . . 252, 253, 345
Rose Bruford School . . . . . . 232
Rothamsted Experimental Station 206,
287, 340
Routes, long-distance see Footpaths
Rowing. . . . • • • • 5°4-5
Royal Academy . . • • 224, 225
Royal Academy of Dramatic Art . . 232
Royal Academy of Music . . 228, 237
Royal Air Force 108-9, 112, 1x3, 114,
124--7, 130, 385
Reserve . . . . • • . . 127
Royal Aircraft Establishments 115,214,
337, 385
Royal Albert Hall . . • • • • 236
Royal Automobile Club (rac) . . 510
Royal Auxiliary Air Force . . . . 126
Royal Ballet and School . . 237, 238
Royal Botanic Gardens (Kew) 49, 216-7
Royal College of Art 225
Royal College of Midwives . . .. 156
Royal College of Music . . 228, 237
Royal College of Nursing . . 156, 421
Royal College of Science and Tech¬
nology .. •• •• •• 203
Royal Commissions:
on Ancient and Historical Monu¬
ments . . .. * •■ •• 226
appointment and functions of • • 44
on Local Government (Greater
London) . . . . • • • • 71
on Population . . • • • • 9
on the Press . . . . • • • • 487
Royal Family:
ceremonial . . • • • • • • 29
financial provision for . . • ■ 425
genealogical tree . . • ■ . . 26
order of succession . . . • 26, 27
Royal Festival Hall . . - • • • 236
576
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Royal Fine Art Commissions 221, 226
Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service . . 117
Royal Fleet Reserve . . . . .,.120
Royal Forestry Society . . . . 298
Royal Greenwich Observatory 48, 206, 214
Royal Household, political officers . . 35
Royal Institute of British Architects
(riba) . . .. 226, 227, 228
Royal Institute of Chemistry. . . . 202
Royal Institute of Oil Painters . . 224
Royal Institution . . .. . . 202
Royal International Horse Shows . . 508
Royal Marines . . .. .. .. 119
police . . . . . . . . 100
Royal Mint . . . . . . 46, 436
Royal National Lifeboat Institution . . 359
Royal Naval Minewatching Service . . 120
Royal Naval Scientific Service . . 214
Royal Navy . . 48, 108-9, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116-20
Reserves . . .. . . 117, 120
Royal Observer Corps . . . . 127
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. . 237
Royal Ordnance Factories 59, 64, 114, 256
Royal Pavilion, Brighton . . . . 224
Royal Prerogatives see under Monarchy
Royal Proclamations see under Monarchy
Royal Radar Establishment . . 115 , 214
Royal Society 202, 206, 210, 214, 219, 220
Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents . . . . . . 373, 419
Royal Society of Arts . . . . 202, 225
Royal Society of British Artists . . 224
Royal Society of Literature . . . . 229
Royal Society of Painters in Water
Colours . . . . . . . . 224
Royal Society of Portrait Painters . . 224
Royal title see under Monarchy
Royal Ulster Constabulary . . . . 103
Rubber industry .. .. 251,353
Rugby Football see under Football
Rugby League.. .. .. .. 498
Rugby Union .. . . .. . . 498
Rule Committees . . . . . . 88
Rural Community Councils . . . . 289
Rural district councils . . . . 70
See also County district councils
Rural Industries Bureau . . 289, 298
Rural Industries Loan Fund Ltd. . . 289
Rural Music Schools Association . . 236
s
Sadler’s Wells Ballet and School see
Royal Ballet and School
Sadler’s Wells Theatre . . . . 237
Page
Safety measures:
agriculture . . . . . . . . 413
air .. 126, 379-8o, 385-6, 39r, 4i3
atomic energy .. . . . . 212
forests . . . . . . . . 297
industry 308, 400, 403, 404, 412-4, 419-20
mines . . 215, 301, 303, 413, 419
railways . . . . . . 369, 414
roads and road users 61, 372, 373, 414,
420
sea 126, 292, 357, 358-9, 391, 413, 4i4
Sailing . . . . . . . . . . 505
St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association 132,
154
St. John Ambulance Brigade 132, 154, 177
Salaries see Wages and salaries
Salvation Army . . 132, 197, 198
Sandhurst .. .. .. 122, 126
Sandwich courses (technology) . . 169
Sanitation, regulations for 71-2, 145, 411,
412
Savings .. .. .. .. 244, 246
National Savings Movement .. 437
Savings Banks . . . . 437-8
See also Investment, trusts
Scholarships 122, 160, 162, 166-7, I7°,
172, 210
School Health Service . . . . 164
School Meals Service .
Schools . .
approved
architecture . .
art
ballet. .
broadcasting to
building of . .
church
drama
examinations
fees . .
free transport to
. . 164
158- 65
62, 97
. . 227
.. 225
• • 238
163, 478, 479, 481, 484
164-5, 188, 189
159, 164, 165, 195, 199
 232
. . 158, 161, 162, 237
159- 60
164
games and sport in 496, 498-502, 504-5,
508, 510-1
health and welfare in
Inspectorate . .
leaving age . .
meals in
mountaineering
music in
numbers attending
religious teaching in
riding
scholarships . .
teachers
types of
visual aids in
. . 164
5L 158
58, 161, 162
. . 164
.. 509
•• 237
158-9
. . 164
•• 507
. . 160
162-3, 418
159-62, 164
. . 163
INDEX
577
Page
Science:
international collaboration 202, 203, 216,
217-20
museums .. . . 52, 217, 223, 228
promotion of . . . • 201-21
university expansion for 167-8, 203-4
See also Research
Scientific Advisory Council (electricity) 312
Scientific Film Association . . . . 233
Scientific and industrial instruments
industry . . . . 250, 252, 332-3
Scientific and Industrial Research:
Committee for (Privy Council) 207, 208
Department of see under Research
Research Council for see Research
Council (dsir)
Scientific Instruments Manufacturers’
Association . . . . . . • • 333
Scientific Library and Technical
Information Committee . . . . 207
Scientific Manpower, Committee on 203,
207
Scientists:
employment of . . 203, 208, 220
from overseas .. • • 202, 219
training of . . 167, 201, 203-4, 205, 209
Scilly, Isles of . . . . • • i» 269
Scotland:
Agricultural Executive Committees 273
Advisory Committee on Medical
Research . . . . • • • • 216
After-care Council (prisoners) . . 96
agricultural research 210, 211, 214, 287
Agricultural Wages Board . . . . 408
agriculture 265, 266, 268, 269, 272, 273,
274-5, 276, 277, 279, 282, 284, 285,
286, 287, 288, 289
air services . . • • 382
airports . . . . • • 384> 385
ambulance service . . . • 129, 154
Ancient Monuments Board . . 226
architects and architecture . . . . 226
area and counties 1, 274, fold-in map
art galleries and museums . . 223, 224
banks and banknotes . . 436, 512
borstals . . . . • ■ . . 98
broadcasting . . . . . .478-81, 483
canals . . . . • • 374, 375
censuses .. .. • • tS, *7
Central Institutions . . I7°> 2°4
churches 132, 143, 195, 196, 197-8, 200
civil defence . . . . 128, 129, 130
coalfields . . . . . . • • 253
colleges of education . . . . 163
courts of law . . 82-3, 85, 88
crofts and crofters . . 274-5, 282, 284
Page
Scotland—contd.
Crown Office . . . . . . 62
Department of Agriculture for 62, 211,
214, 275, 284, 287, 298
Department of Health for 61, 128, 215,
216, 226, 292
Development Area . . . . . . 253
elections . . . . . . 32, 73, 74
electricity 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313
films . . . . . . . . • • 233
fire service . . . . . . 103-6
fishing . . . . 61, 290, 291, 292
forestry . . . . 294, 296, 297, 298
gas .. .. .• •• 3X4—6
General Registry Office (Depart¬
ment of the Registrar-General). .8, 62
Government departments . . . . 60-2
health services . . 61, 145, 146, 148
Highlands, development of 61, 253,
275, 296, 297, 308, 309
Historic Buildings Council 191,226
holidays, statutory . . . . . . 419
hospitals, number of .. . . 150
housing 179, 180, 181, 183, 184, 189
hydro-electric power 253, 308, 309-10
Industrial Design, Scottish Com¬
mittee .. .. •• •• 225
industry 252-3, 254, 305, 3X°, 325, 326,
328, 329, 33i, 333, 339, 342, 344-5,
347, 349, 351
judges, appointment of . . . . 88
language
law and legal procedure 77-8, 79, 80, 81
Law Officers
Law Society
legal aid
legislation
libraries
lighthouses
local government
• 7, 18
43, 62, 88
89, 90
89-90
29, 36, 47
227-9
• • 359
70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75,
76, 77
medical research . . . . 157, 216
milk 279,280
Milk Marketing Boards . . . . 280
Minister of State for . . 43, 60
National Forest Parks . . 190-1
National Gaelic Mod .. .. 236
National Parks (proposed) . . 190
National Trust for . . . . 192, 227
National Youth Employment Coun¬
cil, Advisory Committee for . . 401
Nature Reserves . . . . . . 191
new towns . . 188, 189
newspapers . . . . 489, 490-I> 492
nuclear energy establishments and
power stations .. 213,310,311
578
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Scotland—contd
orchestras
peers . .
police
population
ports . .
Post Office, directorate
prison system
probation
rates . .
 236
 3i
99-103
7, 15, 16, 17
290, 291, 361, 362, 363
.. 386
•■93-6
• • 99
. . 76
Registers of Scotland, Department of 62
research institutes 209, 211, 214, 215,
287, 340
roads . . .. 61, 370, 371
Royal Commission on Ancient and
Historical Monuments . . . . 226
Royal Fine Art Commission 221, 226
Royal Scottish Academy . . . . 224
Royal Scottish Academy (music) . . 237
Royal Scottish Forestry Society . . 298
Royal Scottish Museum . . 62, 223
scholarships . . . . . . . . 166
schools . . 159, 160, 161, 162, 164
Secretary of State for . . 24, 60, 74,
75, 87, 88, 92, 93, 97, 99, 100 1, 104,
161, 166, 179, 211, 212, 221, 233,
272, 274, 275, 293, 296, 308, 312,
3i7, 37o, 496
Sheriffdoms . . . . . . . . 82
shipbuilding areas . . . . 252, 327
sport . . 496-9, 501-5, 507, 509-n
State Management Districts . . 61
technical education . . 168, 170, 204
town and country planning 179, 186—92
Transport Users’ Consultative
Committee . . . . . . 366
universities 41, 103, 165, 167, 203,
228, 288
vital statistics, registration of . . 8
war pensioners . . . . 61, 144
water supply . . . . 319, 320
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . . . 288
young offenders, treatment of . . 96-9
youth hostels . . . . 177-8
youth services . . . . . . 174
See also Edinburgh
Scotland Yard . . . . . . . . 103
Scottish Agricultural Improvement
Council . . . . . . . . 286
Scottish Agricultural Organisation
Society . . . . . . . . 279
Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation Ltd. . . . . 285,440
Scottish Amateur Athletic Association 502
Scottish Board for Industry . . . . 260
Scottish Central Library . . 228-9
Page
Scottish Chambers of Commerce,
Council of . . . . . . . . 258
Scottish Community Drama Associa¬
tion .. .. .. .. ..231
Scottish Council (Development and
Industry) 233, 254
Scottish Council of Physical
Recreation . . . . . . 178,496
Scottish Council of Social Service 131, 142
Scottish Country Industries Develop¬
ment Trust . . . . . . . . 289
Scottish Education Department 61-2, 158,
159, 162, 231, 401, 496
Scottish Football Association . . 497
Scottish Football League . . . . 497
Scottish Grand Committee (parlia¬
mentary) .. .. . . . . 36
Scottish Health Services Council . . 148
Scottish Home Department 61, 69, 128,
214,292
Scottish Industrial Estates Ltd. . . 253
Scottish Information Office . . . . 62
Scottish Institute of Adult Education 171
Scottish Land Court . . . . 83, 275
Scottish Leaving Certificate . . . . 162
Scottish National Building Record . . 226
Scottish Office, definition of . . . . 61
Scottish Old People’s Welfare Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 142
Scottish Omnibus Group . . 365, 372
Scottish Police Federation . . . . 102
Scottish Record Office . . . . 62
Scottish Special Housing Association 180
Scottish Standing Committee (parlia¬
mentary) .. .. . . . . 36
Scottish Statistical Office . . . . 259
Scottish Trades Union Congress . . 407
Scottish Valuation Advisory Council. . 76
Scottish Women’s Rural Institutes . . 23
Scouts and Guides . . . . 174, 176
Sea Cadet Corps . . . . 120, 177
Sea pollution, prevention of . . • • 358
Seamen:
conditions of employment 357, 358, 360,
4i3
organisations . . . . • ■ 357
safety regulations for 292, 358, 359,
4i3, 4i4
training . . . . 357, 359-60
Search and Rescue Organisation . . 126
Secretaries of State . . . . . . 42
Select Committees (parliamentary):
on Estimates . . . . . . 427
on Nationalised Industries. . . . 261
on Public Accounts. . . . 426-7
on Statutory Instruments . . . . 39
INDEX
579
Page
Selection, Committee of (parliamen¬
tary)   36-7
Services’ Land Requirements, Inter¬
departmental Committee on . . 179
Sewerage . . 54, 61, 72, 145, 320
Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Com¬
pany . . . • • • • • •• 230
Shale mining . . . . . . . . 3°5
Sheffield:
industries
newspaper . .
population . .
University . .
Sheriff Courts . .
Ship repairing industry
Shipbuilding industry
252, 325, 338,35i
. . 490
. . 18
165, 203, 204, 350
82, 85, 88, 90
48, 251, 252, 258,
327, 328
48, 220, 252, 253,
258, 262, 325, 327-8
Shipowners . . . . . . 35^, 357
Shipping .. .. • • 354-63> 4.5°
cable ships . . . . . • • • 391
coastal . . . . 356, 363, 364, 365
companies and lines 327, 355, 356, 357,
362
conferences . . . . . . 357_8, 365
cross-channel services . . 362, 368
on inland waterways . . • • 374
insurance . . . . . . 356-7. 442
medical advice, service for. . • • 391
merchant fleet, composition 354~6
ore carriers . . . . 326, 354, 356
organisations . . . • 3 5 6-8
ports . . . . . • • • 360-3
propulsion .. 118,212,328 331. 354_5
radio communications . . 390, 391
relations with Government 358—9
safety . . . . 357, 358, 359, 39L 413
tankers . . 305, 354, 355, 356, 363
tonnage . . . . • • 354~6, 368
weather reports for . . . . • • 391
See also Docks, Merchant Navy,
Royal Navy and Shipbuilding
industry
Shipping Federation . . . . • • 357
Shirley Institute
Shooting
Shop stewards . .
Shops
Show jumping . .
Sickness benefit
Silk industry . .
Silo grants
Silver ware
Ski-ing . .
Slade School of Fine Arts
Slum clearance
205, 342
• • 503
. . 406
188, 189, 411-2, 472-4
508
. . 136
• • 345
282,283
35o-i
.. 5”
. . 225
.. 181
Smallholdings . .
See also Scotland, crofts
Smallpox vaccination . .
Smoke control
Social services . .
expenditure on
Page
. . 269
• • 155
. • 300
131-78
I3L 433
reciprocal agreements with other
countries .. . . .. .. 134
training of social workers . . . . 132
voluntary organisations 131-2, 141-2,
143, 144, 145, 153, 154, 155-6, 158,
171, 173-4, US, 176-8, 403
Society for Education through Art . . 225
Society for the Promotion of Nature
Reserves . . . . . . . . 191
Society for the Protection of Ancient
Buildings . . . . . . 192, 227
Society for Theatre Research . . 231
Society of Authors . . . . . . 229
Society of British Aircraft Constructors 337
Society of Film and Television Arts .. 234
Society of Industrial Artists . . . . 225
Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders Ltd. . . . . . . 336
Society of St. Vincent de Paul . . 132
Soft drinks industry . . . . . . 348
Solicitor-General . . . . 43, 55, 89
Solicitor-General for Scotland . . 62
Solicitors . . . . . . 88-9, 90
Sondes Place Research Institute . . 205
South-East Asia Treaty Organisation 108
South of Scotland Electricity Board 308,
312,313
Southampton 165, 189, 203, 224, 251, 306,
310, 311, 339, 361, 362, 363
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space research . . . . . . 220
Speaker:
House of Commons 30, 32, 33, 35-6, 39
House of Lords . . 30, 31, 33, 35
Special constables . . 101, 103, 130
Speleology see Pot-holing
Sport . . . . 21, 178, 292, 496-511
amateur and professional 496, 497-502,
506, 508-9, 511
clubs   497-502, 504-11
instructors . . . . . . 496, 502
Squash rackets. . . . . . . . 504
Staff colleges (armed forces) . . . . 114
Stamp duty see under Taxation
Standing Commission on Museums
and Galleries . . . . 221, 224
Standing Conference for Amateur
Music . . . . . . • . 236
Standing Conference of Drama
Associations . . . . . . ..231
580
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Standing Conference of National
Voluntary Youth Organisations . . 175
State Management Schemes .. 54, 61
Stationery Office .. ..58,229,256
Statutory instruments see Delegated
legislation
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelworks plant industry . . . . 332
Sterling and sterling area 239, 249, 454,
458, 459-60, 465
United Kingdom trade with sterling
area . . . . 448, 452, 462-3
Stock Exchanges .. . . . . 440
Stoke-on-Trent . . . .18, 251, 349
Strikes and lock-outs .. . . 404, 409
Students:
Orchestras of Great Britain . . 237
from overseas . . 50, 52, 171-3, 219
in teachers’ training colleges
(Church of England) .. • • 195
in technical and commercial colleges
168, 169-70, 171
in universities 165, 166, 167, 171-2, 203
Subsidies:
agricultural and food
272, 274, 276,
279-85, 433
293, 297
182-3
49, 281-2
5
•• 473
36, 39, 425
fishing and forestry
housing
Sugar Board
Sunshine, hours of
Supermarkets . .
Supply, Committee of
Supply, Ministry of 58-9, 109, in, 114-5,
211, 214, 215, 258, 337 379
Supply Services . . . . 425, 434
Supreme Court of Judicature 82, 88
Surface Water Survey Centre . . 320
Surtax see under Taxation
Swansea 165, 203, 252, 361, 362, 363
Swimming . . .. . . . . 505
Tanker terminals . . . . .. 363
Tankers see under Shipping
Tanning  351
Tariff policy .. .. 279,431,451-3
Tate Gallery .. .. .. .. 223
Taxation 47, 51, 54, 424, 427-31, 432,
433, 434
of companies .. . . 429, 433
Customs and Excise duties 51, 348, 427,
43i, 432, 434, 452-3
entertainments duty (cinemas) 234, 431,
434
estate duty . . • • 54, 43°, 433, 434
Page
Taxation—contd.
income tax 54, 247, 427, 428, 429-30,
434, 437
local see Rates
motor vehicles :. 429, 432, 434
for non-residents . . . . 429-30
profits tax 54, 429, 434
purchase tax .. 431, 433, 434
revenue from . . 246, 432, 433, 434
stamp duty . . . . 54, 429, 434, 436
surtax . . . . 54, 429, 430
Taxicabs (London) . . . . • • 375
Teachers see under Schools
Technical and Scientific Register . . 398
Technical education see under Education
Technical Information Service . . 263
Technical Staff College . . . . 400
Technology, Colleges of Advanced 169-70,
204
Tees-side . . . . 252, 327, 363
Telecommunications, overseas 390-1, 486
Telegraph system . . 216, 388-9, 390
Telephone system . . 216, 389-90, 391
areas . . . . . . . . .. 386
emergency and information services 390,
39i
Teleprinter system . . 388, 389, 390
Television 21, 22, 234, 477-8, 479-80,
483-4, 485, 486
advertising on . . . . 479, 484
films .. . . . . . . 233, 486
licences . . . . . . 21, 477
Television Advisory Committee . . 485
Telex Service . . . . . . 389, 390
Temperature . . . . . . . . 5
Tennis:
Lawn
Real . .
Table  
Territorial Army
Test matches . .
Textile and London Fashion Organisa¬
tion  345
Textile industries 203, 251, 252, 253, 324,
341-5, 395, 398, 447
machinery industry. . ..251, 329-30
500-1
• 504
• 5°4
123-4
• 499
Thames Conservancy Board
Theatres
clubs . .
professional associations
Thomson Newspapers Ltd.
Thomson-Leng publishing group 489, 492
Tilling (bus) Group . . . . 365, 372
Timber Development Association 208, 298
Timber, production and marketing 191,
294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299
•• 3i9
22, 230-1
.. 231
. . 231
488, 489
INDEX
581
Page
Timber—contd.
imports . . . . . • 294, 295
Tinplate industry . . . . 252, 325
Tobacco:
consumer expenditure on . . 247, 348
industry . . . . 251, 253, 348-9
revenue duty . . 348, 43 433
Toilet preparations industry . . . . 341
Tomato and Cucumber Marketing
Board . . . . . . .. 278
Tourist trade . . . . . .21, 450, 451
Tourists’ currency allowances . . 454
Town and country planning 54, 61, 72,
179, 185-92, 215, 253-4
Town Commissioners. . . . . . 70
Town Councils . . 70, 71, 72, 75
Town Development Schemes .. 189
Townswomen’s Guilds . . 22-3, 171
Toy industry .. .. .. •• 3S1
Tractors . . . . 272, 328-9, 466
Trade 248, 444-7^
Board of 43, 59, 66, 205, 225, 234,253-4,
258, 259, 260, 263, 264, 298,
453, 454-6
external 239-40, 248, 302-3, 444-71
balance of payments ..241,460-71
composition . . . . 446-7
distribution . . . . 448-9
financing of . . . . 458-60
Government assistance to 455_8
‘invisible’ transactions 248, 449-51
return to private trading 273, 277, 453
tariff policy . . • . 279, 451-3
value and volume of . . 445“6
See also Exports and Imports
internal . . . . . . 471-6
retail . . . . . • 472-5
wholesale . . . . . . • • 471
See also Markets, food and
Marketing Boards
regulation of trading practices 257, 258
restrictive practices, control of 86, 264
Trade Commissioners . . • • 456
Trade fairs .. . . . • 258, 457-8
Trade Unions 102, 260, 262, 403-4, 405-7,
409-10, 4x1
civil aviation . . . . .. 380
Civil Service .. 67, 406, 409-10
local government service 75, 4°6, 410
miners . . . . • • • • 3°3
musicians . . . . . . . • 237
political fund . . . . • • 4°7
press .. . . . • 493-4
seamen . . . . . . • • 357
theatre . . . . . . ..231
Trades councils . . . . . • 4°7
Page
260, 262, 406-7,
409, 421
378, 382, 383, 384
• • 380, 385-6
• • 374
21, 364, 367, 373
20, 367, 375-6
336-7
360-3
Trades Union Congress
Traffic:
air
air control
canals
congestion . .
London
Northern Ireland
ports ....
Post Office . . 387-8, 389, 39°, 39L 392
rail and road 20, 21, 363-4, 366, 367-8,
371-3, 376-7
shipping . . 354, 355-6, 364, 450
Training schemes for industry 168-71, 172,
263-4, 399-400, 402-3, 405, 406-7, 422
Transatlantic telephone cables 334, 391
Transport . . . . . . 354“386
air  377-86
consultative committees . . . . 366
free for patients .. .. ..154
free for school children . . . . 164
inland waterways . . 363, 366, 373-5
London .. 20, 255, 364, 365, 375-6
Ministry of, and Civil Aviation 59-60,
105, 215, 259, 292, 358, 359, 360, 362,
364, 365, 370, 375, 379, 380-1, 384, 385
nationalisation, legislation . . 364-5
Northern Ireland . . . . 376-7
rail . . 363, 364, 365, 366-9, 376-7
research . . 212, 215, 323-4, 385
road . . 363, 364, 365, 369-73, 377
sea 354-63, 365, 368
Tribunal . . . . .. 366, 372
Users’ Consultative Committees . . 366
See also British Transport Commis¬
sion, Safety and Traffic
Travel see Tourist trade
Travel allowance . . . . . . 454
Treasure trove. . . . . . 80, 86
Treasury 47-8, 65, 67, 259, 260, 425-6,
427, 434, 440-1, 454, 468
bills ..
Solicitor’s Department
Treaties, international
Trees
Tribunals:
administrative
agricultural land
Civil Service Arbitration
Council on . .
industrial disputes . .
lands . .
pensions appeal
rent ..
transport
434, 438-9
46, 58
• • 28, 35, 52
6, 186, 294-5
.86-7
• 275
. 410
.86-7
. 408
76, 86
86,133
86,185
•. 366
582
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Trinity House, Corporation of 359, 362
Trustee Savings Banks . . 437, 438
Tuberculosis:
bovine . . . . . . 277,283
prevention and treatment of 154, 155
Tyneside 17, 252, 327, 333, 361, 363
See also Newcastle
Typographical Association . . . . 494
u
Page
Universities—contd.
sport . . 496, 498, 499, 500, 502, 504,
505. 5ii
students . . 165, 166, 167, 171-2, 203
technological education in 167, 203-4
University Grants Committee 166, 204
Urban district councils .. . . 70
See also County district councils
Utilisation of Home Grown Timber,
Advisory Committee on . . . . 298
UKAEA see Atomic Energy Authority
Ulster Agricultural Organisation
Society . . . . . . . . 279
Ulster Drama Festivals, Association of 231
Ulster Drama League. . . . ..231
Ulster Group Theatre . . . . 231
Ulster Savings .. .. . . . . 437
Ulster Special Constabulary . . . . 103
Ulster Transport Authority .. 376-7
Unemployment 240, 243, 250, 253-4, 394,
396-7, 398
Unemployment benefit .. .. 136
Unit trusts . . . . . . . . 441
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches 198
United Kingdom:
area and composition 1, 17-18, 24, 239
physical . . . . . . .. 1-7
population .. .. . . 7-18, 239
United Nations Organisation:
relations with 13, 49, 52, 92, 218, 358,
379, 463, 469, 470, 486
Technical Assistance 172, 469, 470
United States:
defence co-operation 115, 116, 118, 122
financial aid from . . 241, 463, 465-6
private investment in UK . . . . 466
trade with . . . . .. . . 449
see also Dollar area, trade with
Universities . . . . 165-8, 203-4
agricultural degree courses . . 288
departments of education . . . . 163
departments of physical education 496
drama course and societies . . 232
extra-mural extension courses 171, 228
finance . . .. .. .. 166
forestry courses . . . . . . 299
International Festival of University
Theatres . . . . . . . . 232
medical and dental schools. . .. 148
museums and libraries 224, 227-8, 289
Privy Council committees for . . 41
research 167, 203-4, 208, 287, 299, 306,
316, 323, 350, 421
scholarships and research fellow¬
ships 166-7, I72, 204, 210, 211
V
VAD see Voluntary Aid Detachments
VHF (very high frequency) 385, 481, 485
navigational aids (air) . . . . 385
Vaccination . . . . .. .. 155
Valuation (for rates, etc.) . . 54, 76
Valves, industrial . . . . . . 331
Vegetables, production and marketing 23,
266, 269, 271, 278, 281, 284, 471, 475
Vegetation .. . . .. 5-6, 294-5
Vehicles industry 251, 253, 257, 262, 324,
325, 335-7
Veterinary Service and research 214, 263,
277, 287
Victoria and Albert Museum 52, 223, 224,
228
Visitors, Boards and Committees of
(prisons)  92-3,95
222-7
•.8-13
401-3
399, 401-2, 403
119
Visual arts
Vital statistics . .
Vocational guidance
Vocational training
Voluntary Aid Detachments (vad)
Voluntary organisations:
for child care . . 143, 144, 153 156
in civil defence . . . . . . 128
in education . . . . 158, 171, 173
in industry . . . . 403, 419, 422
for moral welfare 131, 132, 143-4, I53
as part of British life . . 22-3
for prisoners’ aid . . . . 93, 96
for sick, handicapped and aged 131-2,
141-2, 144, 145, 154, 155-6, 403
in youth services . . 173-4, I75, 176-8
See also Arts, promotion of and Sport
Voting:
in House of Commons . . . . 36
in local government elections . . 73
in parliamentary elections . . 32-3, 34
w
WVS see Women’s Voluntary Services
Wages and salaries 21-2, 32, 68, 75, 414-8
INDEX
583
Page
Wages and salaries—contd.
negotiations 257, 357, 360, 404, 407-8,
409-11
Wages Boards and Councils . . . . 408
Wales:
administration . . 24, 46, 51, 53
agriculture 266, 268, 269, 275, 278, 284,
288, 289
Ancient Monuments Board . . 226
area and counties . . 1, fold-in map
broadcasting.. .. 478-9,481,483
churches .. 195, 196, 197, 198, 200
Civil Defence, Director of. . . . 128
county farm institutes . . . . 288
Eisteddfodau . . . . 229, 236
forestry . . .. 294, 296, 297, 298
Historic Buildings Council 191, 226
holidays, statutory . . . . . . 418
industries 252, 253, 302, 306, 316, 325,
326, 338, 343, 346, 349, 369
language .. .. .. ..7,18
Local Government Commission . . 70
Ministers for Welsh Affairs 24, 42, 43
National Forest Park . . . . 191
National Industrial Development
Council . . . . . . . . 254
National Library . . . . 227-8, 492
National Museum . . . . 223, 492
National Parks . . . . 189, 190
National Youth, Orchestra of . . 237
new town in . . . . . . 188
newspapers and periodicals 491, 492
nuclear power station and proposed
sites . . . . . . 310, 311
population .. . . . . 14-16, 17
ports and tanker terminals 290, 361
362, 363
Post Office, directorate . . . . 386
roads  37°, 37^
Royal Commission on Ancient and
Historical Monuments . . . . 226
sport 497-8, 499, 501, 502, 503-4,
509, Si 1
Transport Users’ Consultative
Committee . . . . . . 366
University of . . 165, 288, 492
Wales and Monmouthshire Industrial
Estates Ltd. .. . . . . 253
Wallace Collection . . . . . . 223
War-damaged cities, reconstruction . . 189
War Department Constabulary . . too
War, economic effects of . . • • 240
War, Secretary of State for 60, 109, 120
War Office .. 60, 100, 105, in, 122
War pensioners 53, 57, 61, 133, 144
Warburg Institute . . . . . . 225
Page
Warren Spring Research Station
208-9,
304
Watch Committee (police) . . . . 100
Water Pollution Research Board . . 320
Water Pollution Research Laboratory^ 320,
323
Water polo . . . . .. . . 505
Water power . . 299, 300, 308, 309-10
Water supply . . . . 262, 282, 317-20
Conservancies, Thames and Lee . . 318,
3i9, 320
sources of .. 317, 318, 319, 320
Waterways see Inland waterways
Ways and Means, Committee of . . 36
Weather . . . . 4-5, 6, 265, 295
bulletins for ships . . .. • • 391
forecast services 49-50, 214, 390, 391
Welbeck College . . . . 122-3
Welfare:
blind 53, 131, 140, 141.
centres
in civil defence
fishermen
industrial . . 301, 303
maternity and child
Merchant Navy
old people
overseas students
prisoners and probationers
school children
sick and handicapped
war pensioners
young offenders
See also National Assistance
National Insurance
Welfare Foods Service . . 152-3
Wellcome Foundation and Trust 201, 204
Welsh Agricultural Land Sub-
Commission
Welsh Agricultural Organisation
Society Ltd.
Welsh Board for Industry
Welsh Board of Health
Welsh Department of Ministry
Education
Welsh Folk Museum . .
Welsh Land Settlement Society
Welsh League of Youth
Welsh National Opera Company
Wembley Stadium 497, 498, 499, 508, 510
Wesleyan Reform Union
Western European Union
Westminster Press Group
Whaling
Whips, parliamentary . .
Whisky industry
228, 403, 477
..152
. . 129
. . 292
412-4, 420-1
142-4, IS2-3
360, 413, 414
53, 61, 141-2
172-3
94-6, 99
. . 164
53, 61, 155-6
57, 133, 144
. . 97
and
275
of
278
260
53
5i
223
269
176
237
197
108, 118
489
293-4
32, 35, 43, 47
••347
584
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
White City .. .. 502, 507, 508
White Fish Authority . . 292, 293
White Fish Industry Advisory Council 293
Whitechapel Art Gallery . . . . 225
Whitley Councils
Wholesale trade
Widows’ benefits
Widows’ pensions
Wigmore Hall . .
Wimbledon
Winds . .
Wire broadcasting
67, 75, 409-10
• • 47i, 474
..137
137,139-40, 144
.. 236
. . 500
• • 4-5
484
Wires and cables (insulated) industry 334
Women:
in armed forces in, 112, 119, 121, 126,
394
in civil defence . . . . 128-9
in Civil Service . . . . 64, 418
employment 321, 342, 344, 345, 376,
393-4, 395-6, 412, 414-5, 418, 420
in fire services . . . . .. 106
in Free Church ministry
housewives . .
national insurance for
periodicals for
police . . . . 100,
prison officers
proportion in population
sporting activities
■ 197
20-1, 317, 393
• 135
. 492
101, 102, 103
• 93
13
497, 499, 500, soi,
502, 505, 509
Women’s Advisory Council on Solid
Fuel .. .. . . .. .. 317
Women’s Group on Public Welfare . . 132
Women’s Institutes . . . . 22-3, 171
Work, hours of:
average
for children and women
in Civil Service
lost by strikes
Page
20, 418
411, 412, 418
.. 68
404, 409
for prisoners and young offenders 94, 98
Workers’ Educational Association . . 171
Working conditions see under Labour
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes 22—3
Works councils . . 407-8, 409, 423
Works, Ministry of 60, 179, 191, 215, 223,
226, 237, 259, 263, 322
World Assembly of Youth
World Council of Churches
World Refugee Year . .
Wrestling
judo 
175
200
13
5°9
509
505
Women’s International Art Club . . 224
Women’s Junior Air Corps . . 176-7
Women’s Royal Air Force .. . . 126
Women’s Royal Army Corps 121, 123
Women’s Royal Naval Reserve . . 120
Women’s Royal Naval Service 119, 120
Women’s Rural Institutes . . . . 23
Women’s Voluntary Services (wvs) 128,
132, 154, 156
Woodland Owners’ Association . . 297
Woodlands . . 6, 294-5, 297-8, 299
Dedication Scheme . . 297-8
Wool Industries Research Association 343
Wool industry 203,251,252,253,257, Zebra crossings
342-3 Zenith (reactor)
Wool Marketing Board, British 278, 281 Zeta
Yacht racing
York:
Archbishop of . . 31, 44, 86, 194
festival and mystery plays . . . . 236
industry . . . . . . . . 252
museum . . . . . . . . 224
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . 177, 288
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca)  i74
Young offenders . . 91, 92, 96-9
See also Juvenile courts
Young Women’s Christian Association
(ywca)  I74
Youth:
Employment Service . . 401-2
orchestras . . . . . . . . 237
organisations 120, 124, 127, 176-8, 288
services . . . . . . 173-8
‘teenagers’ . . . . . . . . 22
theatre . . . . . . ..231
See also Children, Employment,
Leisure activities, Sport and
Young offenders
Youth Hostels Associations . . I77—8
373
212
212
//7?e<
: jrth of forth
Dunbar
Ro
4/:
thes°1
Ardrossar
j Paisley^
)W
^^Eci in burgh
Hamilton''
o' —
■JI mar nock Lanark >
Peebles
CoU
,stren^
St. AbB’s Head
\
, Eyemouth
lerwick-upon-Tweed
Tweedmbuth
ENGLAND & WALES
10
Scale 1:2,000,000
10 20 30 40 50 Statute Miles
2 v'
 J/ ^ Ay%
npbeltown J
Mull of - FirtV °^
Kmtyre
Calashiels°L
Holy, I.
V 0 3
rW , tirvar
T
\ Moffat
Z
4*
v" ' °Selkirk The Cheviot
/ v\^2676
(Hawick \SD/
N,o-
Rothbury
\lorth Sunderland
v \
c \
C \
\lnwick.
Amble \
10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Kilometres
-...Hi, Canals
 Railways
(Passenger Services)
----- Shipping Routes
(Distances in Nautical Miles)
3210 Heights in Feet
c .Stranraer
/Newton
Stewart^
Mull of
-.Galloway
Pt. of AyreN
Dumfries}
ks
NORTHUMBERLANI
Morpeth
gingham0
^nnan-d^itZhDile r Newca^tnemout^ ^ .
lmptonc/'<^fj^a'y^^r*Xno South SKielcls
Kirkcudbright X'QUMBE
1 A'i^aryportcr Skiddaw
SolwOl Z_^.3053
Worklnptonf/rwZT^* ^ , v
Whitehavenu I wWr'trKeswT^
St. Bees Head J-T ' WESTMOR'
Egremont lp) Sea. Fell , ,
iMo Ctowkshead
»■ \ \A/i nrl/nr
Durham
^Bishopkucklanjd'
ND ,
(t>Cross Fell
^Chester le Street N
\Seaham HarbouN
N
O
R
JD
Downpatrick 1 OF MAN Ra'„se/ ^ Rme„s, A" Xdt.'
I Pool/ Sniefell/os/^O/ ^ /^,ere^
£ i Port Erir
boi Calf of Mam
Douglas
Zastletown
tf
^Hartlepool
'West Hartlepool,
iSdf/sbrough.
ington Kettle Ness
Ccsfle i>A A, ) r
...imoWYork Mo?rS
bedale j//Northallerton
° //fhirsk Pickering,
o
irnard
Barro\
Morecaf^^o^^mfznc^ster
QQ I
'.IRISH
SEA
---.Heyshom
r \
> \ Fleetwoodu/^VP
'\ Blackpool^
'Lytham^St. Annes'
Scarborough
\
Filey \
_ . \
.P'ponX \ Alo/to^York WoldT? Flamborough Head
K rK: b H 1 , Rc b .^//Bridlington \
itel jjFnar/hgroug^h Da/fie/d
‘lerb/WYork T Hornsea \
Ev a s t 9 \
1<L)  r, /
^ MarketQ^evBr eY
)tj^e
?ton
WaIhP yWithernsea / \<^
_To Hamburg 422_
T
H
cSV
A0.
To_publin_]22__^
Li verpool-- - BodtvleX Act-
,LlVerPOX>lv*fJ.H^|<
__To Dun_Laog_haire57/'' f ( ^landur/^ A BirkenheadfeT Widnes,
i ud -r \ F-On^ /'p PhyL/fl/)
H° yHNy™N™
%6(
rJKI
53 U
n-,1
o'
S° 't/7
f?'rtv7' BraicK-y-Pwll
Caernarvon
Bay
nesdd
aejyiaTvon
o
^ DENBIG;
^ Ruthinx
A
ewark
'Or
Mablethorpe
^Skegness
'ffVw \
O0
iL' ,
Kesteven
.MERIONETH Oswestt
.Harlech / t'\ /\ J
Barmoutf/ ,^Pph§ellau v4^ ilk
oOmos x_
ader Idris Mawddw)
Towy^2927^MDNJGOMER1
lachynlleth £./)
Bay Borth/
VO Gibraltar Pt. on ""V^,
jZ / , as \'u-
^Boston ^ c^edogham
Px ^ /><aCrori'\er
> A Sandringham^/ | North
'j PFakenham \oWalsham
Cardig
Bay
Aberystwyt
/id
Juneafon
lam
/Downham
Market
Attleborough.
Aberayror
New Qua
|Strumble Hd.:
r -
4eots^
idge  
CAMBtUD
:dde
To Cork
St. David''
Nf
jarc
Roiipy
far \ Gloucest<
\berga'
fenby
„ fiorry Port NNeo'ti
Tsfc.«S?~pi-3|
°r ponhcaw!S'.y ^ >i*Gardil
0110 fork       Bri^
Bris.o/ Cya~gf^w
super-Mare
Hineht
°Saffr
fottenhai..
jQ-Rdmford
i^est—H«
fhe Naze'
'laclon-
on-Sea
soa /..
?Southminster
i imrix/ i J/racombe y3?/
Lundy 1.^ Morte Pt.rT 4xrnc
Hartland Pt. Bide fore
Dunkeryy-\
/eBeacon l/i
'07
M. E
UULI i
B.jdel \ \
■Honi
/esT/r 0kehamFton ^aExeter
WILTS
oL. \yVarminstek C
jsingstpke^
^Whitchurch
herb
kerne St'MfqBlandforc
T Padstn
Frevose Hd
Newquay
'fold'
fWesto-'pakmoorDiJ^^F
^Tavist/p/ Ptnncetow- A
dD\0 R S E\..
,Kegf§ Wimbornt
  ^ iprcriesters
-jaton DdnDfr
idmouth Ayr/ Wareh
■*<?&
Bexhill
•^Eastbourne-
lewton fobo&J^™yuthLyme Bay fjort|and m /.
Weymouth&\
nr - //v '7,
' Swanage^Of^
yoo " -a ^,-r- vi a- v ^ - tastoourr
rmo«&*R /Kyd\ D %0 %A^/Oa A Beach/. Head
VLufcown^o^^, ^ London,5'’'
.ydd \/' 9 . ,
Dungeness i Calais
astmgs ,^Gris?Je2
N
^ Boulogne °
Micho
v’/s°xv
^//
Dodman Pt. /
'mouth yfi ^
ut-T
   lignton
}artmouth^lP‘r'x^am
bKingsbridge
Start Pt..,'
l
rv}/
<*>
r\(
C
H
>1
'N G l/ 1
St. Valery
Fecamp
Sq
Alderney
® Cherbourg
Guernsey
Sark
CHANNEL ISLANDS
(Brjtish)
• -o* V
; Rouen
r v-/ ?f, ) a
\ C u (1/)
S
A
. Helier
h
WEST FROM GREENWICH
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY GEORGE PHILIP Ot SON. LTD.. LONDON
EAST FROM GREENWICH
Se'ne
I 1959 GEORGE PHILIP & SQN. LTD.
Continuation northward
on the same scale
Papa Stour
Q3
Foula
Sula Sgeir
Rona
rwick
’tjNoss
Sressay
t. Sule Skerry
■ Stock Skerry
Fair Isle
0
North
Ronaldsay ^
’estray
Stromne
Old Nan of Hoy
Rora
Hd.
.Islands
C. Wrath'
7 70
Hberdeen_ \\-F-.
Butt of Lewis
>rt of Ajess
Tolsta
Fair Isle
Gallan Hd
b
L-Res
■C Scarp
West L.
Taransay
qj Toe Hd
A rl --K^ish
Ard an r I
Runair
Loch /,
'-3a
Handa I. qJ
Pt.of
Stoer
/Eye J''
Peninsula
Kebock Hd.
TSHeTl\
^Rhui
Summer Is.
rOrth hlant, ,s- ^
o ' Rudha ,./r°dday
.udh’Re
Melvaig\
Monach „ , .
h sfer«\)T,
<U _/v^^§Ronay «■
Benbecula
a /rhsay
^ O.
L RP^^^Wiay
6 Sfn^cula Sd. *-
3 OOUt
Rudha : BflMhor
Ardvule i ,>- . /2034
o u
\dn%’
So
JLofhboisdale'i
.Boisdaleb
0Ssv
V „ ^(PEriskay
X
rtvi
i
Burrayl^'1'
SouthA?
u. owona. fenaidsay
E/n/, Pentland Firth Old Head
sS 'KStVomaA W/entland Skernes
_ ■'O'Groats !
^Lwtnet ■o .Ouncansby
TJrfkso ^castiet0wnofrsswjcf\
L / : !,/ \
yattenPinc%r's Bor \
_ SoayC?
Canna ^//"i Sa L.^j o/. ,.
^rmadp/e/Q.;
RhurS; VsT-y
A \z=zC*Castlebay
i Mir*
oq o dnOray
^-jMingulay
oBerneray
^ra Hd.
MuckCC? / Ari'.aig
^ Ardnamurchan Pt.
c] C^7 Toberfo.
Gunna <dCr’ .t?- ' „.Ap
Ti ree < V , ;Derv0}%
, <A W. L'~-\
R.t2' Staffa0
Skerryvore
Iona
Ert^1
d°L
Rattray
TLA
Dubh Artach
N T I c
OCEAN
Nave*
Coul Pt.
ftalin Hd.
S^\
Horn rsr
Hd. ' '
*4
- J* N ,
k -Errii
^2466
DON!
-|5^
Carndonagh
Movilleo
JZIaui
O—f/\Dung(Ven ANTRIM
VA -A jr- ^ LONDONDERRY V BorouShshone „ , , .
&^C^N^n/ZLlff°r^Strabarh\ \ % /Ballymena dLarn^aftee/ -R Stran\aer
'22^i^3fj Ik P Imwe/to 4 «4Wn8b//y°/0reXSehea? "T
rnhymore f n T A\Antn'm |
NORTHERNxx > • IRI-LAND ^ ^
> '=tr/- , i Cookstown0 'r [Lough/ \ /
SaUintra^j/P^p^L* ^Tk T 0 TNeLh D Belfast UTA
- promore TYRONE °^oy °Stevvun^a .
v tfrvinestoWnOFlntona DungOnnonO"x^k^Q A^-isburrir,
>er|'>'g0nn^y^, ^,U^eAk51^^u^r,oc/°F0^^}> 0rta
^@m%ach ^7% ^ d"""
Njielcoo lEnnisk,
Coionsay^L/j
Oronsay^p
of Oa
 .eAaV
^ W ,-skathlinT
5:;
Sf! J/V —o/ ,i
q! f Campbeltown Z//S,
| i /' ^/7 ]
. Mu 11 V^^^Sputhend
Fair A'ofZintyre ° ,-'nC( N ^
' ' A'Oa :l,a
. Mull
.teSff’S&k'^*s?sr**«- X7C™E/^
T rostan
1817 jC^shendall
Zlenarm
i.ng°r - i
fDondghadee
^ oNeWtownards
^ ^ °-i\ o (Ards \ i
CT "vkAbbP-
^OroLore. )Penin?ula
jdfce °M,y™yc(piftoferry:
L'\ N P-7-
.. s TV v .!
Alston's V'—^
Weannefj
Uppe t
KCcUck -^lltshanctra^Pca^H ^
V^onnon^ZrrrT^ -Ste
Newta,.
fiutj/r.y' Moncibban
PNAGH
^'or/Newb\iss o
nnifeR^J ^"Ybay,
°Keady
tehill
W lnnisk.ee
m " / I A /) v ' irdglass gj
raNewry 2796 o(. ■"cwj S:
■ C“"iB"ASe"L'T Rc'“r *■ ®/ ■
■cssj/ew^ir^^Zr k'- w‘
Pee/
' D ''oc/e
°0ard
«■?/
/ ft
Calf <jf Man £5
I
louglas
.astletown
H
SCOTLAND
AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
Scale 1:1,600,000
'P ? 10 20 30 40 50Statute Miles
i 1 1 , H- 1 -H 1—1 1 1
10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Kilometres
£ A
Eebe//i
lngharfi
. Railways
(Passenger Services)
. Shipping Routes
(Distances in Nautical Miles)
. Canals
,3058 Heights in Feet
WEST FROM GREENWICH
PRINTED IN GREAT BRltAIN BY GEORGE PHILIP a SON
) 1959 GEORGE PHILIP ft SON. LTD.
Printed in England by Her Majesty's Stationery Office
6410) Wt. 3014/P4271 K.54 11/59 Hw.
S.O. Code No. 70-701-0-60*
WILD FLOWERS
of the British Isles
Birdsfoot Trefoil
^ose-bay MlloW-he^
Convolvulus
