^ Jt;
'!S
a, '
Vhi^
BRITAIN 1974
An official handbook
BRITAIN
1974
An official handbook
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office: 1974
© Crown copyright 1974
HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
Government Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London wciv 6hb
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
41 The Hayes, Cardiff cfi ijw
Brazennose Street, Manchester m6o 8as
Wine Street, Bristol bsi zbq
258 Broad Street, Birmingham bi 2HE
80 Chichester Street, Belfast bti 4JY
Government publications are also available
through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from 220 University Avenue
Palo Alto
California 94301
£2'10 net
y C °-
Ut
! Fir ■-)
O. i
S 74 '■
ISBN on 700623 8
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION ix
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE i
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 7
Social Life 18
2. GOVERNMENT 26
General Survey 26
The Monarchy 27
Parliament 31
The Privy Council 42
Her Majesty’s Government 43
Government Departments 47
The Civil Service 61
Local Government 67
The Fire Services 76
3. MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY 80
4. LAW AND ORDER 85
The Law 85
Penal Systems 103
The Police Service no
5. DEFENCE 115
Policy 115
Planning and Control 116
Deployment 117
The Armed Forces 120
Defence Procurement 125
6. SOCIAL WELFARE 127
State and Voluntary Services 127
Social Security 129
Health and Personal Social Services 137
Immigration and Community Relations 152
7. EDUCATION 154
The Youth Service 171
8. ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING 174
9. HOUSING 185
10. THE CHURCHES 192
v
11. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Economic Management
International Monetary Situation
The Framework of the Economy
12. FINANCE
The Public Sector
The Central Bank
The Private Sector
13. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Overseas Trade
Balance of Payments
Internal Trade
14. INDUSTRY
Organisation and Production
Fuel and Power
Water Supply
Construction
Manufacturing Industries
15. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
Page
197
198
201
203
208
208
217
219
227
227
238
246
253
253
269
285
288
290
FORESTRY 3H
3H
332
336
16. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 34°
Sea Transport 34°
Inland Transport 34^
Civil Aviation 359
The Post Office 365
17. EMPLOYMENT 37°
Manpower 37°
Employment Services 372
Industrial Training 377
Terms of Employment and Working Conditions 37$
18. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 393
19. THE ARTS 4i3
20. THE PRESS 429
21. BROADCASTING 43^
22. SPORT 446
APPENDIX 463
Currency 4^3
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures 4^3
BIBLIOGRAPHY
465
INDEX
485
vi
DIAGRAMS
MAPS
PHOTOGRAPHS
Page
Birth Rates and Death Rates in Britain 9
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 10
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 29
Institutions of the European Community 82
Functional Analysis of Defence Expenditure 1973-74 116
Functional Analysis of Defence Personnel 1973-74 121
Housing Stock 186
Personal Income and Expenditure 1972 205
Industrial Pattern of Fixed Investment 1967 and 1972 206
National Savings 1958 and 1972 221
Area Pattern of Trade in 1972 230
Energy Trends 1962-72 272
Earnings, Wage Rates, Retail Prices, Wages and Salaries 1963-73 380
Physical Features 3
Towns and Cities with more than 200,000 Inhabitants 17
Population Density 1971 facing page 38
Local Authority Areas in Great Britain 68
Circuits; Pligh Court and Crown Court Centres for England and Wales 87
Deployment of the Armed Forces—early 1973 118-19
New Towns 177
The Assisted Areas 267
Fuel and Power Resources 271
Motorways and Major Trunk Routes 352
Topography
Some British Animals
Anti-pollution Equipment
facing page
between pages 38 and 39
39
134
vii
Food Technology
Leisure Facilities
Technological Research
Industry
Apprentice Training
Ulster Museum
Participation in the Arts
Modern British Crafts
facing page
between pages 134 and 135
135
294
between pages 294 and 295
295
422
between pages 422 and 423
423
Acknowledgment is made to the Department of the Environment for the computer map (facing p. 38) and
the map used in the cover design both produced from statistics supplied by the Office of Population
Censuses and Surveys.
Acknowledgment is made for photographs to: Vickers Ltd. for pulverisation system (facing p. i34)j
Perkins Engines Ltd. for advanced noise cell (facing p. 134); Baker Perkins Holdings Ltd. for beater of
waste re-cycling plant (facing p. 134); Courtaulds Ltd. for checking microbial content (between pp. 134
and 135); Lord Rank Research Centre for fungal mycroprotein (between pp. 134 and 135); .Peiro-
leum for plant producing yeast protein (between pp. 134 and 135); Berwyn Engineering Ltd. for equipment
for conserving feed grain (between pp. 134 and 135)» International Flavours & FragranciesIrr(LrB)
Ltd. for manufacturing flavours (between pp. 134 and 135); Holme Pierrepont National Water Sports Centre
for National Water Sports Centre (facing p. 135); United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority for Cleo
Tokamak and European Space Tribology Laboratory (facing p. 294); Quest Automation Ltd. for device for
direct computer input (between pp. 294 and 295) J Rolls Royce (1971) Ltd. for mainshaft roller bearing for
aero-engine (between pp. 294 and 295); Plessey for height gauge micrometer (between pp. 294 and 295) J
Rotork Controls Ltd. for testing nuclear valve actuators (between pp. 294 and 295); A. A. Jones and
Shipman Ltd. for grinding machine (between pp. 294 and 295); Ulster Museum for Ulster Museum
(facing p. 422); The Bubble Theatre Company for Bubble Theatre (facing p. 422); Inter-Action for Dogg s
Troupe (facing p. 422); The Royal Scottish Museum for modern British crafts (facing p. 423).
INTRODUCTION
Britain 1974 is the twenty-fifth official handbook in the series prepared and
revised each year by Reference Division of the Central Office of Information
with the co-operation of other government departments and of many national
organisations. The handbook is widely known as an established work of
reference and is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided by the British
Information Services in many countries. It is available overseas in a limited
free edition and is on sale throughout the world.
This 1974 edition, which covers events up to September 1973, gives a
factual account of the administration and the national economy of Britain.
It describes the activities of many of the national institutions, both official
and unofficial, and shows the part played by the Government in the life of
the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt
to cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The
factual and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and
other authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to
Britain as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland are also given separately when relevant.
Readers who require more detailed information should consult the Annual
Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of Statistics, issued by the Central
Statistical Office, and also other government publications and standard works
of reference, some of which are listed in the bibliography towards the end of
the handbook.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September 1973
ix
1 The Land and the
People
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
Britain, formally known as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, forms the greater part of the British Isles, a group of islands lying off
the north-west coast of Europe. The largest islands are Great Britain (compris¬
ing the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland) and Ireland (comprising
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the southern coast of England
is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the Isles of Scilly; off
north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by numerous islands and
to the far north are the important groups of the Orkneys and Shetlands. All
these have administrative ties with the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the
Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France have a
large measure of administrative autonomy and are not part of England,
Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
England has a total area (including inland water) of 50,335 square miles
(i3°>367 S(l- km.); Wales has a total area of 8,017 square miles (20,764 sq. km.);
Scotland, including its inhabited islands, has a total area of 30,414 square
miles (78,772 sq. km.); Northern Ireland has a total area of 5,452 square
miles (14,121 sq. km.). Together, these countries constitute the United King¬
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (or Britain), with a total area of
94,217 square miles (244,021 sq. km.). The total land area of the United King¬
dom (excluding inland water) is 93,026 square miles (240,936 sq. km.):
England, 50,053 (129,637); Wales 7,968 (20,638); Scotland 29,799 (77JI79)i
and Northern Ireland, 5,206 (13,483).
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they
refer to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together
for many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which com¬
prises England, Wales and Scotland, or to Britain (the United Kingdom) as
a whole. United Kingdom statistics and other data sometimes include the Isle
of Man, 227 square miles (588 sq. km.), and the Channel Islands, 75 square
miles (194 sq. km.), which strictly are not part of the United Kingdom but are
dependencies of the Crown.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British
mainland (the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the
Shetland Islands. The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet
Head, near John o’ Groats, is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o°
passes through the old observatory at Greenwich (London), while the
easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45/ East and the westernmost point
of Northern Ireland is 8° 10' West. It is just under 600 miles (966 km.) in a
straight line from the south coast to the extreme north of mainland Britain and
about 300 miles (483 km.) across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous
bays and inlets no point in Britain is as much as 75 miles (121 km.) from tidal
water.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually
less than 50 fathoms (300 feet or 91 metres)—because the islands lie on the
Geology and
Topography
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
continental shelf. To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor
plunges abruptly from 600 feet (183 metres) to 3,000 feet (914 metres). These
shallow waters are important because they provide excellent fishing grounds
as well as breeding grounds for fish. The North Atlantic Current, the drift
of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out
over the shelf and its ameliorating effect on the air is thus magnified. The
effect of tidal movement is also increased by the shallowness of the water.
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main
geological periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant
to weather and have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south
and east, and the island can therefore be divided roughly into two main
regions, lowland Britain and highland Britain.
In lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern
England have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and
rising to chalk and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet
(305 metres) above sea level. Its boundaries run roughly from the mouth of
the Tyne in the north-east to the mouth of the Exe in the south-west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and
moors of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands,
which extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the
Lake District in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the
Pennines, almost the whole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of
England coinciding approximately with the counties of Devon and Cornwall.
Highland Britain contains all the mountainous parts1 of Great Britain and
extensive uplands lying above one thousand feet (305 metres). This high
ground, however, is not continuous but is interspersed with valleys and plains.
Geologically the mountains and hills consist mainly of outcrops of very old
rocks (archaean and palaeozoic), while the upper strata in the valleys and plains
are mainly more recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those in the northern
and western parts of lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal measures
which have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion. The out¬
crops and shallow seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted were
found on the edge of the plains and up the valleys leading to the high land.
Most of the present deep coal workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors
of present-day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice Age
during which, at one period or another, ice caps and ice sheets extended
approximately as far south as the Bristol Channel and the Thames valley. The
ice naturally accumulated on the higher ground and swept from the mountains
of Scotland, northern England and Wales any loose rock or soil which had
previously been formed, so that, when the ice eventually disappeared, the hills
stood out as barren rocky areas, while a thick mantle of glacial debris—boulders,
boulder-clay, sands and gravels—lay distributed widely over the lower ground.
The ice had blocked up previous drainage channels and left large lakes, which
have since gradually dried up, leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often
affording soils of great fertility.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by
the ice sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet (1,342 metres); in Wales,
Snowdon, 3,560 feet (1,085 metres); and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District,
Cumberland), 3,210 feet (978 metres).
i/'i
8° W
—55° N
-50°
Shetland Is,
PHYSICAL FEATURES
of Wight
English Channel
8° W
I
land's End y c
Isles of ScillyV Tha Uzard
55° N-
4
Climate
Winds
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of the previous natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses1 are irregu¬
larly placed around central lowlands; the rocks of Ireland are of the same types
as the highland zone of Great Britain, and in the higher parts the moorland
vegetation resembles that of the higher parts of highland Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety
of scenery and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances, parti¬
cularly on the coasts. The ancient rocks of highland Britain often reach the
coast in towering cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as
along much of the west coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are
notable features in other parts of the varied coastline: the granite cliffs of
Land’s End; the limestone masses and slates of the Pembrokeshire coast in
south Wales; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast;
and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa in the Inner
Hebrides. Even around lowland Britain there are striking contrasts. In some
parts the soft, white limestone—the chalk—forms the world-famous white
cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight; while other parts of the
south and south-east coastline have beaches of sand or shingle. The eastern
coast of England between the Humber and the Thames estuary is for the
most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches of it have been
protected against the sea by embankments.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of
the sand and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the
short British rivers2 valuable as natural harbours.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. It lies in middle latitudes
to the north-west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but the prevail¬
ing winds are south-westerly and the weather from day to day is controlled
mainly by a succession of depressions from the Atlantic which, moving in a
generally easterly or north-easterly direction, pass over or near the British
Isles. The climate is subject to frequent changes but to few extremes of
temperature. Although it is largely determined by that of the eastern Atlantic,
occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may bring a cold, dry,
continental type of weather which, once established, may persist for many days
or even weeks. During the summer months the Azores high pressure system
usually extends its influence north-eastwards towards north-west Europe, and
the depressions take a more northerly course, often passing entirely to the
north of the British Isles.
In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from an
easterly quarter the least; such winds occur about one-third as often as south¬
westerly ones although easterly winds are appreciably more frequent in the
spring than at any other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction may
differ markedly from the general direction owing to local topography. Winds
are generally stronger in the north than in the south of the British Isles, stronger
on the coasts than inland, and stronger in the west than in the east. The
strongest winds usually occur in the winter; the average speed at Lerwick,
Shetland Islands, varies from about 19 m.p.h. (31 km.p.h.) in January to about
14 m.p.h. (23 km.p.h.) in August, while at Kew Observatory, on the western
outskirts of London, the average speed varies from about 10 m.p.h. (16
km.p.h.) in January to about 7 m.p.h. (11 km.p.h.) in August. The stormiest
1 The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet (852 metres).
2 The longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only about 220 and
210 miles (354 and 338 km.) long respectively.
Temperature
Rainfall
Sunshine
Visibility
Soil and
Vegetation
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 5
region of the British Isles is along the north-west coast with over 30 gales a
year; south-east England and the east Midlands are the least stormy, with
gales occurring on about 2 days a year inland and on some 15 to 20 days on the
Channel coast.
Near sea level in the west of the British Isles the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C. (47°F.) in the Hebrides to ii°C. (S2°F.) in the extreme
south-west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the eastern
part of Britain. The mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at
Lerwick (Shetlands), ranges from 4°C. (39°F.) during the winter (December,
January and February) to I2°C. (54°F.) during the summer (June, July and
August): the corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south,
are 5°C. (41 °F.) and i6°C. (61 °F.). The average range of temperature between
winter and summer varies from 7°C. to i2°C. (450-54°F.), being greatest
inland in the eastern part of the country. During a normal summer, the
temperature occasionally rises above 27°C. (8o°F.) in the south, but tempera¬
tures of 32°C. (90°F.) and above are infrequent. Extreme minimum tempera¬
tures depend largely on local conditions, but — 7°C. (20°F.) may occur on a
still, clear winter’s night, —i2°C. (io°F.) is rare, and —i8°C. (o F.) or below
has been recorded only during exceptionally cold winter periods.
The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches (102 cm.),
while England alone has about 34 inches (86 cm.). The geographical distribu¬
tion of annual rainfall is largely governed by topography and exposure to the
Atlantic, the mountainous areas of the west and north having far more rain
than the lowland of the south and east. Between 150 and 200 inches (381 and
508 cm.) of rain fall on the summits of Snowdon and Ben Nevis during the
average year, whereas some places in the south-east of England record less
than 20 inches (51 cm.). Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year,
but, on the average, March to June are the driest months and October to
January the wettest. A period of as long as three weeks without rain is excep¬
tional, and is usually confined to limited areas. In successive years, however,
remarkably contrasting weather conditions are sometimes experienced.
The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general decrease
from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the
mean daily duration of sunshine varies from five hours in north-west Scotland
to eight hours in the Isle of Wight; during the months of shortest daylight—
November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum, with an average
of half an hour a day in some parts of the Highlands of Scotland and in the
Peak District (Derbyshire) and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
In fine, still weather there is occasionally haze in summer and mist and fog
in winter. Fogs have become less frequent and less severe in recent years as a
result of changes in fuel usage and the operation of clean air legislation.
Many parts of the surface of highland Britain have only thin, poor soils, with
the result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands of
Scotland, the Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in
parts of north-east and south-west England. In most areas the farmer has
cultivated only the valleys and the plains where soils are deeper and richer;
villages and towns are often separated by uplands with few if any habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of heath and forest, almost the whole of
Fauna
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area except
where there are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land drainage
systems have been developed through the centuries to bring under cultivation
the fertile soil of the low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and part of East Anglia.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of
natural vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably
covered the greater part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands,
forests of Scots pine on higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open moor¬
land. In the course of the centuries the forest area was progressively diminished
and, in spite of planting by estate owners in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and the establishment of large forests by the Forestry Commission
in the past 50 years, woodlands now occupy only about 8 per cent of the surface
of the country. The greatest density of woodland occurs in the north and east
of Scotland, in some parts of south-east England and in Monmouthshire on
the Welsh border. Yet much of Britain appears to be well wooded because of
the numerous hedgerows and isolated trees. The most common trees are oak,
beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of
woods, fens and marshes, foreshores and cliffs, chalk downs and the higher
slopes of mountains; the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country,
which consists mainly of heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton
grass in the wetter parts. Most of Britain, however, is agricultural land, of
which over a third is arable and the rest pasture and meadow, a varied semi¬
natural vegetation composed of indigenous grasses and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges, stone walls or wire fences and,
especially in the mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents a
pattern of contrasting colour. The cool temperate climate of Britain and the
even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry
up, grassland is green throughout the year with many wild flowers from spring
to autumn; in most years there is scarcely a month in which some flowers may
not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western
Europe, though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals, includ¬
ing the wolf, the bear, the boar and the reindeer, have become extinct; but red
deer, protected for sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish Highlands and on
Exmoor in the counties of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are found in Scotland
and in the wooded areas of southern England, and fallow deer (which are
probably not indigenous) have been introduced into parks and are wild in
some districts. The badger, a nocturnal animal, is rarely seen; there are foxes
in most rural areas, and otters are found along many rivers and streams. Both
common and grey seals may be seen on various parts of the coast, though not
usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals include mice, rats, voles,
shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey more numerous than
the native red), hares, rabbits, weasels and stoats.
About 460 species of birds have been recorded in the British Isles. Some 200
species breed; the rest are regular migrants to, or pass through, the country, or
are casual stragglers. Visitors to Britain are often struck by the abundance,
variety and tameness of song birds in towns and villages. The pigeon, blackbird
and chaffinch are widely distributed but sparrows usually predominate near
houses. London and some other large towns have huge flocks of starlings which
congregate to roost on buildings, especially in winter. Most species of birds
have maintained their numbers over the last few decades, owing to their
Supplement
POLITICAL
DEVELOPMENTS
This supplement gives more detail than was possible in the text about
developments in Northern Ireland over the past year and outlines
‘Stage Three’ of the Government’s counter-inflation policy announced
in November 1973.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Although provisional agreement on the formation of a Northern Ireland
Executive (see p. 26) was reached on 21st November 1973, the Province
was, at that date, still under direct rule provided for by the Northern Ireland
(Temporary Provisions) Act 1972, which had been extended for one year in
March 1973. Thus, at the end of November 1973, the United Kingdom
Parliament was still responsible for legislation for Northern Ireland by means
of Orders in Council and, for the time being, administrative responsibility
continued to rest with the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, assisted by
two Ministers of State and two Parliamentary Under-Secretaries responsible
for particular Northern Ireland departments.
During the preceding year the political initiatives taken by the British
Government, with the support of the Opposition, to find a basis for future
internal constitutional arrangements in Northern Ireland which would be fair
and acceptable to all sections of the community in the Province and would
lead to effective and lasting peace, had included: the publication, at the end of
October 1972, of a consultative document {The Future of Northern Ireland)
which was followed by intensive discussions between the Secretary of State and
the political parties and other groups in Northern Ireland; the holding, in
March 1973, of a plebiscite on the status of Northern Ireland within the United
Kingdom, at which 61 per cent of the total electorate of Northern Ireland
voted—the result being 591,820 for retaining links with Britain and 6,463 for
links with the Irish Republic; the publication, also in March 1973, of a report
{Northern Ireland Constitutional Proposals) giving details of the new arrange¬
ments on the basis of the foregoing discussions proposed for the future govern¬
ment of Northern Ireland (which included the establishment of an elected
Assembly with certain legislative powers and an Executive, composed of
members of the Assembly, representing all sections of the community), and
setting out the conditions necessary for these arrangements to be put into
effect; the passing, in May 1973, of the Northern Ireland Assembly Act, which
provided for an Assembly of 78 members elected by universal adult suffrage
in the 12 Westminster constituencies in Northern Ireland on the basis of the
single transferable vote (which means that there are several members for each
constituency, providing the opportunity for the representation of a wide range
of opinion) and laid down that the salaries of members of the Assembly should
be £2,500 with an additional £800 to defray secretarial expenses; and finally
the passing in July 1973 of the Northern Ireland Constitution Act and the
subsequent discussions between the Secretary of State and delegates from
those parties who were prepared to operate the Act (the Official Unionist
SUPPLEMENT
Party, the Social Democratic and Labour Party and the Alliance Party) about
the basis on which an Executive might be formed within the provisions of
that Act.
The Northern
Ireland
Constitution Act
Status of
Northern Ireland
The Northern
Ireland Assembly
The Northern
Ireland Executive
Devolution of
Powers
Legislation
The Northern Ireland Constitution Act 1973 implements the main proposals
in the report for a new constitutional framework for Northern Ireland to
replace that provided by the Government of Ireland Act 1920. Those sections
of the Act which deal with the status of Northern Ireland as part of the United
Kingdom, the procedure for devolving legislative and executive responsibility
to the new Assembly, the machinery of the Assembly, and the prevention of
religious and political discrimination, are already in operation. Those sections
which deal with legislative powers and executive authority will, however,
come into force only when the Order devolving powers on the new Northern
Ireland institutions (see p. 26) has been made.
The main provisions of the Act are set out below.
Northern Ireland remains part of the United Kingdom (see p. 26), but a poll
on the border question, on the same lines as the plebiscite held in March 1973,
is to be held at ten-year intervals.
The office of Governor of Northern Ireland is abohshed, but the link of the
Queen with Northern Ireland is maintained and the Queen remains the source
of executive authority in the Province. The Privy Council of Northern Ireland
remains, but no further appointments to it are to be made.
The Northern Ireland Parliament established by the Government of Ireland
Act 1920 is abolished and replaced by the Assembly elected under provisions
of the Northern Ireland Assembly Act 1973. The Assembly is responsible for
regulating its own procedure by standing orders. But these must provide for
the debate of measures introduced in the Assembly and for the setting up of
consultative committees, the membership of which must reflect, as far as
possible, the balance of parties in the Assembly as a whole. A public accounts
committee must also be established.
The Assembly, its members and committees have the same powers,
privileges and immunities as the House of Commons, its members and
committees.
The Secretary of State is responsible for the formal appointment of the
Northern Ireland Executive, the composition of which has to be agreed by the
Assembly. Members of the Executive will be required to take an oath binding
them to uphold the laws of Northern Ireland and to fulfill their duties under
the Act in the interests of Northern Ireland and its people. They will not be
required to take an oath of allegiance to the Crown.
The devolution of legislative and executive powers to the Assembly and the
Executive is to be effected by Order in Council subject to affirmative resolu¬
tion—that is, subject by resolution to the approval of each House of Parlia¬
ment. But such an order will not be made until the Secretary of State is
satisfied that suitable arrangements (including the setting up of consultative
committees in the Assembly and the formation of a ‘power-sharing’ Executive)
have been made for government by consent. The Northern Ireland institutions
will not begin work until the initial devolution order has been made.
Legislation affecting Northern Ireland is to be classified in three ways:
‘excepted’ matters, which are matters of national significance such as foreign
policy and defence on which the Assembly will have no power to legislate at
any time; ‘transferred’ matters, such as agriculture, education, health and social
SUPPLEMENT
Relations with the
Irish Republic
Prevention of
Religious and
Political
Discrimination
Finance
RECENT EVENTS
services, which, under the devolution order, will be dealt with exclusively by the
Assembly; and ‘reserved’ matters (including matters relating to law and order)
which will, in general, be outside the competence of the Assembly for the
time being, but on which it may legislate with the consent of the Secretary of
State. (The Act contains provisions whereby powers in this category could be
transferred to the Assembly later if the United Kingdom Parliament considered
the circumstances appropriate.)
Measures passed by the Assembly on ‘transferred’ matters will be treated in
the same way as were Bills of the Northern Ireland Parliament under the
Government of Ireland Act—that is, they will be subject to the formal approval
of the Queen in Council and when enacted will have the same force as an Act of
Parliament. Measures on ‘reserved’ matters, on the other hand, may be con¬
sidered by the United Kingdom Parliament before being submitted for formal
approval.
The Northern Ireland executive authorities will be empowered to consult
authorities in the Irish Republic on any matter and, regarding ‘transferred’
matters, to make agreements with them. The exercise of legislative powers to
give effect to any such agreement will be a ‘reserved’ matter and will thus
require the consent of the Secretary of State.
All legislative and executive actions of central and local government and
statutory boards in Northern Ireland which are discriminatory on religious or
political grounds are unlawful. If the Secretary of State thinks that any
proposed measure by the Assembly contains provisions which may be dis¬
criminatory, he will be required to refer it back to the Assembly; if, when it is
returned to him he is still doubtful, he must refer the matter for decision to
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. A complainant alleging religious
or political discrimination may avail himself of a simplified procedure to seek a
court injunction to prevent such action. In addition, if he submits his case to
the Parliamentary Commissioners for Administration (for the United Kingdom
and for Northern Ireland) or to the Northern Ireland Commissioner for
Complaints, they may investigate his complaint even if a legal remedy exists.
A Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights is to be established to
advise on the adequacy and effectiveness of the law and practice of public
bodies in preventing discrimination. The commission is to be appointed by the
Secretary of State, but there are to be certain ex-officio members.
In general the Assembly will have power to legislate on taxation only in relation
to such local taxes as rates and some licence fees (see p. 217). The revenue
required to meet the cost of devolved services will be derived from the
Northern Ireland share of the yield of United Kingdom taxes which will be
paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the United Kingdom into that of
Northern Ireland, from the product of taxes levied locally, and from certain
non-tax revenue which accrues locally. If necessary this revenue will be
supplemented by an annual sum voted to the Secretary of State. (Loans from
the United Kingdom National Loans Fund will continue to be available—up
to a limit of £350 million—to finance capital expenditure programmes in
Northern Ireland.)
Since the passing of the Northern Ireland Constitution Act elections to the
Assembly have been held under provisions of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Act 1973. The results were as follows: Alliance Party 8; Northern Ireland
SUPPLEMENT
SECURITY
SITUATION
Northern Ireland
(Emergency
Provisions) Act
Labour Party i ; Social Democratic and Labour Party 19; Official Unionist
Party 24; Others (loyalist groups and other Unionists) 26. A Clerk to the
Assembly has been appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Secretary of
State; and the Assembly has met—at an inaugural meeting to elect its presiding
officer and, in a second session in November 1973 to debate provisions for
standing orders which have been passed to conform with the provisions of the
Constitution Act. Most recently (on 22nd November 1973) the Secretary of
State announced the successful conclusion of his talks with the three main
parties in the Assembly and the formation of an ‘Executive Designate’ of
eleven members, with four additional outside members. He also announced
that a conference to discuss the setting up of a Council of Ireland to promote
closer co-operation and understanding between Northern Ireland and the
Irish Republic would be held in December 1973 between the British Govern¬
ment, the Government of the Republic and the Northern Ireland parties who
had signified their willingness to serve in the Northern Ireland Executive. This
preliminary conference would, if agreement were reached, be followed by the
formal appointment of the Northern Ireland Executive and, subject to the
approval of the United Kingdom Parliament, to the devolution of powers to
the Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly.
In general the security situation, while unpredictable and still giving cause for
concern, has shown some improvement during the past year and the general
level of violence has declined. During the period August, September and
ist-i8th October 1973 the total number of shooting incidents (645) was less
than one-third of that recorded during the same months in 1972; there were
over 100 fewer explosions (181 as compared with 311); and deaths due to
terrorist activities were reduced from 135 to 35. The strength of the United
Kingdom armed forces serving in Northern Ireland (see p. 117) has, in conse¬
quence, been reduced from 21,500 at the height of the emergency (in July
1972) to 16,500 in November 1973, and it is planned to withdraw a further two
units, comprising 1,000 men by the end of the year. The security forces
continue to recover large quantities of arms and explosives from extremists in
both sections of the community.
To strengthen the powers of the Northern Ireland courts to deal effectively
with terrorist crime, a number of temporary measures have been introduced
under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1973. The aim of
these measures, which apply only to ‘scheduled offences’—that is, to crimes
specifically related to terrorist activities—is to remove the main obstacle with
which the courts have been faced in relation to these offences, namely the
intimidation of witnesses and jurors, while not conflicting with the require¬
ments of a judicial process. The measures include: provision for trial by a
judge without a jury; new limitations on the granting of bail; a change in the
onus of proof in cases involving the possession of firearms and explosives (in
such cases the accused must show that he had no knowledge of, or control
over, their presence among his possessions); and an extension of the powers of
the court to deal with young people.
Special powers provided for in the Act include police powers (see p. 114) to
arrest people suspected of terrorism and those suspected of scheduled offences
under the Act; and powers granted to the armed forces on duty to arrest
without warrant and to detain suspects for not more than four hours, to enter
and search premises for arms and explosives and for people unlawfully
detained, and to search people and vehicles in the street.
SUPPLEMENT
Detention and
Internment
Prices, Profits
and Dividends
The Act also gives the Secretary of State power to proscribe organisations
concerned in or encouraging terrorism and makes membership of any such
organisation an offence.
Most of the provisions in the Act are to remain in force for one year only
unless continued by legislation of the United Kingdom Parliament.
New procedure relating to detention and internment, which was provided in
the Detention of Terrorists (Northern Ireland) Order of November 1972 to
replace the provisions of the Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Regulations,
has been re-enacted in the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1973.
Under this procedure three Commissioners, appointed by the Secretary of
State but independent of the Executive, are required to consider whether a
person has been concerned in the commission or attempted commission of
any act of terrorism, or the direction, organisation or training of persons for
the purpose of terrorism, and whether his detention is necessary for the pro¬
tection of the public.
The Secretary of State is empowered to order the detention for up to 28 days
of anyone suspected of being concerned with terrorism. Within that period his
case must be referred to a Commissioner by the Chief Constable of the Royal
Ulster Constabulary, or he must be released. Anyone whose case is the subject
of a reference is given a written statement as to the nature of the terrorist
activities which are to be the subject of the enquiry not less than seven days
before the hearing of the case, and he has the right to be legally represented.
The Commissioners may order the detention or release of a suspect, but the
Secretary of State may direct his release, subject to specified conditions, even
when a detention order has been made. The Secretary of State may also refer
to a Commissioner, at any time, the case of a detained person for review to
determine whether or not he should be released. He is additionally required to
refer for review the case of any person who has been detained for one year
since the making of a detention order against him, and thereafter six months
from the determination of the most recent review. The first reviews under this
provision of the Act took place during August 1973.
A Detention Appeal Tribunal has also been set up.
COUNTER-INFLATION POLICY—STAGE THREE
Stage Three of the Government’s counter-inflation policy (see p. 200) came
into effect on 1st November 1973 for prices and dividends and on 7th Novem¬
ber 1973 for pay. The objectives of the policy remain unchanged, with the
Government aiming at a continued strict control of prices and profits, com¬
bined with protection and improvement of living standards, especially those
of the low-paid, and the encouragement of investment and efficiency. A
revised Price and Pay Code, to cover Stage Three, was published on 30th
October; some of its provisions are described below.
Price increases are permitted only if justified by ‘allowable’ cost increases, for
example in labour, materials or fuel. In addition they are controlled in relation
to profit margins. Net profit margins (defined as the margin of net profit
expressed as a percentage of sales or turnover) must not exceed the average
level of the best two of the last five years of account of the enterprise concerned
ending not later than 30th April 1973 (the ‘reference level’). The artificial
subdivision of enterprises to avoid profit margin control is not allowed.
All enterprises are expected to observe the Price and Pay Code. The strictness
SUPPLEMENT
of the control exerted by the Price Commission varies according to the
size of company. As in Stage Two firms are divided for this purpose into three
categories. The largest firms, which are in category i, must notify proposed
price increases to the Price Commission at least four weeks before they are
to be put into effect, during which time the commission may restrict or reject
them if they do not meet the terms of the Price and Pay Code. Under Stage
Three the medium-sized manufacturing and service industry firms in category
2 must also notify proposed increases for similar consideration, but in their
case at least two weeks before they are due to be put into effect. Category 3
firms need not notify increases, but must keep records and are subject to spot
checks. (Manufacturing firms are in category 1 if annual sales exceed ^50
million, in category 2 if annual sales are between £5 million and £50 million,
and in category 3 if annual sales are between £1 million and £5 million).
The smallest firms are exempt from checks, though required to observe the
Price and Pay Code.
Control of prices charged by the nationalised industries is being continued.
To maintain investment, increases in depreciation costs are taken into
account in price control and the reduction of profit margins is limited to 10 per
cent. Special provision is being made to modify price control for capital-
intensive enterprises which had a major plant with under-utilised capacity at
the start of Stage Two.
For firms suffering losses or low profits, relief is provided by allowing an
enterprise with a profit level representing a return on capital of under 8 per
cent (or a net profit margin of per cent on turnover) to use the level of net
profit needed to produce an 8 per cent return as its reference level.
The rate of dividend increase continues to be limited to 5 per cent a year,
but with some latitude where new capital has to be raised for investment.
The aims of pay policy for Stage Three are: fairness and special help for the
low paid; greater flexibility in negotiations than in Stage Two; and protection
of living standards against a high rate of increase in prices (see p. 380).
It is the duty of the Pay Board (see p. 379) to ensure that pay increases
comply with the provisions of the Price and Pay Code.
Pay increases may be made for a group of employees up to 7 per cent or, if
negotiators prefer, up to an average of £2’2$ a week per head for the group,
with an individual maximum of £350 a year. (The Stage Two figures were
4 per cent plus £1 per week, and £250 a year.)
A flexibility margin of a further 1 per cent is available to negotiators for use
in settlements which remove anomalies or obstacles to the better use of man¬
power.
Extra payments may be made under new efficiency schemes when such
schemes have achieved genuine savings and contributed to stabilising prices.
Extra payments to those working ‘unsocial hours’ (that is, broadly, at
night or at weekends) can be brought up to a minimum standard.
The Price and Pay Code allows for consideration of adjustments in pay to
deal with anomalies created by the standstill.
An increase made towards the implementation of equal pay as between men
and women (see p. 380) may be made outside the pay limit if it reduces by the
end of 1974 by up to one-half any differential between men’s and women’s
rates which existed at 31st December 1973, and provided that no other
increase affecting the group concerned has the effect of widening the per¬
centage differential.
SUPPLEMENT
Increases in certain types of allowance for people living or working in Lon¬
don are permissible outside the pay limit.
A ‘threshold’ safeguard is provided to enable pay to be increased by up to
40p a week if, within one year, the increase in the retail price index reaches
7 per cent above its level at October 1973, and by up to 4op a week for every
1 per cent rise above that level.
Provision is made in the Price and Pay Code for the cost of a proposed
additional day’s bank holiday—1st January in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and on a day to be decided after consultation, for Scotland (see p.
381)—not to count for the purpose of the pay limit.
30th November 1973
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
success in adapting themselves to man-made surroundings, and in London
there has been an increase in the number of species breeding as a result of the
improvement in the environment brought about by anti-pollution measures.
Some large birds, on the other hand, have tended to decrease, but several
species, such as the osprey and the ruff, have re-established themselves after
disappearing from Britain in the nineteenth century.
Many species of gulls and other sea birds nest around the coast, and gulls
may regularly be seen feeding far inland; some nest in inland sites such as
gravel pits and sewage farms. The drainage and reclamation of marshlands
have diminished the natural habitat of ducks, geese and other aquatic birds,
but the survival of such species is largely assured on the nature reserves and
bird sanctuaries which have recently been established on an increasing scale.
Nearly all British wild birds are protected; the principal exceptions are those
considered injurious to agriculture and birds shot for sport in the open season.
About 30 kinds of freshwater fish are found; salmon, trout, pike, roach,
dace and perch being widely distributed. Stocks of trout, rainbow trout (an
introduced species), carp, tench and roach are frequently supplemented by
introductions for angling purposes. In a number of rivers measures to control
pollution have resulted in fish becoming more numerous. In the Thames in
London, for example, where 63 species of fish have been caught, conditions are
now thought to be suitable for salmon to enter the river.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three
species of snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of
lizards, including the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented
by three species of newts and five species of frogs and toads. Most British
reptiles and amphibians are indigenous but at least one, the marsh frog, has
been recently introduced from Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small,
in the British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly (3 to
4 inches or 8 to 10 cm.) and the stag beetle (2^ inches or 6 cm.). The insect
fauna in Britain is less varied than that of continental Europe and lacks a
number of common European species. With modern methods of pest control,
extensive insect damage to crops or timber and serious outbreaks of diseases
spread by insect vectors are not common in Britain but there is some anxiety
among naturalists that chemical protection against insects may be reducing
the population of creatures which feed on them, and of their predators in turn.
These and other effects of agricultural chemicals on wild life are the subject of
special safeguards.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the
people who inhabited them nine centuries ago. The last of a long succession of
invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of Europe were
the Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian Vikings who, after
settling in northern France, intermarrying with the French, and assimilating
the French language and customs, crossed to England and conquered it in
1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the
relative importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans, Anglo-
Saxons and the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the present
English, Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over most of
England and the lowlands of Scotland the language which soon came to
Vital Statistics
and Population
Censuses
Total
Population
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
predominate was English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and Norman-
French, while the use of Celtic languages persisted in Wales, Cornwall, the
Isle of Man, the highlands of Scotland and in Ireland.
The available records do not enable any precise estimates to be made of the
size of population or of the extent or direction of population movement until
the beginning of the nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the
end of the eleventh century the population of Great Britain was about 2 million,
while at the end of the seventeenth century a reasonable contemporary estimate
put the population of England and Wales at 5^ million and that of Scotland
at about 1 million. The main factor in this gradual growth of population was a
slow natural increase, the rate of which was retarded in Britain, as in all countries
before the development of medical science, by high death rates and, in parti¬
cular, by very high infant and maternal mortality. Immigration from the con¬
tinent of Europe has been an influence at certain times and immigration from
Commonwealth countries more recently.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British
people—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths, mar¬
riages, occupations, language and family structure—is relatively plentiful and
reliable. Most of it is derived from two main sources: the regular flow of vital
statistics (that is, statistical information based on statutory registration of
births, marriages and deaths) and the periodic censuses of population.
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is
carried out by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as registrars
of marriages. In England and Wales there are nearly 500 superintendent
registrars in charge of registration districts and some 1.200 registrars in charge
of sub-districts. Registrars and superintendent registrars are appointed by the
county, county borough and London borough councils but they act under the
instruction of the Registrar General for England and Wales, who is in charge
of a central government department, the Office of Population Censuses and
Surveys, whose functions include regulating the registration of births, deaths
and marriages, the planning and carrying out of population censuses, and the
compilation and analysis of population and vital statistics. There are cor¬
responding authorities1 and similar arrangements in Scotland, Northern Ire¬
land, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
Censuses of the people of Great Britain have been taken regularly every ten
years since 1801, except that there was no census in 1941 because of the
second world war. The latest full census covering Britain as a whole was taken
in April 1971 when Britain’s population was found to number 55,506,000.
Analyses of much of the demographic information obtained have been pub¬
lished. Censuses were taken throughout Great Britain (on a sample basis) and
Northern Ireland in 1966.
The short demographic account given in this chapter is based mainly on
census reports and on the regular returns of births, marriages and deaths.
In mid-1972 the estimated home population of Britain (excluding the popula¬
tions of the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands) was 55,798,100 compared
with 53,266,000 in mid-1962, 38-2 million in 1901, and over 6-5 million in
1700. The main causes of this great increase in numbers were a progressive
1 The various authorities are: the General Register Office, Edinburgh; the General
Register Office, Belfast; the Governments of Jersey, of Guernsey and its associated
islands, and of the Isle of Man.
Future Growth
Birth and Death
Rates
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 9
reduction in death rates and a continuance of high birth rates into the begin¬
ning of the twentieth century.
Britain’s population density was approximately 592 persons per square
mile (229 per sq. km.) in mid-1972, but in England there were approximately
920 persons per square mile (355 per sq. km.), and in Greater London 12,058
persons per square mile (4,656 per sq. km.).
On the basis of present trends in birth and death rates and migration, the
increase in population is expected to continue, reaching 57-3 million in 1981,
59-8 million in 1991, 62-4 million in 2001, and 65-6 million in 2011.
For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate was over 30 per
thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just over 20 per
thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 20 years of the century,
but natural population increase changed little.
Deaths
1871-75 1881
-85 1891-95
BIRTH RATES AND DEATH RATES
IN BRITAIN
(per 1,000 population)
Comparable rates not available owing to war
1915
1925
1935
1945
1950
1955
1970!
1965 1972
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age
groups, produced a population of low average age. But when death rates in all
age groups fell by an average of about a third, as they did between 1880 and
1910, the results were a very low general death rate, which helped to maintain
the population increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and a gradual
increase in the average age of the population. By the 1930s the birth rate had
fallen to less than half the nineteenth century rate. The population continued
to increase slowly, but its average age rose more rapidly.
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained
nearly stationary since 1920 at around 12 per thousand of the population
though death rates have continued to fall heavily in every age group, particu¬
larly among pre-school-children, school-children, and adults in their thirties
and forties, with a consequent lengthening of the expectation of life from about
48 years at birth for a boy born in 1901 and 52 years for a girl, to 68-6 years at
birth for a boy born in 1969-1971 and 74-9 for a girl.
Since 1933 the steady fall in the number of births has ceased. During the
second world war the birth rate began to rise and reached a temporary post¬
war peak of 20-7 per thousand population in 1947. It receded to slightly above
the pre-war level in the early 1950s, but from 1956 onwards began to rise,
reaching a peak of 18-8 per thousand in 1964. It has since fallen and was 14-9
per thousand population in 1972. The proportion of illegitimate births, which
reached a peak of 9-1 per cent of all live births in 1945, the end of the second
IO BRITAIN 1974: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
world war, fell between 1945 and 1955, when it reached 4‘5 per cent; since then
it has risen, and was about 8-4 per cent in 1972.
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH Years
Mortality
Causes
Sex Ratio
Marriage
and Divorce
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising standards
of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities,
improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain on
mothers and enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant
and maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main
acute infectious diseases of childhood is less than a two-hundredth and mor¬
tality from tuberculosis is about one-fifty-fifth of the rate prevailing in the
mid-nineteenth century. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under
one year old per thousand live births) has fallen from 142 in 1900-2 to 17-5
in 1972 and maternal mortality from 4*71 per thousand live births in 1900-2
to 0-15 in 1972. The reported mortality from some of the illnesses of middle
and old age, such as cancer of the lung and heart conditions, has risen during
the twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the improvement
in diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet discovered effective
measures to combat some of these illnesses and improvement in positive health
does not always bring increased immunity or resistance to them.
Total births of boys naturally exceed those of girls by about 6 per cent, but
stillbirth rates and mortality rates at almost all ages are higher for males, so
that in nearly all countries—and in Britain since records began—women pre¬
ponderate among the elderly and outnumber men in the total population.
There are nearly 106 females to every 100 males in Britain. Formerly women
outnumbered men in every age group from adolescence onwards. Recently,
however, the fall in stillbirths and infant mortality has reduced the influence
of these factors on sex ratio so that the age at which women begin to out¬
number men has advanced and is now about 45. On the other hand, the
lengthening of the expectation of life, which has been rather more marked for
women than for men, has increased the preponderance of women among the
elderly—there are now some 19 women over 70 years old to every 10 men—
and made it a weightier factor in the sex ratio of the whole population.
Over the past 30 years the proportion of the population of Great Britain who
are or have been married has risen from about 52 per cent in 1939 to 59 per
cent in 1972, while the proportion of single persons in the population aged
15 years or over has fallen from 33-3 per cent to 23 per cent. This change has
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
II
Fertility Trends
Age
Distribution
been due mainly to an increase in marriage rates among men and women in
their late teens and early twenties; whereas in 1939 only 33-8 per cent of
young women aged 20 to 24 were married, in 1972 the percentage was 58.
Earlier marriage has led to a large increase in the number of children born to
women under 30 years of age and in recent years has contributed to a sub¬
stantial acceleration of the total flow of births into the population.
There were 6 decrees of divorce made absolute in 1971 for every 1,000
married people in England and Wales; a substantial proportion of divorced
people marry again. Divorce is highest for girls marrying in their teens, the
ratio being twice as high as for women aged 20 to 24 at marriage.
The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and the early part
of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of the family
(that is, the number of children born per married couple) caused by the spread
of deliberate family limitation. Couples married just over a hundred years ago
produced on the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline
seems to have set in with those married in the 1860s, and the average family size
for Great Britain fell to less than 2-1 for those married in the decade 1934-43.
There has since been some increase, and in the latest set of official population
projections the average family size of women marrying in recent years is
assumed to be 2-3 liveborn children.
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20
and 30 years later, had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to
replace the original generation, while those born at the beginning of the present
century had only about 70 per cent of the number of children needed for
replacement. Since then the figure has been rising again and seems likely to
exceed full replacement with the generation born during the second world
war. The rise has been due mainly to the increased proportion of women
getting married and of children surviving to adult life.
The effect of the fall in the birth rate beginning in the latter part of the
nineteenth century was to reduce the ratio of children and old people to
adults of working age. This ratio was at a minimum in 1930. After 1936 the
number of children leaving school for work fell sharply owing to the drop in
the birth rate after 1921, but the population aged over 64, born during an era
of high fertility and representing successive generations of steeply rising
numbers, increased very rapidly; the population aged over 40 was also in¬
creasing relatively faster than that between 15 and 40. The higher birth rates
after 1942 arrested the compensating fall in the number of children and further
reduced the proportion of people of conventional working age.
Because of this high proportion of the young and the old in the present
population, which is expected to increase still further, and the growing num¬
bers of young people continuing in full-time education, there is a special need
to make the best use of national human resources, both by placing those
available for work in suitable employment and by introducing technological
improvements and wider training in order to raise productivity. At the time of
the 1971 census nearly 92 per cent of men and 53 per cent of women between
15 and 64 in Great Britain were economically active in remunerative work
(this includes those temporarily out of work or sick). In addition some 19 per
cent of men and nearly 7 per cent of women aged 65 or more were still
economically active. At the other end of the scale, some 30 per cent of young
people between 15 and 20 were continuing their education.
12
Migration
Nationality
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
From the beginning of the nineteenth century until the 1930s the balance of
migration was markedly outward. Between 1815 and 1930 well over 20 million
people left Britain for destinations outside Europe, mainly in the Common¬
wealth and the United States. Many emigrants later returned and large num¬
bers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles, Germans and Hungarians, entered
the British Isles. Nevertheless, the net loss by migration from Britain’s present
area amounted to some 4 million between 1871 and 1931. Since then the
balance of migration for Britain as a whole was inward until 1967, after which
a small net outflow has been recorded. Scotland and Northern Ireland have
throughout continued to have a net outward movement of population to
countries overseas as well as to England and Wales.
There have been two main periods of net inflow into Britain since 1931. The
first was in the years 1931 to 1940 when emigration was very low, many former
emigrants returned, there was considerable net immigration from the Irish
Republic, and extensive immigration from Europe, including about a quarter
of a million refugees seeking sanctuary in Britain. The second, from the 1950s,
resulted from a large increase in net immigration from Commonwealth coun¬
tries, particularly West Indian countries, India and Pakistan. In the three
years 1960-62 total net immigration amounted to some 388,000 people, about
three-quarters of them from the Commonwealth. It was in these circumstances
that the Government introduced the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962,
which gave it power to restrict the number of people from the Commonwealth
and, in principle, the Irish Republic who did not have citizenship of the
United Kingdom and Colonies and who might immigrate into Britain without
assured prospects of employment or adequate means of self-support. The
Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 extended immigration control to citizens
of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had no close links with Britain:
broadly speaking, those neither born, naturalised, adopted or registered in
Britain nor having a parent or grandparent who was. The Immigration Act
1971, provides a single system of control over Commonwealth citizens and
aliens entering Britain. It confers a right of abode—and exemption from
control—on citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who are connected
with Britain by birth, adoption, naturalisation or registration or are children
or grandchildren of such persons, on citizens of the United Kingdom and
Colonies from overseas who have been resident in Britain for a continuous
period of five years, and on Commonwealth citizens with a mother or father
born in the United Kingdom. (For welfare of immigrants see p. 152 and for
conditions of entry see p. 376.)
The net emigration of United Kingdom citizens to Commonwealth countries
in 1972 was 21,500 and to foreign countries 27,200. Some 26,000 Common¬
wealth citizens and over 37,000 United Kingdom passport holders from East
Africa and India were admitted for settlement in Britain in 1972, the latter
including 26,000 expelled from Uganda.
In 1972 some 74,000 foreigners entered Britain for a period of a year or
more.
Under the British Nationality Act 1948, persons born in the United Kingdom,
the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, a ship or aircraft registered in the
United Kingdom, or a territory which is still a colony, are, with insignificant
exceptions, citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies by birth. Citizen¬
ship may also be acquired: by descent from a father who is himself a citizen
otherwise than by descent and, in certain specified circumstances, from a
father who is a citizen by descent only; by registration, for citizens of Com-
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
13
Language
Distribution of
Population
monwealth member countries or of the Irish Republic, for minor children
and for women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies; in
consequence of an adoption order; and, for aliens, by naturalisation. The
requirements for naturalisation include five years’ residence in the United
Kingdom or Colonies or five years’ Crown service, good character, a sufficient
knowledge of English and the intention to reside in the United Kingdom or a
colony or to remain in Crown service. The requirements for registration are
similar except that most Commonwealth and Irish citizens settled in Britain
by 1st January 1973 have the right to be registered after completing five years’
ordinary residence without satisfying any other requirement. Some 44,000
persons acquired citizenship by naturalisation and registration in 1972.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizen¬
ship by acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another
country (although he can lose it automatically if the territory from which he
derives it becomes independent); nor does a woman who is a citizen of the
United Kingdom and Colonies lose her citizenship by marriage to an alien.
Indeed, a citizen cannot be deprived of his citizenship against his will except
in very exceptional circumstances (for example, if he has obtained naturalisa¬
tion or registration as a citizen by fraud). Any man or woman who is a citizen
is, however, at liberty to renounce citizenship if he or she possesses or acquires
the nationality or citizenship of another country.
Citizens of the other independent Commonwealth countries are, in United
Kingdom law, British subjects or Commonwealth citizens.
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language
predominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic,
is the first language of the majority of the population in most of the western
counties and was spoken by 21 per cent of the population aged three years and
over (some 524,400 people) at the time of the 1971 census. The Welsh
Language Council, an official body, promotes the use of the language. The
Welsh Language Act 1967 affirms the equal validity of Welsh with English
in the administration of justice1 and conduct of government business through¬
out Wales. In Scotland nearly 81,000 persons in 1961, mainly in Ross and
Cromarty, Inverness, Argyll and Lanark, spoke the Scottish form of Gaelic,2
while a few families in Northern Ireland spoke the Irish form of Gaelic. The
Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic are no longer effectively living languages,
although, in the Isle of Man, Manx is used in addition to English for certain
official pronouncements.
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French
patois is still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official
language of Jersey, used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French
and English are used in the courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now used
for almost all official proceedings.
The population of England is, and has been for centuries, greater than that
of all other parts of Britain. The distribution of the British population by
1 Summary trials in Wales are normally held entirely in Welsh in Welsh-speaking areas
and, in the predominantly English-speaking areas, with the ordinary interpretation
machinery. In the Crown Courts the provision of facilities for simultaneous translation
is being improved.
2 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included
in the counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
H
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
thousands
TABLE 1
Populations
1901-72“
1901
census
1931
census
1961
census
1971
census
1972
mid-year
estimate
England
Wales
Scotland
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
30,509
14,714
15,795
2,019
1,014
1,004
4,472
2,174
2,298
37,359
17,839
19,520
2,593
1,294
1,300
4,843
2,326
2,517
43,461
21,012
22,448
2,644
1,292
1,352
5,179
2,483
2,697
46,018
22,355
23,663
2,731
1,328
1,404
5,229
2,515
2,714
46,297
22,510
23,788
2,731
1,328
1,403
5,210
2,504
2,706
Total f Persons
Great Britain 4 M ales
Females
37,000
17,902
19,098
44,795
21,459
23,337
51,284
24,787
26,497
53,979
26,198
27,781
54,239
26,342
27,897
Northern
Ireland
f Persons
4 Males
Females
1,237
590
647
l,243b
601b
642b
1,425
694
731
l,528c
751c
777c
1,549
765
784
Total United f Persons
Kingdom 4 Males
Females
38,237
18,492
19,745
46,038
22,060
23,979
52,709
25,481
27,228
55,506c
26,948c
28,558c
55,788
27,107
28,681
f Persons
Isle of Man 4 Males
[_ Females
Jersey
Persons
Males
Females
Guernsey and f Persons
Associated < Males
Islands (_ Females
55
25
29
53
24
29
43
21
22
49
22
27
50
23
27
43
21
22
48
22
26
64
31
33
47
23
24
56
26
30
73
35
37
53
25
27
56
26
30
72
35
36
52
25
27
0 Figures may not add up to the totals shown because of rounding.
b Estimates. c Provisional.
country, as enumerated by censuses in 1901, 1931, 1961 and 1971 (or nearest
possible estimate) and estimated in 1972, is shown in Table 1, which also gives
figures for the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. The populations of
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland were in every case greater in
1961 than in 1931 and in 1931 than in 1901, and they rose again between 1961
and 1972. The high rate of increase in England is partly due to migration from
the other three countries.
Geography, history and economic factors have given rise to the differences
between the four countries and to an uneven distribution of the population
within them. Table 2 shows the areas and populations of the urban and rural
areas in England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, of the eight
standard regions of England and of the seven conurbations in Great Britain
(areas of urban development where a number of separate towns have merged).
Table 3 gives figures of Britain’s larger urban populations (over 200,000).
About half the British population lives within the area of an ellipse drawn
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
15
Area"
square
miles
square
km.
Population
(estimate)
Urban and Rural Districts
England and Wales
Urban areas
Rural districts
Scotland
Cities and burghs
Landward areas
Northern Ireland
Urban areas
Rural districts
English Standard Regions
East Anglia
East Midlands
North
North-West
South-East
South-West
West Midlands
Yorkshire and Humberside
Conurbations
Central Clydeside
Greater London
Merseyside
South-East Lancashire
Tyneside
West Midlands
West Yorkshire
8,403-7
49,946-2
508-1
29,906-1
292-7
5,159-5
4,851-2
4,702-2
7,470-8
3,086-0
10,582-2
9,135-2
5,024-4
5,481-3
300-8
609-8
152-2
379-5
90-6
261-8
484-6
22,612
128,518
1,316
77,457
758
13,363
12,566
12,179
19,349
7,992
27,414
23,660
13,013
14,196
779
1,579
394
983
235
678
1,255
{thousands)
38,205
10,833
3,678
1,532
853
696
1,711
3,416
3,296
6,753
17,318
3,833
5,152
4,825
1,698
7,345
1,247
2,395
797
2,367
1,737
0 Areas relate to boundaries as constituted in April 1971.
across England enclosing south Lancashire and west Yorkshire at one end,
and the London area at the other, having the industrialised Midlands at its
heart. Other areas with large populations are the central lowlands of Scotland;
1,000 square miles (2,590 sq. km.) in the north-east of England from north of
the river Tyne down to the river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area;
and the English Channel coast from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely
populated areas are the eastern fringes of England between the Wash and the
Thames estuary, and the far south-west. Most of the mountainous parts of
Britain, including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and the
central Pennines in northern England, are very sparsely populated.
These differences in average density between different regions have been
widening. Though in most places the population has been increasing, there
have been local differences in the rate of increase. Many places in the Midlands
and south-east England, some south-coast areas and some of the most
prosperous parts of northern England, Wales and Scotland have had increases
well above the average national rate, while many of the older industrial towns
and remote country areas in northern England, Wales and Scotland and some
coastal resorts have had relatively small increases. The differences result from
the combined effect of natural increase in almost all areas and net migration
towards the expanding employment opportunities of the Midlands and south
and towards certain retirement areas, mainly on the south coast.
i6
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 3
Towns and Cities
WITH MORE THAN
200,000
Inhabitants
Urban Dispersal
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Liverpool
Manchester
Sheffield
Leeds
Edinburgh
Bristol
Teesside
Belfast
Coventry
Nottingham
Bradford
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Cardiff
W olverhampton
Stoke-on-T rent
Plymouth
Derby
Newcastle upon Tyne
Sunderland
Southampton
Portsmouth
Area®
square
miles
609-8
80-6
61-4
43-6
42-5
70-9
63-5
52-5
42-3
68-5
25- 1
31-4
28-7
39-9
27- 4
28- 2
30-9
26- 6
35-8
30-6
30-1
17- 4
20-0
18- 9
14-4
square
km.
1,580
209
159
113
110
184
164
136
110
177
65
81
74
103
71
73
80
69
93
79
78
45
52
49
37
Population
Mid-1972
(estimate)
{thousands)
7,345
1,008
862
591
535
515
500
450
422
394
362
335
295
294
283
282
275
270
263
252
220
217
215
214
207
0 Areas relate to boundaries as constituted in April 197]
Throughout Britain the population is predominantly urban and suburban,
although there may be access to large parks, commons and other expanses of
open country within the urban area. Table 2 shows the distribution of the
people of Britain between areas classified as urban for administrative purposes
and those classified as rural.
During the nineteenth century the labour demands of newly developing
industry drew great numbers from the countryside; by the end of the century
three-quarters of the British population was living in towns and the large
conurbation was already the dominant type of British community. During the
twentieth century the suburbs of the towns in these population centres have
continued to spread and merge. Nearly one-third of the population lives in the
seven great conurbations whose centres are the cities of London (Greater
London), Manchester (South-East Lancashire), Birmingham and Wolver¬
hampton (West Midlands), Glasgow (Central Clydeside), Leeds and Bradford
(West Yorkshire), Liverpool (Merseyside) and Newcastle upon Tyne (Tyne¬
side).
There has been a recent decline in the numbers of people living in inner
urban areas, balanced or surpassed by the increase of population in and
beyond the outer suburban fringes (limited in certain areas by the ‘green belt’
policy where little development is permitted). This applies most strikingly to
London, also to the outer areas of the West Midlands and Merseyside conurba¬
tions and to such towns and cities as Bristol, Derby, Leicester, Norwich,
Oxford, Portsmouth and Sheffield.
Factors in the further dispersal of the last few years have been the spread of
WALES
Wolverhampton 0 Leicester
® • Coventry
Birmingham
ENGLAND
London
'0 Bristol
Southampton
Plymouth
Mobility
Households
Dwellings
Housework
BRITAIN 1974: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
car ownership, expansion in public transport serving journeys to work, private
property developments to meet the demand for housing, and planned transfers
of population to the new towns around London, Glasgow, the West Midlands
and Merseyside and to selected expanding towns near to the great cities.
The extent to which people in Britain move about the country for work,
housing or study purposes is shown by the finding that 10-7 per cent of
residents in Great Britain in 1966 had changed their address in the preceding
year and 33 per cent in the previous five years; 4-2 per cent had moved
between England and Scotland or Wales, or from one region to another,
during 1961-66.
SOCIAL LIFE
This section gives some points of general interest about the structure of
households and social habits in Britain as a background to the information
given in later chapters of the handbook, in particular those on housing,
transport and environmental planning.
The majority of people in Great Britain (some 97 per cent at the time of the
1971 census) live in private households (usually in families or on their own).
The remainder include such people as residents in hotels, people in hospital,
in the armed services and in educational or other institutions. Of 12,000
households analysed in 1971 for the General Household Survey, 17-1 per cent
consisted of one person only, 31-3 per cent of two, 19-4 per cent of three, 18
per cent of four and 14-2 per cent of five or more. The increasing number of
households and their smaller average size (less than three persons) reflect a
number of factors including lower birth rates, the higher proportion of married
people in the population, and the increased tendency for young people, married
and single, and for independent elderly people to have their own separate homes.
Social factors such as the greater general availability of housing, the rehousing
of slum dwellers outside city centres, and the greater readiness of people to
change their place of work have helped to weaken the family unit and increase
the dangers of loneliness, particularly for the elderly. The persisting strength
of family ties is, however, reflected in the frequency of home visiting at week¬
ends and holiday times.
In 1972, of 19-6 million dwellings, about one-half were owner-occupied,
about one-third rented from public authorities, and one-sixth privately rented.
Towards the centre of large towns new housing is often provided in the form
of multi-storey blocks of flats, but in the suburbs most people live in streets of
semi-detached or detached two-storey houses with gardens. Altogether some
85 per cent of families in Great Britain live in houses, and about 14 per cent
in flats. Standards of new housing have improved considerably in recent years
and the degree of overcrowding is lower than in most other European coun¬
tries. There has also been an increase in the number of houses with modern
conveniences. The General Household Survey showed that over 88 per cent
of households had exclusive use of a bath or shower, that 96 per cent had
sole use of a lavatory and that 34 per cent of houses were centrally heated.
Some 90 per cent of all new dwellings built by local authorities in England
and Wales have central heating.
Much of the drudgery of housework has been reduced by changes in habits
and equipment, for instance, the increased use of easily cleaned plastic sur-
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
!9
Income,
Leisure and
Opportunities
faces in place of materials which need scrubbing or polishing, and of non-iron
fabrics and babies’ disposable napkins; the availability of convenience foods
(processed foods requiring little additional preparation before consumption),
and hot, ‘take-home’ meals (including the traditional fish and chips); and the
spread of labour-saving devices. More than four households in five have a
vacuum cleaner, two out of three a washing machine and a refrigerator, nearly
all an electric iron, one in four an electric clothes dryer, and one in five an
electric food mixer. An increasing, though still comparatively small, number
possess a dish-washing machine.
Most women, and many men living alone, do their own catering and house¬
work; probably less than five per cent of households employ any regular paid
help, and less than half of one per cent in England and Wales have a resident
servant. A few households (estimated at one in 750, and those mainly ones
with small children) have a foreign girl living with them au pair. Some
households get help through the local authority home help service because
of particular need, for example, if there is an invalid or elderly person in the
house or because a mother is having her baby at home.
People in full-time work benefit, among other things, from launderettes with
extended opening hours and from shops, particularly departmental stores and
supermarkets, which stay open late at least one evening a week.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend
it, greater educational opportunities and higher real incomes than had
previous generations.
Agreed hours of full-time work are usually from 35 to 40 a week, although
men in manual work actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary over¬
time working, while the hours worked by women and girls average somewhat
less. Flexible working hours, which allow employees to adjust their working
day provided the full number of hours is worked over a period, are being
introduced by some employers. Some five or six hours a week are spent by the
majority of people in travelling to and from work. Almost all employees are
entitled to a minimum of two weeks’ paid holiday a year in addition to public
holidays, and a substantial and increasing proportion have three.
Britain has fewer public holidays than nearly all other European countries.
Probably more than half the working population already enjoy a five-day week
—most people employed in factories and offices have Saturdays and Sundays
free—and a further extension of five-day working in distributive trades offering
a six-day week service is in progress.
In the last decade average earnings have risen more than prices. Women’s
earnings have risen rather less than men’s. The principle of equal pay for equal
work applies in many occupations and is being extended under legislation
passed in 1970; the average earnings of women are a little over half the average
earnings of men. The real incomes of manual workers, especially unskilled
workers and young people under 18 years old, have risen both in absolute
terms and in relation to the incomes of non-manual workers. The weakest
groups economically are retired people wholly or mainly dependent on pen¬
sions, households in which the father is dead or absent, and low wage earners
with a number of young children.
Illustrative of the widening opportunities for education and training is the
increase in the proportion of young people benefiting from non-compulsory
education. In 1970-71, for instance, 41 *5 per cent of 16-year-olds were in
some form of full-time education, compared with 29 per cent in 1963-64.
The proportion of 18-year-olds continuing full-time education in universities,
20
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
colleges of education and technical colleges is also steadily increasing. A
large number of undergraduates are, moreover, ‘first generation’ students,
neither of whose parents had a university education. Although the children of
professional parents are still more likely to go on to higher education than the
children of manual workers—a reflection of the continuing influence of
parental education and encouragement—a higher proportion of the children
of manual workers in Britain receive higher education than in most other
European countries.
Over the last decade social differences between manual and other workers
have become less pronounced. Increased prosperity and modern production
and marketing methods have allowed many workers to acquire household goods
and personal possessions previously beyond their means. The increased
diversity of market products and greater spending power have permitted a
much freer expression of individual taste for everyone, irrespective of class.
Styles in clothes, for example, vary more according to age group than accord¬
ing to income group or occupation.
The general level of nutrition is high. The movement towards a greater use
of convenience foods, especially foreign foods in the 1960s, has been partly off¬
set by a reversion to a slightly less expensive diet. Increases in meat and fish
prices have resulted in greater demand for poultry. Vegetables, butter and
cream are among the other foodstuffs consumed in greater quantities than a
decade ago while the consumption of bread and flour has declined. Tea
remains the most popular beverage, but many more people are drinking coffee,
including ‘instant’ coffee, than before. The consumption of considerable
quantities of sweets and chocolate (some 8 oz.—226-8 gr.—per person a week)
remains a notable feature of British eating habits. Many more people are now
interested in ‘good eating’, both of traditional English food and exotic dishes.
Restaurants providing the national dishes of other countries are to be found
throughout Britain; Chinese restaurants predominate but there are also many
which specialise in Indian and Italian food, while the growth in the number of
French bistros has widened the available range of French cuisine. The quality
of domestic cooking has also improved and menus have become more imagin¬
ative, helped by cookery journalism, including television demonstrations, and
a great variety of paper-backed recipe books. Increased affluence and tastes
acquired abroad have likewise increased the demand for wines, spirits and
liqueurs—during the 1960s sales of wines nearly doubled and consumption
increased by more than 10 per cent between 1971 an<^ I972> from 7-8 pints
per head to 8-8 pints. Beer remains the most popular alcoholic drink in Britain,
consumption per head in 1972 berog nearly 186 pints.
Expenditure on food now accounts for a much smaller share of total con¬
sumer expenditure than it did ten years ago. Large increases have taken place,
however, in expenditure on motor vehicles, housing, alcoholic drink, recrea¬
tion and entertainment. The proportion of expenditure on clothing and foot¬
wear has fallen, but there have been noticeable developments such as the
growing range of leisure clothes, the more adventurous styling in men s wear,
and the large turnover in mass-produced fashions for young people, with fre¬
quent (and sometimes startling) changes of style. In this branch of fashion,
British designers are among the leading designers in the world.
Although more cigarettes were smoked in 1972 (over 130,500 million or
about 45 a week per head of population) than ten years previously, the increase
was due to a trend towards smaller (and cheaper) cigarettes and not to an
increase in cigarette tobacco consumption which has fallen since 1959. During
the same period, while sales of pipe tobacco also declined, sales of cigar tobacco
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
Home Interests
increased nearly threefold. In a consumer survey carried out in 1971, 65 per
cent of men and 42 per cent of women described themselves as smokers.
The greatly increased diversification and output of consumer products have
been accompanied by a growth of activity to protect and help the shopping
public. Which?, the magazine of the Consumers’ Association, a non-govern¬
mental organisation, publishes appraisals of selected consumer goods and has
over 600,000 subscribers with an estimated readership of more than three
million. Over million people a year visit the Design Centre in London where
consumer goods in current production, which meet its criteria of good design,
are displayed.
In Britain, as in many other countries, a considerable proportion of people’s
free time is spent in their homes; on a weekday evening, for instance, seven
out of eight of the adult population are likely to be found at home, watching
television, reading newspapers or books, listening to the radio or the record
player, playing musical instruments (guitars are particularly popular among
young people), or entertaining friends. Many of them also have hobbies,
some of which demand considerable skill and financial outlay, their varied
interests being catered for by magazines and periodicals of all kinds, including
papers dealing with sport, magazines about current ‘pop’ music, do-it-yourself
and gardening weeklies, and illustrated instructional periodicals which build
up into encyclopedias of art, science or general knowledge.
Nine out of ten families in Britain have a television set and it is thought that
more leisure time is spent watching television than on any other pastime;
average viewing time per head of population is over 15 hours a week. Audiences
for the most popular programmes exceed 15 million.
Nearly one-third of the total population are registered members of public
libraries. Book sales have increased—a widening range of titles, including
works of scholarship, being bought in the comparatively cheap ‘paper-backed’
form, which constitutes well over half the total book production. More
‘comics’1 are produced per head of the child population than in any other
European country; their sale reaches about 9 million a week.
Sales of long-playing records (LPs), including ‘pop’ albums, have increased
sharply during the past decade, partly in response to lower prices; the 1971
production figure of 71 million was four times greater than in 1961. The
production of ‘extended play’ and ‘single’ records—on the weekly sales of
which the ‘pop’ music popularity placings, known as the ‘Top Ten’ and the
‘Top Twenty’, are calculated—reached its peak in 1964; the 1971 production
figure was 48 million.
About four out of five families do most of their own decorating, and the
large sales of hand-tools and of small power tools testify to the extent and
range of home carpentry and other crafts. Gardening is another major interest;
in spite of the high proportion of the population living in urban areas, at least
half the families in Britain have some garden, and the general standard of
cultivation in both town and country gardens is high. Over 3,000 local
horticultural societies are affiliated to the National Allotment Garden Society,
and there are a large number of unaffiliated societies. Probably about 20
million people do some gardening in their spare time. The numerous flower
and vegetable shows held in town and country are very popular, and there is a
large attendance at the more important of them, including the annual Chelsea
Flower Show.
1 Comics are papers for children (normally appearing weekly) which consist largely of
picture stories and cartoons. Horror comics are illegal.
22
Entertainments
Outside the Home
BRITAIN 1974: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Britain, many households have a pet; besides cats and dogs, budgerigars
and tropical fish are popular. Annual registrations of pedigree dogs at the
Kennel Club have more than trebled since 1938—reaching a total of 183,770 in
1972; the leading breed in numbers is the Alsatian. There are 3,500 dog shows
every year, of which Cruft’s is the best known, and between 20,000 and 25,000
breeders.
The increasing diversity of entertainments outside the home includes, for
young people, discotheques and ‘pop’ concerts. The cinemas, many of which
show international as well as British films, are popular among young people,
although audiences in general have been declining for several years. Theatres
continue to appeal to all age groups throughout Britain; although the theatre¬
going public is not a large one, the new theatres opened during the last decade
are well supported. Ballet, opera and concerts of classical music also have an
enthusiastic and growing public. Amateur dramatic and music-making societies
flourish, encouraged by the increasing number of local and national festivals
which have become a feature of British cultural life. Special art exhibitions
often attract large audiences.
Dancing is very popular, especially with those under 35 years of age; it is
thought that over 6 million people go dancing each week. There are between
3,000 and 4,000 regular dance halls throughout the country, including public
dance halls and halls operated by the major dance schools (which are open at
least three times a week), and about 4,000 other schools of dancing. Public
dances are often held in other halls, while many of the clubs and societies
which abound in Britain hold dances occasionally in their own or hired
premises. For younger people formal ballroom dancing is fast being super¬
seded by dances involving spontaneous movement to the rhythms and moods
of ‘pop’ music. However, ballroom dancing, together with Scottish, English
and Irish traditional dances, retains a following particularly among the over¬
thirties. The folk dancing festival held each year at the Royal Albert Hall in
London is well attended.
The public house—the ‘pub’ or the ‘local’—has for many years been a
centre of social life for a large number of people (especially men) in Britain.
Pubs, besides offering a wide variety of alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks and
providing (in increasing numbers) hot and cold food, serve as places for meet¬
ing friends and for entertainment; many have, for instance, television sets,
amusement machines and juke-boxes and provide facilities for playing darts,
billiards, dominoes and similar games. Some also employ musicians for even¬
ing entertainment, such as piano playing, folk singing and modern jazz.
‘Bingo’1 is widely played in converted cinemas and in club rooms and village
halls; legalised by the gambling Acts of the 1960s, it provides a form of social
entertainment of particular value to the elderly and lonely, and does not
involve large sums of money. There are some 125 commercial gaming clubs,
operating under strict legislative control. Betting shops number some 14,810.
The turnover of money staked by the public on horse and greyhound racing
is of the order of ^1,500 million a year, about four-fifths of which is staked
on horse-races. Betting on football matches, both at fixed odds and through
football pools, is widespread, but usually for smaller stakes.
Increasing prosperity and leisure have affected interest in playing and
watching both outdoor and indoor sports—an interest which has been stimu¬
lated by frequent television broadcasts of sporting events. According to the
1 Bingo is a traditional game of chance played by groups of people for prizes. It is also
known as ‘lotto’ or ‘housey-housey’.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
23
Clubs and Groups
Holidays
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) audience research figures, the sports
most popular with viewers, are, in order: football, boxing, athletics, show-
jumping, horse-racing and tennis. Large crowds continue to be attracted to
the major sporting spectacles, such as the association football ‘Cup Final’ at
Wembley, the international rugby matches at Twickenham, the Lawn Tennis
Championships at Wimbledon, and the ‘classic’ horse-races. A growth in
active participation is reported by the governing bodies of almost every sport.
With more money to spend more people are able to enjoy minority sports,
such as golf, sailing, riding and skiing. The steadily rising sales of sports
goods indicate the increased enthusiasm for open air leisure activities,
especially among younger people.
A number of people in all age-groups and occupations spend much of their
free time in the more serious group activities associated, for instance, with the
churches, the trade unions, local or national politics, social welfare and reform,
and in educational and cultural pursuits—every year some 2 million people
attend non-vocational adult education classes in a very wide range of subjects.
A feature of recent years has been the forming of new groups outside the
official welfare bodies to meet newly recognised needs—for example, citizens’
rights groups which advise people on their legal rights and their entitlement
to welfare benefits. Novel methods of fund-raising, such as sponsoring long¬
distance walks, have been introduced.
Some of the longer-established clubs and societies are organised on a
national basis and have branches throughout the country; these include the
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes, the Townswomen’s Guilds and the
Women’s Institutes. Working Men’s Clubs, affiliated to the Working Men’s
Club and Institute Union, number nearly 4,000 and have over 3-6 million
members (mainly but not entirely men); primarily social and recreational in
nature, the clubs aim at providing amenities comparable with the comforts of
members’ homes and at arranging events, including lectures and classes, of
sufficient interest to compete with the entertainment provided by television.
Over 2,800 Townswomen’s Guilds, with a total membership of some quarter
of a million, are affiliated to the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds.
The guilds are educational as well as social in purpose, and they co-operate
in many public welfare activities. The declared objective of the National
Federation of Women’s Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; in
villages throughout England and Wales there are over 9,000 institutes with
a total of nearly half a million members. In Scotland and Northern Ireland
there are Women’s Rural Institutes with similar aims and interests.
Over 46 million people in Britain take an annual holiday and many now
take two holidays a year. Most people spend their holidays away from home;
one in two travel by car (three in ten going abroad), most of them preferring
to tour. The number of people who go abroad for their holidays has risen from
a million in the early 1950s to over 8-5 million in 1972. The popularity of
foreign travel is attributable to several factors besides rising incomes: the
attraction of the sun which makes Spain, France and Italy the most popular
destinations for the British tourist; the many charter and other airline services
provided; and the readiness of the travel trade to provide inexpensive, in¬
clusive holidays. A by-product has been an increase in the number of adults
who, with the help of radio and television programmes and by attending adult
classes, are studying foreign languages to add to what they learned at school.
Of those who stay in Britain an increasing number enjoy active holidays, such
24
Private Transport
The Changing
Face of Britain
Changes in
British Society
BRITAIN I974t AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
as canoeing, sailing and pony-trekking; camping under canvas, in caravans and
in specially equipped vehicles, is becoming increasingly popular.
More people in Britain own cars than ever before and the number is still
rising. There is an increasing number of ‘two-car’ families and some families
have more. In mid-1972 there were about 12-7 million cars licensed on the
roads in Great Britain, compared with 5-5 million in i960. There is still a large
number of motor cycles (including motor scooters)—970,000 in 1972—but
fewer than in 1962, when the licence figure was 1-9 million. Sales of bicycles
to the home market reached 694,270 in 1972 which, though lower than in
1959, was higher than in recent years.
Although the number of motor vehicles has continued to increase, the
number of total casualties from road accidents has not risen proportionately.
In 1972, nearly 7,800 persons were killed and some 91,000 seriously injured.
Though deaths increased slightly in 1972 total casualties fell as they did over
the five-year period 1967-72. The rate of deaths per 1,000 vehicles licensed has
been progressively reduced from 3-2 in 1930 to 0*5 in 1972 partly through
advances in medical and surgical techniques as well as in vehicle design, road
construction and road safety legislation, for instance the introduction of the
‘breathalyser’ (a means of administering a breath test to indicate the level of
alcohol in the blood).
Increasing population and social developments are affecting the physical
appearance of Britain. The spread of car ownership, which has changed the
whole pattern of leisure activities, has also led to a new and more scattered
distribution of houses and to different siting for factories, shops and offices. It
is also one of the main reasons for the large-scale urban reconstruction and
road development programmes which are being carried out. In general,
towns and cities are being altered to accommodate more traffic and house more
people; experiments are being tried in remodelling town centres with pedes¬
trian precincts; multi-storey blocks of flats and offices pierce the skyline. In
addition to new roads and motorways, more reservoirs are needed to supply
the growing demand for water and more lines to carry electric power for the
growing volume of appliances.
In modern industrial society in a densely populated country there is much
scope for conflict between the need for new communal facilities and the desire
to preserve existing beauty or places of historic interest, and between potential
users of a new service and people whose way of life is threatened by the need
to accommodate it. As a result the activities of the established amenity societies,
such as the Council for the Protection of Rural England, the National Trust
and the Georgian Society, are being supplemented to a growing extent by
those of groups formed expressly to safeguard the amenities of a particular area
and to give publicity to the views of the people they represent.
Growing public concern about the dangers both to health and to the natural
environment caused by the unregulated disposal of industrial and human
waste, by exhaust fumes and by the rising volume of noise is reflected in the
appointment by the Government of a standing Royal Commission on En¬
vironmental Pollution and an Advisory Council on Noise. Voluntary societies
include the National Society for Clean Air, the Noise Abatement Society and
the Council for Nature.
In the past 20 years the traditional pattern of life in Britain has undergone
considerable change. Not only have distinctions of class and social habits
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
25
become less rigid, but subjects formerly taboo in public discussion are now
openly considered in books, plays and films and in ordinary conversation. A
more informed tolerance of behaviour which deviates from the usual pattern is
reflected, for instance, in the growing popular sympathy for the difficulties of
the unmarried mother. The passing of new laws on such matters as abortion,
divorce and homosexuality, although disliked by some people is nevertheless
indicative of public unwillingness to penalise individuals with particular per¬
sonal problems. Similarly, changes in the law applying to young offenders
reflect the view that it is unreasonable to treat children who have broken the
law as fundamentally different from other children in trouble.
This liberalising trend is balanced by a recognition that, in some areas,
restrictions on certain freedoms must be extended in the interests of society as
a whole—hence legislation on race relations and the control of dangerous
drugs and firearms.
Relationships between the generations are also undergoing considerable
change, with the result that there is today a greater readiness than there has
ever been on the part of children and young people to criticise traditional
institutions and to seek more influence in shaping society. This desire for
personal involvement is manifest not only among those prepared to demon¬
strate for or against certain courses of action and to bring pressure on the
responsible authorities, but also among the increasing numbers of young
people who offer their services, both as individuals and as members of
voluntary organisations, to help the old, the immigrants, the disabled, the
illiterate, and others in need.
2 Government
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical State. It is also one of the independent
members of the Commonwealth,1 all of whose members recognise the Queen
as head of the Commonwealth. In January 1973 it became a member nation
of the European Community which includes all the major powers of Western
Europe and over 80 per cent of its population (see p. 80).
The origins and traditions of the United Kingdom are to be found in each
of its four component parts: England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
England was united under a Saxon king in the ninth century; Wales became
part of that kingdom and Ireland was joined with it before the end of the
thirteenth century; and the English and Scottish thrones were dynastically
united in the person of James I and VI in 1603. In 1707 the Treaty for the
Union of England and Scotland provided that the two countries ‘should be
forever united into one kingdom’, and one Parliament (the Parliament of
Great Britain) became the supreme authority in both countries.
In 1801 the Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland 1800, which
joined the Irish Parliament to the Parliament of Great Britain, established the
United Kingdom. In 1922 the 26 counties of Southern Ireland (now the
Irish Republic) became a self-governing country, outside the United King¬
dom. Meantime, the Government of Ireland Act 1920 had enacted a constitu¬
tion for Northern Ireland which, while preserving the supreme authority of
the United Kingdom Parliament and reserving certain matters to that Parlia¬
ment, provided Northern Ireland with its own legislature and executive, to
deal with domestic ‘transferred’ affairs. The unrest in Northern Ireland, which
began in 1968, led in March 1972, to the introduction of direct rule from
Westminster, and the transfer of all the legislative and executive powers of the
Northern Ireland Parliament (which was prorogued) to the United Kingdom
Government and Parliament. A new constitution for Northern Ireland has
been enacted which provides, amongst other things, for an elected Assembly
of 78 members to which legislative powers in a wide range of domestic matters
can be devolved, and an Executive representative of the main Northern Ire¬
land parties, acceptable to all sections of the community. The Assembly was
elected in June 1973, but it cannot assume legislative responsibilities until the
main parties represented have reached agreement on power-sharing in the
Executive. Because of the transitional nature of the situation most references
to Northern Ireland have been omitted from this chapter. The latest informa¬
tion on the subject is included in the supplement.
Although one nation, historically and constitutionally, the United Kingdom
has adopted flexible methods of government, adapted, to some extent, to the
needs of the constituent countries. England and Wales, on the one hand, and
Scotland on the other, continue as before the Union to have different systems
1 The other members are: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Bangladesh, Sri
Lanka, Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Irmidad
and Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Malta, Zambia, The Gambia, Singapore,
Guyana, Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados, Mauritius, Swaziland, Tonga, Western Samoa
and Fiji. In addition, Nauru is a special member, participating in functional activities
but not in meetings of Heads of Government.
GOVERNMENT
27
of law, a different judiciary, different educational systems, different systems of
local government, national churches on a different footing, and, for most
domestic matters, different government departments. In Scotland these depart¬
ments have headquarters in Edinburgh and are grouped under the Secretary
of State for Scotland, who is a member of the Cabinet.
There is also a considerable measure of devolution in the administration of
Welsh affairs to the Welsh Office, under the Secretary of State for Wales—
a Cabinet Minister who is assisted by a Minister of State.
The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man (which are Crown dependencies,
not part of the United Kingdom) have their own legislative assemblies and
systems of local administration and of law, and their own courts. At the same
time, they have a special relationship with the United Kingdom because of
their proximity to it and the antiquity of their connection with the Crown.
Her Majesty’s Government is responsible for their defence, their international
relations and, ultimately, their good government.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by
common law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions,
which have never been codified and are not directly enforceable in a court of
law, but which, nevertheless, have a binding force as rules of the constitution.
Because the constitution is not contained in any document, because it can be
altered by the passing of an Act of Parliament or by general agreement to vary,
abolish or create a convention, it can the more readily be adapted to changing
political conditions and ideas without serious disturbance to existing organs
and forms.
The organs of government in the constitution are readily distinguishable
although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They are:
1. the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the
supreme authority in the realm;
2. the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other ministers of the
Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(b) government departments, most of them under the control of ministers
and all staffed by civil servants, which are responsible for administration
at the national level; (c) local authorities, which administer and manage
many services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards, which are
severally responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries
or public services, and which are subject to ministerial control in varying
degrees; and
3. the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes, and is
independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The following pages describe these three organs of government in some
detail in order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.1
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in
spite of interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle
upon which it was founded has never been abandoned. The royal lineage can
1 A Commission on the Constitution is considering whether any changes are desirable
in the present constitutional relationships between the several countries, nations and
regions of the United Kingdom and also between the United Kingdom and the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
28
Succession
Accession
Coronation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
be traced back to Cerdic, King of Wessex in the sixth century, through the
Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the year 829; and to Alpin,
King of Kintyre in the ninth century through Malcolm II, whose reign in
Scotland (1005-34) was correspondingly important in that part of the realm.
According to the Royal Titles Act 1953, the royal title in the United
Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms
and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’.
The form of the royal title is varied for the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, to suit the particular
circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. For the performance of
royal functions in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is repre¬
sented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the other member nations of the Com¬
monwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown the Queen’s representative is
the Governor-General, who is appointed by the Crown on the advice of the
ministers of the country concerned and is wholly independent of the United
Kingdom Government. In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is
usually represented by Governors who are appointed by the Crown, having
varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United
Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement 1701, which
provided that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most
excellent Princess Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’. Sub¬
sequent Succession to the Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration; and
although succession is not bound to continue in its present line, it cannot now
be altered (under a provision of the Statute of Westminster 1931) except by
common consent of the member nations of the Commonwealth which owe
allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide
that the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the Throne accord¬
ing to their seniority; if there are no sons, the daughters succeed in order of
their seniority. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant and
the powers of the Crown are vested in her as fully and effectively as though she
were a king. By convention, the consort of a king takes the rank and style of her
husband; the converse, however, does not apply and the constitution has never
attached any special rank or privileges to the husband of the Queen-Regnant
although in practice he may fill an important role in the life of the nation.
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession
of another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new
Sovereign is proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of the
Privy Council are summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Lord
Mayor, aldermen and other leading citizens of the City of London, and the
High Commissioners in London of the member nations of the Commonwealth
are also invited to attend.
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which
may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the same in
substance for nearly a thousand years although the details have frequently
been modified to bring it into conformity with the customs of the time. The
1 The Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I of England.
THE ROYAL FAMILY
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1973
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901
1. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
GOVERNMENT
29
£ S
- 41
•S'S
1 13 M
“ c'S
^ ^ CO
=30'3
CO M
U V
tl
I o C
ro 4)
VO S >
'Sis
_ 4) to
*5 *W
O VO T3 o
c 7<a
'^ xr'.-f3-
Q S p 4)wh
'|SSg2^
^03 2
^ w
r—n S'
riil-
o 2.M
4» 0"S
•37^"
h-pgsH
o ^ m 0
8 g p 0
o^s
^3 S|!
(£ 1 q'51
^ u o
J J.
■2S E>S «
-I'S 0',S’£-
Q 3
%>-
>v C O'—' o
f,w £
^ CO* o .3
J099 pffi
(X, M
►>TJ 1 S
S® Im®o
•<
VO M
ro „
I Ph
>§
-§g-
«a
i-3
o2
z0
U
w ^ ~0 C b-i
0 7 s
z Sa jW «
S^W"1 ^
9-0^
^3 rJ 'tS C3
C o^- C
ro3 C a
'Sjw^Sg
I S>s
0 W>M
ip ,
s^il
Q. ed
^ J ^
- > -m m
a§;
I
£ !
N ^
-t_; O' - n -
3 7^.1
■w
01
-}s 2-a ^
,3||7
•« S 8'g’
_T) Js n3 O'
cd (U g m
C3 4) c 1
JKlxi
So
-fev'c ^
OW^ji
co
 O O'
§
* I
_ o O' ^
••HMD
d-0 &
a, .h
m
§ss
a S'
^ o
-a n
-S3 I
l>* N rirt 4)
Tj-lidUd C C
O' O' O CX 3
mm m^Jh-,
rl ^ -O* C M .2
•S o'0 n «
S « W
ex o
a b
_ „ 1
2 &§-B >•«
5lls||
|8§l«
S<;omo
3°
Acts of
Government
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
service used at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was derived from
that used at the coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of
representatives of the Lords, the Commons and all the great public interests
in the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the
other Commonwealth countries and of representatives of foreign States.
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the
executive, an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in
England and Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, the commander-in-chief
of all the armed forces of the Crown and the temporal ‘governor’ of the
established Church of England. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary
process during which the absolute power of the monarchy has been pro¬
gressively reduced, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which
she cannot constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The
United Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of
the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation
during the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers
without any necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen.
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; as a general rule
she opens the new session with a speech from the throne drafted by her
ministers (although this may be read by the Lord Chancellor if the Queen is
unable to be present); and she must give Royal Assent before a Bill which has
passed all its stages in both Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enactment.
The Queen is ‘the fountain of justice’ and as such can remit all or part of the
penalties imposed on people convicted of crime. As ‘the fountain of honour’,
the Queen confers peerages, baronetcies, knighthoods and other honours,1
and makes appointment to all important State offices, including those of
judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, and diplomats, and to all
leading positions in the established Church of England. The Queen’s consent
and approval are required before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be
formed. In the realm of international affairs, by virtue of her pre-eminence as
head of the State, the Queen has the power to conclude treaties, to cede or
accept territory, to declare war and to make peace.
These and similar acts of government involve the use of the royal preroga¬
tive which has been defined as ‘the residue of discretionary authority legally
left in the hands of the Crown’.2 Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of
this authority is shown in three constitutional ways in which the royal will can
be expressed: by Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice of the Privy
Council’; by Order, Commission or Warrant signed personally by the Queen
and generally bearing the signature of one or more responsible ministers; or
by Proclamation, Writs, Letters Patent, or other documents under the Great
Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in obedience to a Royal Warrant counter¬
signed by a minister.
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; a
few (the Order of Merit, the Royal Victorian Order, the Most Noble Order of the
Garter, and the Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle) are in the
Sovereign’s personal gift.
2 Other powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by Royal Charter;
the construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of infants; the admini¬
stration of charities; coinage; the grant of franchises, for example, to markets, ferries
and fisheries; the right to treasure trove; and to print, or to licence others to print, the
Bible, the Book of Common Prayer and State papers.
GOVERNMENT
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
3i
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not
detract from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the
smooth working of government; for although the Queen has no personal
authority and must show complete impartiality in every field, she must be
informed and consulted on every aspect of the national life. The Queen holds
meetings of the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other
holders of office at home and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions,
reads dispatches and signs innumerable State papers.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them
if the Sovereign is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of 18 years on
accession to the throne. The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act 1953—
laid down that the first potential Regent should be The Prince Philip, Duke
of Edinburgh, and thereafter those in succession to the throne who are of age.
In the event of the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision
is made for the appointment of Counsellors of State (generally the wife or
husband of the Sovereign, and the four adult persons next in succession
to the Crown1) to whom the Sovereign may delegate by Letters Patent certain
royal functions. But Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the express instructions of the Sovereign), nor create
peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the
British Isles and, in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered
outlook of both the Sovereign and the people,2 certain traditional customs and
usages remain. Royal marriages, the birth of royal children and royal funerals
are marked by public ceremony. The birthday of the Sovereign is officially
celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on the Horse Guards Parade
and is also celebrated as Commonwealth Day. State banquets take place when
a foreign monarch or head of State visits the United Kingdom; investitures
are held at Buckingham Palace; and royal processions add significance to
such occasions as the opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives in state
from Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating
from the fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal
ordinances, established custom and the public will. The Queen and other
members of the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom every
year, and their presence at the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial
and charitable works of national importance ensures nation-wide interest and
support. 1 he Sovereign herself pays State visits, often accompanied by other
members of the royal family, to foreign governments and undertakes lengthy
tours in other countries of the Commonwealth. Other members of the royal
family pay official and private visits overseas.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say, the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the
House of Lords and the elected House of Commons.
1 The Regency Act 1953 provided that Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
2 The whole protocol that surrounded the monarch in past centuries has been greatly
simplified and informality emphasised whenever possible.
32 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The three elements of Parliament are outwardly separate; they are con¬
stituted on different principles; they do different work in different places; and
they meet together only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the
coronation, or the State opening of Parliament when the Commons are sum¬
moned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making organ of State,
however, Parliament is a corporate body and cannot legislate without the con¬
currence of all its parts (except in the case of Bills passed under the Parliament
Acts 1911 and 1949).
The Parliament at Westminster can legislate for the United Kingdom as a
whole, or any of the constituent countries separately, or for any combination
of them. It can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which
are Crown dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom, and have
subordinate legislatures1 which legislate on island affairs.
By the passing of the Parliament Act 1911 the life of a United Kingdom
Parliament was fixed at five years (although it may be dissolved and a general
election held before the expiry of the legal term). Because it is not subject
to the type of legal restraints imposed on the legislatures of countries with
formal written constitutions, it is virtually free during this period to legislate
as it pleases: to make or unmake any law; to legalise past illegalities and
make void and punishable what was lawful when done and thus reverse the
decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy firmly established conventions
or turn a convention into binding law. If both Houses agreed, it could even
prolong its own life beyond the normal period of five years without consulting
the electorate. In other words, Parliament is sovereign.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way.
Its members bear in mind the common law which has grown up in Britain
throughout the centuries and act as far as possible in accordance with prece¬
dent and tradition. Moreover, although the validity of an Act of Parliament
that has been duly passed, legally promulgated and published by the proper
authority cannot be disputed in the law courts, no Parliament would be likely
to pass an Act which it knew would receive no public support. The system
of party government in Britain ensures that Parliament legislates with its
responsibility to the electorate in mind.
On 1st January 1973, when Britain acceded to the European Community,
the provisions of the European Communities Act 1972 (passed by Parliament)
applying the Treaty of Rome became operative (see p. 81). These provide for
various types of Community legislation, including regulations, which take
direct effect in member countries, and directives, which are binding as to the
result achieved upon each member State to which they are addressed, but
allow the national parliaments to choose the form and method of implementa¬
tion. Under the Treaty of Rome the national parliaments delegate a number
of their members to sit in the European Parliament (see p. 83).
The Meeting of A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with
Parliament a proclamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council.
Such a proclamation on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and,
on the other, orders the issue of writs for election and announces the date on
which the new Parliament is to meet. This cannot be less than 20 days after
the proclamation, but it may be more.
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of
Guernsey) and the Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy
Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the member
of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each legislative
measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
GOVERNMENT
33
The House of
Lords
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions each normally, though not
necessarily, of a year’s duration. Unless Parliament is being dissolved, each
session is terminated by prorogation—usually effected by a commission
under the Great Seal, which appoints the day and place of its meeting in a new
session. The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred by a
subsequent proclamation. The effect of a prorogation is at once to terminate
all proceedings pending (with certain minor exceptions). This means that a Bill
not completed in one session dies and has to be reintroduced in the next, unless
it is to be abandoned.
During a session either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such
date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business. A
reassembly of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or on the
initiative of the Government under powers specially conferred by each House
on its Speaker.
The average number of sitting days for the House of Commons is about 160,
divided by custom into the following periods: one from November until
Christmas lasting about 40 sitting days, one from January to Easter of about
50 sitting days, one from Easter until Whitsun of some 30 sitting days, and
one from Whitsun until the end of July lasting about 40-50 sitting days.
Nowadays, the session is sometimes concluded with a short period of up to
10 sitting days in October, after the long summer adjournment. In most
sessions, the House of Lords sits on about 140 days.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual.
The Lords Temporal may be sub-divided into (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages under the Peerage Act 1963, (2) all life
peers and peeresses created by the Crown under the Life Peerages Act 1958,
and (3) Lords of Appeal in Ordinary who are appointed under the terms of the
Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 to assist the House in the performance of its
judicial duties and who remain members of the House after their retirement.
The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops
of London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other bishops of the Church of
England, according to their seniority as diocesan bishops.
Peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages carry with them a right to
a seat in the House of Lords, provided the holder is 21 years of age or over,
but anyone succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession,
disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit
in the House of Lords but they gain the right to vote at parliamentary elections
and to offer themselves for election to the House of Commons.
Not all holders of temporal peerages with a right to sit in the House of
Lords attend the sittings of that House. Those who do not wish to attend may
apply for leave of absence, either for the duration of a particular Parliament
or for a single session.
Peers who frequently attend the House of Lords1 include elder statesmen
and others who have spent their lives in public service. They receive no salary
for their parliamentary work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses from
their homes to the Palace of Westminster (provided they attend at least one-
third of the number of sittings), and (with the exception of the Lord Chancellor,
the Lord Chairman of Committees, the Law Lords and any member in receipt
1 Average daily attendance is about 250.
34
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office) they may claim payment for
expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the House (except for
judicial sittings) within a maximum of £8-50 a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who
takes his place on the woolsack as ex officio Speaker of the House. In the
absence of the Lord Chancellor his place may be taken by a deputy speaker
appointed by the Crown or a deputy chairman appointed by the House or, if
neither a deputy speaker nor a deputy chairman is present, by a speaker
chosen by the Lords themselves. The first of the deputy speakers is the Lord
Chairman of Committees, who is appointed each session and takes the chair
in all committees, unless the House otherwise directs. The permanent officers
include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who is responsible for the records of
proceedings including judgments and for the promulgation of Acts of Parlia¬
ment when they have received Royal Assent; the other Clerks at the Table;
the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who is also Serjeant-at-Arms in
attendance upon the Lord Chancellor; and the Yeoman-Usher and Deputy
Serjeant-at-Arms.
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by almost
universal adult suffrage and consists of men and women from all sections of the
community. There are at present 630 seats in the House of Commons (511
for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern Ireland).
Elections are of two kinds: general elections held after a Parliament has
been dissolved and a new one summoned by the Sovereign; and by-elections,
held when a vacancy occurs in the House as a result of the death or resigna¬
tion1 of a member, or as a result of his elevation to the House of Lords.
Members are paid an annual salary of £4,500 and an allowance of £1,000 a
year for secretarial and office expenses. They also have a number of other
allowances, including travel allowances and, for provincial members, sub¬
sistence allowances.
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is elected
by the members to preside over the House immediately after a new Parliament
is formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of
Ways and Means, and the deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers; these
officers are elected by the House on the nomination of the Government and,
like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote other than in their official capacity.
Permanent officers of the House (that is, those who are not members of
Parliament) include the Clerk of the House of Commons, who conducts the
business of the House in the official departments under his control and is
charged with such matters as keeping the records, endorsing Bills and signing
orders, and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends upon the Speaker, executes the
orders of the House and is generally responsible for its domestic staff arrange¬
ments.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies,
each of which returns one member to the House of Commons. Permanent
Boundary Commissions for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
undertake general reviews of constituencies throughout that part of the United
1 If a member wishes to resign from the House, he may apply either for what is techni¬
cally an office of profit under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds and Steward
of the Manor of Northstead), but to which, in fact, no remuneration attaches, or for a
directorship by government nomination in a commercial company which is an ordinary
trading concern (see p. 35).
GOVERNMENT
35
Kingdom for which they are responsible at intervals of not less than ten and
not more than 15 years and report on the changes they recommend. A Com¬
mission is also empowered to submit interim reports on particular consti¬
tuencies if, for instance, it is necessary to bring constituency boundaries into
line with altered local government boundaries. The recommendations in the
last reports of the Commissions were approved by Parliament in 1970.1
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained principally in the
Representation of the People Act 1949 as amended by the Act of 1969. Under
the provisions of these Acts, election to the House of Commons is decided by
secret ballot in which British subjects (except members of the House of Lords)
and citizens of the Irish Republic are entitled to vote2 provided that they are
18 years old or over, and are not subject to any legal incapacity to vote. Those
eligible to vote in any constituency are those who are recorded on the register3
of electors for the constituency as resident in that constituency on a date fixed
by statute. Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling
station, although members of the armed forces, Crown servants of the United
Kingdom and staff of the British Council employed overseas, and wives or
husbands of such persons, if resident overseas with their married partners,
may vote by proxy. Voting by post, or in certain cases by proxy, may also be
allowed if the voter cannot attend in person because of physical incapacity or
the nature of his work or on grounds of religious observance.
Anyone, male or female, who is a British subject aged 21 or over, and is not
otherwise disqualified may stand as a candidate in any constituency at a
parliamentary election. Those who are disqualified include members of the
House of Lords, clergy of the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church, undischarged bank¬
rupts, and those expressly disqualified by the House of Commons Disqualifica¬
tion Act 1957, for instance, holders of judicial offices, civil servants, members
of the regular armed forces and the police forces, and government-nominated
directors of commercial companies which are ordinary trading concerns.
The conduct of elections, including the manner in which candidates can be
nominated for election, is likewise governed by provisions of the 1949 and 1969
Acts. The maximum sum of money that a candidate may spend on his election
campaign was laid down in the 1969 Act as £750, plus ^0-05 for each eight
electors in a borough constituency and £0-05 for each six electors in a county
constituency. The prescribed scale is not required to cover a candidate’s
personal expenses, for instance, the cost of his living at an hotel during the
election campaign, but any such expenses beyond £100 must be paid by his
election agent and particulars sent to the returning officer.
Parliamentary Each House of Parliament enjoys certain rights and immunities designed to
Privilege protect the House from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties.
These rights apply collectively to each House and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown
for the Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the
beginning of each Parliament. These include freedom of speech in debate;
and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective privilege of the
House. Further privileges include the right of the House to control its own
1 These provide for 635 constituencies, instead of 630 as at present, and will come into
force at the next general election.
2 Voting is not compulsory, but normally at least 75 per cent of the electorate vote.
3 A register containing the names of all electors, prepared for each constituency and
published yearly by the registration officers, who in England and Wales are the clerks of
local councils and in Scotland are the land valuation assessors.
The Party
System
TABLE 4
Members Elected
at General
Elections in
1970 and 1966
TABLE 5
Votes Cast at
General
Elections in
1970 and 1966
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
proceedings (so that it is able, for instance, to exclude strangers if it so wishes);
the right to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for membership and to
declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and the right to penalise those who
commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords include: freedom of speech in debate;
freedom of access to the Sovereign for each peer individually; and the right to
commit for contempt. These privileges are not formally claimed by the Speaker
as in the House of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth
century, and has now become an essential element in the working of the
constitution.
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political parties,
each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a general
election or a by-election, the parties may put up candidates for election; any
other citizen who wishes may also stand. The electorate then indicates, by its
choice of candidate at the poll on election day, which of the opposing policies
it would like to see put into effect.
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the
general elections of 1970 and 1966 is shown in Table 4 and the number and
percentage of votes cast for the principal parties in Table 5.
1970
Conservative and Associates. . 330
Labour .. .. .. 287
Liberal . . . . .. 6
Republican Labour .. .. 1
Scottish Nationalist .. . . 1
Unity (Northern Ireland) . . 1
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland) . . 1
Independents.. . . .. 2
The Speaker . . . . .. 1
630
1966
Labour .. .. .. 363
Conservative and Associates . . 253
Liberal .. .. .. 12
Republican Labour .. .. 1
The Speaker .. .. .. 1
630
Party
1970
% of votes
cast
1966
% of votes
cast
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Others
13,106,965
12,141,676
2,109,268
900,473
46-4
43-0
7-4
3-2
11,418,433
13,057,941
2,327,533
452,689
41-9
47-9
8-6
1-6
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the
majority of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority
of supporters in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition,
the leader of the majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign,
usually on the advice of senior ministers; and its most outstanding members
in the House of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial appoint¬
ments on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes
the official Opposition with its own leader1 and its own council of discussion
1 The Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons receives an annual salary of
£9,500 and a parliamentary allowance of £3,000; in the House of Lords the Leader of
the Opposition receives £3,500 a year.
GOVERNMENT
37
The Functions
of Parliament
Parliamentary
Procedure
or ‘shadow Cabinet’; while the members of any other parties or any Indepen¬
dents who have been elected may support the Government or the Opposition
according to their party’s or their own view of the policy being debated at any
given time.
The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable
extent upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on
by agreement: that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must govern
and therefore accepts its decisions; and the majority agrees that the minority
should criticise and therefore sets time aside for that criticism to be heard. The
detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the direction
of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House, by the Government Chief
Whip in consultation with the Opposition Chief Whip. The Chief Whips
together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to in the House of
Commons when the question of the possibility of finding time for debating
some particular issue is discussed. The direction of the business of the House
is primarily the responsibility of the Leader of the House, and it is his duty
to provide all reasonable facilities for the House to debate matters about which
it is concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the voting
strength of their parties by ensuring the attendance of members at important
debates, and conveying upwards to the party leadership the opinions of their
back-bench members. The Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons
is Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury; of the other Government Whips,
three (one of whom is deputy Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household,
five hold titular posts as Lords Commissioners of the Treasury and four are
paid Assistant Whips. Two of the Assistant Whips for the Opposition also
receive salaries. Salaries are likewise paid to the Chief Opposition Whip and
his counterpart in the House of Lords. The Government Whips in the House
of Lords hold offices in the Royal Household and sometimes act as spokesmen
for the Government in debates.
The main functions of Parliament are (i) to pass laws regulating the life of
the community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make
available finance for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds
necessary for the services of the State, and (3) to put relevant facts and issues
before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the ratifi¬
cation of certain international treaties and agreements (in spite of the fact
that the making of treaties is a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the
Government and, in theory, is not subject to parliamentary approval).
Parliamentary procedure is largely based on custom and precedent, supple¬
mented by standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The
system of debate is much the same in the two Houses: for instance, every
matter is determined upon questions put from the chair or woolsack and
resolved in the affirmative or negative, as the case may be; members speak
from wherever they have been sitting and not from a rostrum; and members
do not read their speeches. The main difference is that in the House of Lords
the office of Speaker carries with it no inherent authority to check or curtail
debate, such matters being decided by the general sense of the House, whereas
in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give effect, promptly and
38
Legislation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. He must carefully guard
against abuse of procedure or any infringement of minority rights, and it is his
duty to allow or disallow any closure motion (that is, a motion to end discussion
so that the matter may be put to the vote). He has certain powers to check
irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save the time of the House in various
other respects. In case of grave disorder he has power to adjourn the House or
suspend the sitting on his own initiative.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the
Speaker, and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number
of votes is cast for and against the motion under debate, the Speaker must
give the casting vote, but he does so only in accordance with rules which pre¬
clude an expression of opinion on the merits of the question.
The procedure on voting in the House of Lords is similar to that in the
House of Commons, except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but
no casting, vote—the House of Lords being governed by the principle that
unless there is a majority in favour the question is decided in the negative.
When the House is sitting judicially (see pp. 88 and 91) the question is put in
such a way that, if the votes are equal, there is no interference with the order
under appeal.
All proceedings of either House are public, except on extremely rare occa¬
sions; the minutes (in the House of Commons called Votes and Proceedings
and in the House of Lords, Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The
Official Report of Parliamentary Debates, Hansard) are published daily.
Records of both Houses from 1497 are available to the public in the House of
Lords Record Office.
Public Bills can be introduced by any member of either House, but no Bill
involving taxation or the spending of public money will proceed very far in
the Commons unless the Government agrees to introduce a ‘money resolution’
to cover it. This has the effect of giving the Government control over a wide
field of legislation. In the House of Commons certain days are set aside for
debating private members’ Bills1; that is, public Bills introduced by mem¬
bers of the House not holding office in the Government, who have been suc¬
cessful in the ballot, held early in each session, of members wishing to introduce
Bills. Peers can introduce private members’ Bills in the House of Lords at any
time during a session without notice. Also, persons and bodies outside Parlia¬
ment can promote private Bills relating solely to matters of individual,
corporate or local interest.
Bills may originate in either House, unless their main purpose is financial,
when they must be introduced in the Commons. As a rule, however, Bills likely
to raise political controversy go through the Commons before the Lords,
while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature are frequently intro¬
duced and debated in the Lords before being sent to the Commons.
The process of passing a public Bill is basically the same in the House of
Lords as in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal first reading
on introduction; it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies
between one day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it
is given a second reading after a debate on its general merits or principles. In
the Commons a non-controversial Bill may be referred to a Second Reading
1 A private member may also present a Bill after Question Time on notice given, or seek
leave to introduee a Bill under the ‘Ten Minute Rule', that is, the standing order which
allows a brief speech proposing and another opposing the introduction of the Bill before
the House decides whether or not to grant leave. If a private member’s Bill secures a
second reading, the Government will usually introduce any necessary money resolution.
PERSONS PER SQUARE MILE 1971
BY WARD AND PARISH
0 00 50-00 400-00 6400-00
SCALE 1:5600000
( 88.38 MILES TO 1 INCH )
TOPOGRAPHY
The Black Moun¬
tains in Wales.
Isle of Wight in
southern England.
SOME BRITISH
ANIMALS
Above:
Red deer.
Above right:
Otter.
Right:
Fox.
Far right:
Badger.
Below right:
Grey seal.
Below:
Hedgehog.
GOVERNMENT
39
Parliamentary
Committees
Committee to recommend whether or not it should be taken as read a second
time. After a second reading in the Commons a Bill is referred for detailed
examination either to a standing committee or, if the House so decides, to the
whole House sitting in committee; in the Lords it is referred to a committee
of the whole House. The committee stage is followed by the report stage,
during which previous amendments may be altered and additional amend¬
ments may be suggested and incorporated. The last stage is the third reading
which provides an opportunity for a Bill to be reviewed in its final form. In
the Commons this stage is taken without debate unless there is a motion on
the Order Paper in the name of six members that the question be not put
forthwith—a procedure of which substantial use is made. After the third
reading, the Bill is sent from the Commons to the Lords or from the Lords to
the Commons (depending on its place of origin), when it enters on the same
course again. Any amendments which the second House makes to the Bill
must be agreed to by the first House, or a compromise reached, before the
Bill can become law.
In practice, the Lords pass without amendment such financial Bills1 as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing taxa¬
tion, and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the Supply
Services from the Consolidated Fund. These Bills are introduced upon
resolutions in the House of Commons; they may be initiated only by a
Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are
sent for Royal Assent, which is given by the Sovereign in Letters Patent and
is declared to both Houses by their Speakers or, occasionally, by Royal Com¬
mission. The Sovereign’s power to refuse assent has not been exercised since
the early eighteenth century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; they
are then returned to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent.
However, should any Lords Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would
never reach the Statute Book, for no debating time would be allotted to it—
at any rate until a new government came into power, when it might be re¬
introduced. The Lords, on the other hand, cannot prevent a Bill insisted upon
by the Commons from finally becoming law. In the normal course of events,
they either accept a Bill from the Commons and return it unchanged; or they
revise and improve it by amendments and return it for the consideration of
members of the other House, who frequently agree to the amendments made.
They can, however, delay a non-financial Commons Bill for about six months.
These limitations on the powers of the Lords are based on the belief that the
principal function of the modern House (which is a non-elected assembly) in
respect of legislation is to act as a chamber of revision: in other words that its
object should be to complement the House of Commons and not to rival it.
In substance, a private Bill goes through the same procedure as a public
Bill but most of the work is done in committee, where proceedings follow a
semi-judicial pattern: the promoters must prove the need for the powers or
privileges that they seek and objections on the part of opposing interests are
heard. Both parties may be represented by counsel.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee, known as a Committee of
the Whole House, to consider Bills in detail, clause by clause, after their
1 Under the Parliament Act 1911 a Bill that deals only with taxation or expenditure
must receive Royal Assent within one month of being sent to the House of Lords,
whether or not the Lords have agreed to it.
4o
Delegated
Legislation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
second reading. A Committee of the Whole House is presided over by the
Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman of Committees in the House of
Lords) or one of his two deputies instead of by the Speaker.
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of which
exist to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised and complex
work. They are:
1. Standing Committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons to
deal with public Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the
second reading and the report stages. With the exception of the Scottish
Grand Committee1 (which considers Scottish estimates and other matters
relating exclusively to Scotland), and the Welsh Grand Committee2 (for
which parallel arrangements exist), standing committees3 consist of from
16 to 50 members nominated for each Bill by the Committee of Selection
(a body normally consisting of 11 members drawn from the main parties
in the House in accordance with party strengths at the beginning of each
session). The procedure of a standing committee is generally similar to
that of a Committee of the Whole House.
2. Select Committees, which are appointed to enquire into and report to the
House on special matters. Select Committees are appointed by either House
when the occasion for such an appointment occurs, as, for example, the
European Community Secondary Legislation Committee set up in Decem¬
ber 1972 to consider procedures for the scrutiny of proposals for European
secondary legislation (see p. 32), or at the beginning of a session (some of
them by standing order) to consider all aspects of a particular subject that
may arise during the session. The latter type of committee is known as a
‘sessional’ committee and includes in the House of Commons the Committee
of Public Accounts, the Expenditure Committee, the Committee of Privileges
and the Committees on Public Petitions, House of Commons (Services) and
Nationalised Industries. In the House of Lords there are committees on
special orders, personal Bills, procedures, offices, privileges, leave of absence
and the Appeal and Appellate Committees. The House of Commons also
has a few specialist select committees such as the Committee on Race
Relations and Immigration and the Committee on Scottish Affairs. Other
committees include the Standing Orders Committee which has duties relat¬
ing to private Bills; and joint select committees of both Houses of Parlia¬
ment which may be appointed at the instance of either House.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
important party organisations or committees: the Conservative and Unionist
Members Committee, popularly known as the 1922 Committee, which consists
of the back-bench membership of the party; and the Parliamentary Labour
Party, which is a corporate body comprising all members of the party in both
Houses.
The system of delegated legislation, which is used to relieve pressure on
parliamentary time, empowers ministers and other authorities to regulate
administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. In order to minimise the
1 The Scottish Grand Committee comprises all the members for the Scottish constitu¬
encies and not less than ten nor more than 15 others.
2 The Welsh Grand Committee consists of 36 members for constituencies in Wales and
Monmouthshire, with up to five other nominated members.
3 Not more than two Scottish standing committees may be appointed and each must be
so constituted as to include not less than 16 members representing Scottish con¬
stituencies.
Parliamentary
Control
GOVERNMENT 41
risk that powers thus conferred on the executive might supersede or weaken
parliamentary government, they are normally delegated to the Queen in Council
or to authorities directly responsible to Parliament, that is, to Ministers of the
Crown, to government departments for which ministers are responsible, or to
organisations whose regulations are subject to confirmation or approval by
ministers who thereby become responsible to Parliament for them. More¬
over, the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated
normally provide for some measure of parliamentary control over legislation
made in the exercise of these powers; and there are cases which give Parlia¬
ment the right to confirm or annul the orders themselves. Certain Acts also
require direct consultation with organisations which will be affected thereby
before rules and orders are made.
A joint committee of both Houses checks the technical propriety of statu¬
tory instruments,1 and a standing committee of the House of Commons
considers their merits.
Control of the Government in power is exercised in the final analysis by the
ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign either
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of
confidence’; but because of party discipline and party loyalties this has not
happened for many years. A number of opportunities for a searching examina¬
tion of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own
back-benchers are, however, provided in parliamentary procedure. In the
House of Commons such opportunities include:
1. Question Time, which is an hour of parliamentary time on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday during which ministers, in rotation,
answer questions put to them on matters for which they are responsible.
So much parliamentary time is devoted to scheduled public business that
questions are regarded as one of the best means of eliciting hitherto un¬
published information about the Government’s intentions, as well as an
effective way of airing, and possibly securing some redress of, grievances
brought to the notice of members by their constituents. (Another means
available to members is by way of the Parliamentary Commissioner—see
p. 42.)
2. The right of members to use motions for the adjournment of the House to
initiate discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern.
There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of public business; and
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
Whitsun and the summer) there is a whole day spent discussing matters
for which the Government is responsible raised by private members. More¬
over, if a member wishes to discuss a ‘specific and important matter that
should have urgent consideration’ he may, at the end of Question Time,
ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, he asks the House for leave for it to be put forward.
Leave can be given unanimously, or if 40 or more members support the
motion, or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and the House
(on a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is debated
for three hours, usually on the following day.
3. The practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates has ceased to be
1 Statutory instruments (‘SI’) are made in accordance with the provisions of the
Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
42
Parliamentary
Commissioner
Procedure and
Functions
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a consideration of the financial requirements of the Government and has
become an occasion for the examination, initiated by the Opposition, of
some aspect of the Government’s administrative policy.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during
the debate on the address in reply to the Queen’s speech at the beginning of
a session, during debates or motions of censure for which the Government
gives up part of its own time; and during second reading debates.
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of Com¬
mons, in the management of the revenues of the State and payments for the
public service is described in Chapter 12, Finance.
The Parliamentary Commissioner is an independent statutory officer whose
function is to investigate complaints of maladministration brought to his
notice by members of Parliament on behalf of members of the public. His
powers of investigation extend to actions taken by central government depart¬
ments in the exercise of their administrative functions, but not to policy
decisions (which are the concern of the Government). Certain administrative
actions are also outside his jurisdiction; these include matters affecting rela¬
tions with other countries and the activities of British officials outside the
United Kingdom.
In the performance of his duties, the Parliamentary Commissioner has
access to all departmental papers, and reports his findings to the member of
Parliament who presented the case. The Parliamentary Commissioner reports
annually to Parliament and may submit such other reports as he thinks fit. A
Select Committee has been appointed to consider his reports.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent.
Many of its powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner Committee
of the Privy Council, and much of its work was handed over to newly created
government departments, some of which were originally committees of the
Privy Council. The present-day Privy Council is the body on whose advice
and through which the Sovereign exercises his or her statutory, and a number
of prerogative, powers. It also has its own statutory duties, independent of the
power of the Sovereign in Council.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn of the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy Council
(which is retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation
of the Prime Minister as an honour to persons who have reached eminence
in some branch of public affairs in any country of the Commonwealth. There
are usually about 300 Privy Counsellors.
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and is presided
over by the Sovereign or, when the Sovereign is abroad or ill, by Counsellors
of State. Three Privy Counsellors form a quorum, but, as a rule, not fewer
than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy Council is called together
only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her
intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for advising the Sovereign to approve
Orders in Council, of which there are two kinds, differing fundamentally in
constitutional principle: those made by virtue of the royal prerogative, such
GOVERNMENT
43
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Judicial
Committee
as Orders approving the grant of Royal Charters of Incorporation; and
those made under statutory powers, which are the highest form of delegated
legislation. It is an accepted principle that members of the Privy Council
attending meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not thereby
become personally responsible for the policy upon which the Orders are based;
this rests with the minister whose department is responsible for the subject
matter of the Order in question, whether or not he was present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclama¬
tions, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament) of the same validity as Acts of Parlia¬
ment. Its statutory responsibilities include powers of supervision over the
registering bodies for the medical and allied professions.
There are a number of Privy Council committees whose meetings differ from
those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally
be present. These committees, which have advisory functions, may be preroga¬
tive committees, such as those winch deal with legislative matters sub¬
mitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man and with
applications for the grant of charters of incorporation; or they may be provided
for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the
Scottish universities.
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out
in the Privy Council Office under the control of the Lord President of the
Council.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council derives its appellate jurisdiction
from the right of subjects of the Crown to appeal for redress to the Sovereign
in Council if they believe that the courts of law have failed to do them justice.
It is now the final court of appeal from the courts of the United Kingdom
dependencies, from the courts of those independent members of the Common¬
wealth (including certain countries of which Her Majesty is no longer Queen)
which have not elected to discontinue the appeal, from prize courts1 in the
United Kingdom and dependencies, from the courts of the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man, and from certain professional disciplinary committees.
It also has jurisdiction in a limited class of English ecclesiastical appeals.
Appeals come to the Judicial Committee either where a right of appeal has
been specially created—for instance, by statute, Order in Council or Letters
Patent—or by special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice of the
Judicial Committee. They are heard by a board of the committee, whose
members are usually selected from the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors
and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, although other members of the Privy
Council who have held high judicial office (including chief justices and certain
other judges from Commonwealth countries overseas) are asked to sit from
time to time. In theory the Judicial Committee does not deliver judgment.
It advises the Sovereign who acts on its report and approves an Order in
Council to give effect thereto. Its decisions, though not binding on the English
courts, are treated with great respect by them.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being
with the administration of national affairs.
1 Prize courts deal with matters concerning property captured in time of war which, by
grace of the Crown, falls to the forces which assist in the capture.
44
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Composition
Prime Minister
Departmental
Ministers
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of State
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons.1
However, the Government must be fully represented by Ministers in the
House of Lords as it requires spokesmen of standing to expound its policy and
justify its actions to that House. The Lord Chancellor is always a member of
the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to time,
both in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The creation
of a ministerial office with entirely new functions requires legislation, but the
abolition of an office, the transfer of functions from one minister to another,
or a change in the designation of a minister may be effected by Order in
Council. Functionally ministers may be classified under the following heads:
The Prime Minister, who is also First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service.
Departmental Ministers, who are in charge of government departments. The
holders of these offices (most of whom are in the Cabinet) are known as
‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or they may have a special title, as in the
case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer (who is responsible for the Treasury
and a number of sub-departments). In the present administration there are
eleven Secretaries of State and two ministers in this category as well as the
Chancellor of the Exchequer. There are also some ministers with the status
of a minister in charge of a department not represented in the Cabinet, who
are responsible, under a Secretary of State, for a particular part of the activities
of the department concerned.
Non-Departmental Ministers, who include the holders of various traditional
offices—the Lord President of the Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster,2 the Lord Privy Seal, the Paymaster General—and Ministers with¬
out Portfolio. Sometimes these ministers have few or no departmental duties
and are thus available to perform any special duties which the Prime Minister
may wish to entrust to them.
The Lord Chancellor, who is in a special position as a Minister of the Crown
with departmental functions, is also head of the judiciary in England and
Wales. The four Law Officers of the Crown are: for England and Wales,
the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; for Scotland, the Lord
Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland. The position in Northern
Ireland is described in the supplement.
Ministers of State who are appointed to government departments in which the
work is particularly heavy and complex or where it involves frequent travelling
abroad. There are now three Ministers of State in the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office; two each in the Home Office and the Northern Ireland Office
(see supplement); and one each in the Treasury, the Ministry of Defence, the
Department of Health and Social Security, the Department of Employment,
the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office, and the
Welsh Office.
1 A statutory limit of 91 is entitled to sit in the Commons at any one time.
2 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed
by the reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and
is separately administered by the Chancellor.
GOVERNMENT
45
Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary or,
where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to relieve
their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in parliamentary
debates, answering parliamentary questions, and assisting in departmental
duties. In certain cases, however, they may be given responsibility, directly
under the head of the department, for specific aspects of the department’s
work. The Parliamentary Secretary of the Treasury and the other Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips.
Ministerial salaries range from £20,000 a year for the Prime Minister and
£13,000 for Cabinet ministers to £5,500 for junior ministers. Senior ministers
not in the Cabinet and Ministers of State receive between £9,500 and £7,500.
The Prime Minister and ministers in the House of Commons also have the
parliamentary and secretarial allowances paid to all members of the House.
The Lord Chancellor receives £20,000 a year, £2,000 of which is attributable
to his speakership of the House of Lords.
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during
the eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the holder
of this office derives from his ability to command a majority in Parliament and
from his power to submit his own choice of ministers to the Sovereign and to
obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. Nowadays, by convention,
the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general
business of the Government; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise a
general supervision over departments, settling departmental differences and
approving important departmental decisions where reference to the Cabinet
is not required. The Prime Minister speaks for the Government in the House
of Commons on the most important topics and answers questions on its
general administration in that house.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include making recommenda¬
tions to the Sovereign for the appointment of Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans and the incumbents of some 200 Crown livings, as well as
for appointments to high judicial offices, such as Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
Lord Chief Justice and Lord Justices of Appeal. He also advises the Crown
on appointments of Privy Counsellors, Lord Lieutenants of counties1 and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower,
and some university appointments which are in the gift of the Crown. The
Prime Minister makes similar recommendations for appointments to various
public boards and institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation,
as well as to various royal and statutory commissions. He likewise makes
recommendations to the Sovereign for the award of many civil honours and
distinctions and of Civil List pensions, and selects the trustees of certain
national museums and institutions.
The Cabinet is composed of ministers2 personally selected by the Prime
Minister and may include the holders of departmental and non-departmental
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia.
2 At September 1973, these numbered 19.
46
Cabinet
Meetings
Ministerial
Responsibility
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
offices. Its origins can be traced back to the informal conferences that the
Sovereign held with his leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council,
during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an
active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development of
organised political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the franchise
from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of the policy to
be submitted to Parliament; the supreme control of the national executive
in accordance with the policy agreed by Parliament; and the continuous co¬
ordination and delimitation of the authority of government departments. The
exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the Cabinet is a
group of party representatives, depending for its existence upon the support
of a majority in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential.
Its members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publica¬
tion of Cabinet as well as of other State papers (although after they have been
in existence for 30 years they may be made available for inspection in the
Public Record Office) and a resigning minister desiring to make a statement
involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions should first obtain the permission
of the Sovereign through the Prime Minister. From a practical point of view,
this secrecy is essential in the interests of full and frank discussion, which can
be maintained only if there is no risk of publicity for every statement made and
every point conceded.
In normal times the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week
during parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is
not sitting. Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any
time if a matter urgently requiring discussion should arise. To keep the
amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a great
deal of the work of the Cabinet is carried on through the committee system,
which involves the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet com¬
mittee or to an ad hoc committee composed of the ministers primarily con¬
cerned. The committee then considers the matter in detail and either disposes
of it or reports upon it to the Cabinet with recommendations for action.
Ministers not in the Cabinet are called to attend its meetings when matters
affecting their departments are under discussion; they may also be members
of Cabinet committees.
The Secretary of the Cabinet and senior officials of the Cabinet Office
attend meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate. A record is
kept of the conclusions and of the main points made in discussion.
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which
ministers share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual
responsibility of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the
middle of the nineteenth century, means that the Cabinet is bound to offer
unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold
identical views on a given subject. Consequently it means that the policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government
as a whole. In principle, once the Government’s policy on a particular matter
has been decided, each minister is expected to support it, unless he chooses
GOVERNMENT 47
to resign, as he is free to do if he cannot agree with his colleagues on a matter
of general policy or on a single major issue.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department
means that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its
acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of admini¬
stration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be
criticised in Parliament, whether he is personally responsible or not. Since
the majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, they are
available to answer questions and to defend themselves against criticism in
person. Departmental ministers who are in the House of Lords must be
represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually a Minister of State or a Parliamentary Secretary.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they will usually wish to consult
their colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. Any
decisions by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way
of bringing government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament dis¬
courages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to govern¬
ment policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation. They may,
and frequently do, work with and through local authorities, statutory boards,
and government-sponsored organisations operating under varying degrees of
government control.
A few departments have existed for over 200 years. Many more have come
into existence during the past half-century to match the widening scope of
government activity. In recent years successive governments have favoured
the establishment of larger departments, created to be responsible for related
functions; for instance, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry, and the Department of the Environment. The
election of a party of a different political complexion does not necessarily
affect the number or general functions of government departments, although
a radical change in policy is usually accompanied by some organisational
change.
The work of some departments, for instance, the Ministry of Defence,
covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments, for instance, the
Department of Employment, cover Great Britain (England and Wales, and
Scotland, but not Northern Ireland); others, such as the Department of Health
and Social Security, the Department of Education and Science and the Depart¬
ment of the Environment are mainly concerned with affairs in England, and
there are separate departments for Scotland and Northern Ireland. There is
also a separate department with responsibility for affairs in Wales.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in
which questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent
official, and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament.
For instance, the minister in charge of the day-to-day work of the Civil Service
Department is responsible for the Central Office of Information, the Stationery
Office, and the Department of the Government Actuary, and Treasury
ministers are responsible for the Board of Customs and Excise, the Inland
48
Internal
Organisation
Advisory Bodies
Distribution of
Functions
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Revenue, the Department for National Savings and a number of small
departments including the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Royal Mint,
the National Debt Office and the Public Works Loan Board. Generally, depart¬
ments receive their funds directly out of moneys provided by Parliament and
are staffed by members of the Civil Service (see p. 61).
Departments differ in size and in the volume, type and complexity of their
work. Since each department makes its own arrangements for discharging
its duties there are variations in internal organisation. Most departments, how¬
ever, have certain features in common: for instance, the minister of a major
department is likely to have at the head of his officials a permanent secretary,
sometimes assisted by one or more second permanent secretaries, and also one
or more deputy secretaries, and a varying number of under-secretaries and
assistant secretaries. Usually major departments also have a principal finance
officer and a principal establishments and organisation officer. A number of
establishment divisions have their own organisation and methods (‘O and M’)
branch, the members of which act in an advisory capacity. Many departments
also have their own legal advisers or solicitors, and their own information
divisions.
Some departments maintain a regional organisation, and some that have
direct contact with the public throughout the country also have local offices.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or com¬
mittees (several hundred in all) which undertake research and collect informa¬
tion, mainly to enable ministers to ascertain informed opinion before coming
to a decision involving a legislative or executive act. In some cases there is a
statutory obligation on a minister to consult a standing committee, but usually
advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister concerned be¬
cause he feels the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according
to the nature of the work involved. Some are expert committees; others include
civil servants and representatives of varying interests and professions, for
instance, industrialists, trade unionists, university and industrial scientists,
educationists, lawyers and local government councillors and officers.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are ad hoc committees
which the Government frequently sets up to examine and make recommenda¬
tions on specific matters. For certain important enquiries Royal Commissions,
whose members are selected on the grounds of their wide experience and
diverse knowledge, may be appointed (by Royal Warrant). Royal Commissions
examine written and oral evidence from government departments and other
interested organisations and individuals, and on this evidence submit recom¬
mendations. The Government may accept the recommendations in whole or
in part, or it may decide to take no further action or to delay action. Enquiries
may also be undertaken by departmental committees, appointed by the head
of the appropriate department.
The following pages provide an outline of the principal functions of the main
government departments. They are arranged in alphabetical order, except for
the Cabinet Office, the Civil Service Department, and the Treasury (which,
in view of their central position, are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern
Ireland departments (which are grouped at the end of the section). Further
information on the work of departments is given in later sections under the
relevant subject headings.
GOVERNMENT
49
The Cabinet Office is in essence a secretariat, headed by the Secretary of the
Cabinet, serving ministers collectively. It operates under the direction of the
Prime Minister as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the highest
level. Its functions include circulating the memoranda and other documents
required for Cabinet or Cabinet committee business, preparing the agenda for
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees, recording their discussions and
circulating the minutes, keeping in touch with the progress of action on deci¬
sions and safeguarding the security of documents.
The Cabinet Office also includes a Central Policy Review Staff which works
under the supervision of the Prime Minister, with and through departments,
to assist Cabinet Ministers collectively by providing them with an assessment
of government policies and programmes as a whole. An historical section is
responsible for the preparation of Official Histories of the War.
The Central Statistical Office (CSO), which is part of the Cabinet Office,
co-ordinates the activities of the statistical agencies and statistics divisions of
departments, which together comprise the Government Statistical Service.
In addition, the CSO is responsible for the collection from departments of
statistics relating to the national economy, their analysis and their preparation
as an agreed body of statistics to assist the Government in formulating its
economic and financial policy.
The Civil Service Department is under the control of the Prime Minister as
Minister for the Civil Service, with responsibility for the day-to-day work
of the department delegated to a senior minister assisted by a Parliamentary
Secretary. The department’s Permanent Secretary is also the official head of the
Home Civil Service.
The department is responsible for personnel management in the Civil Ser¬
vice, which includes policy and central arrangements for recruitment, training
(including the Civil Service College), promotion, general career management,
welfare and retirement. It is also responsible for the size and deployment of
manpower, for pay, pensions, and conditions of service in the Civil Service,
and for the co-ordination of pay and pension policies in the public sector as a
whole. The department’s further responsibilities include the development and
application of new systems and techniques in the field of management and
administration; the provision of a central management services consultancy
for the Civil Service as a whole to deal with organisation and methods and
operational research; central planning and co-ordination of data processing
in government; project appraisal; and the promotion of technical develop¬
ments of significance to other government departments.
The Civil Service Commission, which is responsible for the recruitment of
civil servants, forms part of the Civil Service Department. In matters con¬
cerned with recruitment policy, the Commissioners are responsible to ministers
in the normal way, but in the selection of individuals for appointment, they
act under Order in Council and are completely independent of ministers.
The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is responsible for the drafting of all
Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions of Bills exclusively affecting
Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s Department. The Office
drafts all financial and other parliamentary motions and amendments moved
by the Government during the passage of Bills; it advises departments on
questions of parliamentary procedure; and attends sittings (and committees) in
both Houses. It also drafts subordinate legislation when specially instructed,
50
The Treasury
The Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
The Intervention
Board for
Agricultural
Produce
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and advises the Government on legal, parliamentary and constitutional ques¬
tions falling within its special experience.
Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the
First Lord of the Treasury (always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor of the
Exchequer and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners never
meet as a board and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, assisted by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, the Financial
Secretary and a Minister of State. There is also a Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury, who is the Chief Government Whip in the House of Commons.
The Treasury is the government department primarily responsible for the
development of Britain’s overall economic strategy. Its work is carried by three
main groups: the Public Sector Group which has the broad function of con¬
trolling the level of public expenditure and ensuring that resources are effi¬
ciently used within the public sector; the National Economy Group which is
responsible for the preparation of short-term and medium-term economic
forecasts and the co-ordinated economic strategy based on these forecasts, for
home financial transactions, markets and institutions generally, and for the
surveillance of certain areas of economic policy administered primarily by
other departments—namely, fiscal and industrial policies; and the Overseas
Finance Group, which is responsible for questions affecting Britain’s foreign
currency reserves, international monetary policy, and overseas aid.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible in England
and Wales for administering government policy for the agriculture, horti¬
culture and fishing industries. Its functions include the administration, in
co-operation with the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce, of the agri¬
cultural support system as modified by the adoption in 1973 of the Common
Agriculture Policy (CAP) of the enlarged European Community. The ministry
also administers schemes such as those designed for the control and eradication
of animal and plant diseases and for the improvement and drainage of agricul¬
tural land; and it exercises responsibilities relating to applied research and
development. In addition the ministry is concerned with the quality of food
and food hygiene, including the standards of its composition, and labelling
and advertising; and it has certain responsibilities for ensuring public health
standards in the production and handling of basic foods in cargoes, stores and
slaughterhouses. These measures are being harmonised with European Econo¬
mic Community legislation where it already exists.
A number of the functions relating to agriculture and fisheries in Wales and
Monmouthshire are the joint responsibility of the minister and the Secretary
of State for Wales. In regard to the operational control of certain diseases of
animals the ministry’s responsibilities extend to Scotland.
The ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign
countries and participates in certain of the activities of a number of inter¬
national organisations concerned with agriculture, fisheries and food, such as
the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce was set up under the
European Communities Act 1972 to implement (on a United Kingdom basis
and subject to the direction and control of the agricultural ministers) inter¬
vention arrangements provided for under the guarantee section of the Euro¬
pean Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
The Board of
Customs and
ixcise
The Ministry of
Defence
The Department
of Education
and Science
GOVERNMENT 51
The primary work of the Board of Customs and Excise is to collect and
administer the customs and excise duties, including value added tax, im¬
posed from time to time in the annual Finance Acts or by other legislation,
and to advise the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any matters connected with
them. The board is also responsible for preventing and detecting evasion of
the revenue laws.
The board undertakes, for other departments, a wide range of non-revenue
agency work, for instance, the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on
the import and export of certain classes of goods, exchange currency control,
and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade statistics from customs
import and export documents.
The Ministry of Defence is the government department responsible for defence
policy and for the control and administration of the three fighting Services—
Navy, Army and Air Force (including the procurement of defence equip¬
ment). The Secretary of State for Defence is in charge of the department,
assisted by a Minister of State for Defence who represents the Secretary of
State in the House of Commons and deputises for him on all occasions in his
absence. Three Parliamentary Under-Secretaries are severally responsible for
each of the three Services.
The Department of Education and Science promotes education in England and
post-school education in Wales; it is responsible for the Government’s rela¬
tions with the universities in England, Wales and Scotland; and it fosters the
progress of civil science both in Britain and in collaboration with other nations.
The department also has responsibilities relating to the superintendence of the
public library service, to support for the British Library, and to the ad¬
ministration of the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Science Museum.
Specialist branches advise on health, building and planning (including educa¬
tional research and statistics), and law, and there is an information service.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is assisted by two Parlia¬
mentary Under-Secretaries of State. The Paymaster General in his capacity
as minister with responsibility for the arts deals with policy on libraries,
museums, galleries and other aspects of the arts.
Other matters relating to the development of primary, secondary and other
education for which the department has responsibilities include the supply,
training and superannuation of teachers, the capital programmes for the build¬
ing of new schools and other institutions, the school health service (responsi¬
bility for the main part of which will be transferred to the Department of
Health and Social Security from ist April 1974), and the special educational
treatment of handicapped children. In these matters the department works in
co-operation with local education authorities whose duty it is to secure adequate
facilities for all forms of education in their areas. Its relations with the univer¬
sities are conducted through the University Grants Committee. Its activities
concerning civil science are discharged through five research councils: the
Medical P-esearch Council, the Agricultural Research Council, the Natural
Environment Research Council, the Social Science Research Council, and the
Science Research Council. On questions of scientific policy an advisory board
for the research councils advises the Secretary of State.
The Department The Department of Employment is responsible, throughout the United
of Employment Kingdom for manpower policy and labour market intelligence; the running of
public employment and unemployment benefit services, including occupa-
The Department
of the
Environment
Export Credits
Guarantee
Department
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tional guidance, youth employment, and disabled people’s services; industrial
training policy and the operation of government vocational training services1;
safety and health at work, including the Factory Inspectorate and the Employ¬
ment Medical Advisory Service; co-ordination of pay policy; promotion of
better industrial relations and the running of the Conciliation and Advisory
Service; collection and publication of statistics on employment, unemploy¬
ment, earnings, wage rates, hours of work, retail prices and output; relations
with overseas governments on labour and social affairs and development of
EEC social affairs policy.
The Department of the Environment, under a Secretary of State, is responsible
(in England) for a wide range of functions relating to the physical environment
in which people live and work.
In addition to his overall strategic responsibilities, the Secretary of State
concerns himself particularly with the department’s international business,
especially in Europe; environmental pollution policy in general; London
policy; the third London airport; and land availability for housing (including
land prices). He is assisted by three ministers:
1. The Minister for Transport Industries is responsible for ports; general
policy on the nationalised transport industries; railways, roads, and the
Channel Tunnel; road haulage; buses; the international aspects of inland
transport; road and vehicle safety; driver and vehicle licensing.
2. The Minister for Local Government and Development is responsible for
local government; compensation; land use; planning outside London; the
countryside and conservation; inland waterways; water; sewerage; refuse
disposal; clean air; and noise.
3. The Minister for Housing and Construction is responsible for land use
planning casework in the Greater London area; housing programmes and
finance; building regulations; new towns; relations with the building and
civil engineering industries; the Property Services Agency (which provides
nearly all government common services relating to land, property, buildings
and furnishings); and for ancient monuments and historic buildings.
The Department of the Environment is also concerned with the co-ordina¬
tion of work on the prevention of environmental pollution, with special res¬
ponsibility for clean air and anti-noise functions; research into roads, building,
hydraulics, water pollution, fire prevention and the uses of timber; and,
through the Property Services Agency, with government property manage¬
ment and building functions. In addition, it has responsibility for sport and
recreation.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD), responsible to the Secre¬
tary of State for Trade and Industry, provides protection to exporters,
merchants, investors and banks against overseas credit risks by export credit
insurance policies which cover exporters against the main risks of not receiv¬
ing payment; by guarantees to banks financing export trade which provide an
acceptable security; and by insurance which covers new investments against
risks of expropriation, blocked remittances, or war.
1 Legislation has been introduced and is proposed to transfer the department’s responsi¬
bilities in relation to employment and training services (see p. 377) and safety and health
at work (see p. 389) to independent commissions. The reorganisation of the youth
employment service is also proposed (see p. 374).
The Foreign
and
Commonwealth
Office
Overseas
Development
Administration
The Department
of Health and
Social Security
The Home
Office
GOVERNMENT 53
The use of ECGD services is optional, premiums being charged at rates
which enable the department to be run as a self-supporting business.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office, under the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, provides, mainly through diplomatic
missions, the means of communication between the British Government and
other governments and international governmental organisations for the dis¬
cussion and negotiation of all matters, including economic issues, falling within
the field of international relations. In particular the department is responsible
for alerting the British Government to the implications of developments over¬
seas; for protecting British interests overseas, including commercial interests;
for protecting British citizens abroad; and for explaining British policies to,
and wherever possible cultivating friendly relations with, governments and
peoples overseas. The department is also responsible for the discharge of
British responsibilities in the associated states (mainly for defence and external
affairs) and dependent territories. In the dependent territories, each of which
has its own internal administration, the British Government is finally respons¬
ible for good government and for the relations between these territories and
other countries. The Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary is the United
Kingdom representative in the Council of Ministers of the European Com¬
munity.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary is also responsible for the Overseas
Development Administration (ODA), which manages the British Govern¬
ment’s overseas aid programme. The day-to-day administration of the ODA
is in charge of a Minister for Overseas Development.
The Department of Health and Social Security, under the Secretary of State
for Social Services, is responsible (in England) for the administration of the
National Health Service; the social services provided by local authorities for
the elderly and handicapped, socially deprived families, and children in care;
and for certain aspects of public health, including hygiene. From ist April
1974 it will take over responsibility for the main part of the school health
service from the Department of Education and Science. Throughout Great
Britain it is responsible for the payment of benefits and collection of contri¬
butions under the national insurance and industrial injuries schemes and the
payment of family allowances. The department is concerned in making recipro¬
cal social security arrangements with other countries and in the administration
of the EEC social security regulations for immigrant workers. It also represents
the United Kingdom on the World Health Organisation.
Through its Supplementary Benefits Commission the department is respon¬
sible for determining awards of non-contributory benefits and Family Income
Supplements, for reception centres, and for assessing the means of people
applying for legal aid. The department also has responsibilities in connection
with pensions and welfare services (including in some cases the provision of
medical and surgical treatment) for war pensioners in the United Kingdom,
the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and, through its various agencies, for
United Kingdom war pensioners living in other countries.
The Home Office deals mainly with the domestic functions of government not
assigned to other departments. The Home Secretary is the channel of com¬
munication between the Sovereign and her subjects, and between the United
Kingdom Government and the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. His
The Central
Office of
Information
The Board of
Inland Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
main functions are the maintenance of the Queen’s peace and the enforcement
of rules made for the internal well-being of the community. He also advises
the Queen on the exercise of the prerogative of mercy.
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are: the police
service; the prison service; the treatment of offenders, including juvenile
offenders; the probation and after-care service; the organisation of magistrates’
courts; legislation on criminal justice; the criminal injuries compensation
scheme; the fire service; civil defence; the law relating to the conduct of
parliamentary and local government elections; public safety; immigration
control of aliens and Commonwealth citizens; naturalisation of aliens, general
questions and individual cases relating to British nationality and citizenship
of the United Kingdom and Colonies; and community relations.
Other matters include: receiving and submitting addresses and petitions to
the Sovereign and preparing presentations to Parliament; preparing patents
of nobility for peers and formal proceedings for the bestowal of honours;
making and receiving requests for the extradition of criminals; scrutinising
by-laws made by local authorities; granting licences for scientific experiments
on animals; ordering the exhumation and removal of bodies; supervising the
control of explosives, firearms and dangerous drugs; deciding general policies
on the laws of liquor licensing and shops; and general policy on the law relating
to music and dancing.
The Central Office of Information is a common service department which
produces information and publicity material, and supplies publicity services
required by other government departments which are responsible for the
policy expressed in its wrork. In the United Kingdom, it conducts government
press, television and poster advertising, produces booklets, leaflets, films,
television material, exhibitions, photographs and other visual material, and
distributes departmental press notices. For the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office it supplies British information posts overseas with press, radio and
television material, books, graphics, magazines, reference services, films,
exhibitions, photographs, display and reading-room material; and manages
schemes for promoting the overseas sale of British periodicals and newspapers.
It provides exhibition services (except for trade and cultural exhibitions); and
it organises tours (other than those sponsored by the British Council- see p.
412) for visitors officially invited to Britain. There are nine regional informa¬
tion offices in England, which provide services for the home departments and
assist the overseas services by the provision of material and by arranging tours
for overseas visitors; similar services are supplied on an agency basis by the
information staffs of the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Offices.
The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax
and surtax, corporation tax, capital gains tax, stamp duty, estate duty and
certain other direct taxes, and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any
matters connected with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of real
property for such purposes as compensation for compulsory purchase, local
rates in England and Wales, and estate duty; and it collects tithe redemption
annuities.
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales the Attorney
General and the Solicitor General—appear on behalf of the Crown in import¬
ant civil and criminal proceedings and in proceedings before international
tribunals such as the international court at The Hague and the European
GOVERNMENT
55
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
The Department
for National
Savings
Ordnance
Survey
Commission and Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg. The Attorney
General is the senior legal adviser to the Government. He has the ultimate
responsibility for the enforcement of the criminal law and his consent is
necessary before proceedings for a number of criminal offences can be com¬
menced; the Director of Public Prosecutions is subject to his superintendence.
Legal proceedings for the enforcement of public rights and on behalf of the
interests of charity are conducted in his name and the functions of the Queen’s
Proctor, who has certain duties connected with the operation of the divorce
laws, are exercised under his direction. The Attorney General is also spokes¬
man for the Lord Chancellor in the House of Commons on matters affecting
the administration of justice. The Solicitor General is subject to the authority
of the Attorney General, with the same rights and duties. The Law Officers,
who are appointed from among the leading members of the English Bar and
are always members of the House of Commons, are assisted by a small
professional staff.
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an
eminent ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar and carrying Cabinet rank.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian
of the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is the minister primarily responsible
for the administration of the courts and of the law. The Home Secretary has
important responsibilities in respect of the criminal law (see p. 96) but the
Lord Chancellor appoints the justices of the peace and recommends to the
Crown most other appointments to the judiciary in England and Wales. His
responsibility for the courts and for their administrative staff is exercised
through six regional (or circuit) offices and their sub-offices.
The Lord Chancellor is further responsible for the reform of the law, for
appointing the members of the Law Commission, and for presenting the
reports of the Commission to Parliament. He is also concerned with court
procedure (see p. 97).
In addition, the Lord Chancellor is a leading member of the Judicial Com¬
mittee of the Privy Council; he appoints the chairmen of certain administrative
tribunals in England and Wales, and (with the Secretary of State for Scotland)
the members of the Council on Tribunals; and he is responsible for the
administration of the Judge Advocate General’s Department,1 the department
of the Official Solicitor2 and the Public Record Office (which preserves, and
provides access to, the national archives).
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
the National Savings Bank, National Savings Certificates, Premium Savings
Bonds, Government Bonds and stocks on the National Savings Stock register
and the contractual savings scheme, SAYE. The head of the department is the
Director of Savings, who is answerable to the Treasury.
The Ordnance Survey is responsible for the surveying and mapping of Great
Britain. This includes geodetic surveys and associated scientific work, topo¬
graphic surveys and the production of maps at appropriate scales from these
1 The Judge Advocate General’s Department advises the Secretary of State for Defence
and the Defence Council on legal matters arising out of the administration of military
law, and reviews the proceedings of army and air force courts martial (see p. 97).
2 The Official Solicitor is concerned with the interests of minors and people with a
mental disability involved in proceedings in the High Court, who would otherwise not
be represented. In addition he protects the interests of people committed to prison for
contempt of court, acts as Receiver for people with a mental disability, and can be
appointed as Judicial Trustee in complex and disputed trusts.
56
The Paymaster
General’s Office
The Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
The Ministry of
Posts and
Telecom¬
munications
The Department
of the
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
surveys. The department also undertakes a considerable amount of agency
work for other departments, particularly the Ministry of Defence, and for the
Institute of Geological Sciences and the Land Registry.
The Paymaster General’s Office acts generally as a banker for government
departments other than the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and
Excise, for which separate arrangements exist. Money granted by Parliament
is transferred (in such sums as may be required from day to day) from the
Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster General at the Bank of
England. Most departmental payments are made by means of payable orders
drawn on the Paymaster General’s Office; their recipients obtain payments
through the commercial banks, whose accounts at the Bank of England are in
turn reimbursed by the Paymaster General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many public
service pensions.
The Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, whose director is also the
Registrar General for England and Wales, is concerned with the regulation of
civil marriages, the registration of births, marriages and deaths in England and
Wales, and control of the registration services. Its work also includes the pre¬
paration and publication of reports on vital, medical and demographic statistics,
taking the periodical census of the population, and, through the social survey
division, conducting research into the attitudes and circumstances of indivi¬
duals through direct contact with sample members of the general public or of
particular groups.
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is responsible to Parliament
for the Post Office and Cable and Wireless Limited. He also has responsibilities
for broad questions of national broadcasting policy and may issue directions
to the British Broadcasting Corporation and to the Independent Broadcasting
Authority on technical and other matters.
The Ministry has regulatory control of radio transmission and reception; it
is also responsible for the issue of radio operating licences and the sale (through
the Post Office) of television broadcast receiving licences.
The Ministry represents the United Kingdom in the Universal Postal and
International Telecommunication Unions and all related inter-governmental
bodies.
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number of
government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his department
include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and drafting subordinate
legislation, representing other departments in court, and giving general advice
on the interpretation and application of the law. The department undertakes
a considerable amount of conveyancing connected with the transfer of real
property, administers residuary estates (estates undisposed of by will) of cer¬
tain deceased persons, and deals with the outstanding property and rights of
dissolved companies. The Statutory Publications Office is staffed and controlled
by the Treasury Solicitor, who reports annually on its work to the Statute
Law Committee (a body appointed by the Lord Chancellor from among the
judiciary and legal profession in England and Scotland).
Some government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury
Solicitor for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a proportion
of the work and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice and, often,
GOVERNMENT
57
Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
The Welsh
Office
for litigation and conveyancing; others, whose administrative work is based
on or deals with a code of specialised law or involves a great deal of legal work,
have their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also the Queen’s Proctor.
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office (HMSO) is the central purchasing organisa¬
tion responsible for supplying the home and overseas public service with paper,
printing, binding, books, periodicals, office supplies, and office machinery.
The department also provides services, such as duplicating, addressing, photo¬
copying, micro-copying, distribution and repair of office machinery.
As publisher for Parliament and the Government, HMSO produces a wide
range of printed matter in its eight printing works and through private printers
under contract. It operates six binding works, two of wrhich are involved in the
repair of manuscripts from national archives. Official publications are sold by
government bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Manchester, Belfast, Bristol,
Cardiff and Birmingham, and through agents in Britain and overseas. HMSO
is also the United Kingdom agent for European Community publications, and
for those of the principal international organisations. The Controller is
Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament, and the copyright of all British Govern¬
ment documents is vested in him.
The Department of Trade and Industry, under a Secretary of State (who also
holds the historic office of the President of the Board of Trade), is responsible
for helping British industry and commerce to improve their economic and
technological strength and competitiveness by establishing a general frame¬
work of requirements, incentives and restraints within which firms can operate
to their individual advantage. The department’s operations, for which the
Secretary of State is finally responsible, are carried out in four functional
wings, each under a minister, assisted by a Parliamentary Under-Secretary of
State. They are concerned with the development of general industrial and
commercial policy and government relations with industry, including privately
owned manufacturing industries, the service industries and those nationalised
industries for which the department is responsible (electricity, gas, coal, atomic
energy, steel, airlines and airports); the administration of legislation affecting
industry and commerce, including insurance and company law, standards,
weights and measures, patents and trade marks, and the development and
co-ordination of the Government’s policies in relation to the consumer; over¬
seas commercial relations and exports, including Britain’s entry into the
European Economic Community, export promotion services, export credit,
and tariff questions; regional industrial development, including regional
advisory services to industry, investment grants and tourism; policy on
monopolies, mergers and restrictive practices; energy policy; civil aviation
questions, including measures for the development of civil aviation, research
relating to air navigation, the design, development and production of civil
aircraft and the promotion of safety and efficiency in their use; and policy
towards the aerospace industry and towards civil aerospace research, develop¬
ments and projects.
The Secretary of State for Wales has full responsibility in Wales for ministerial
functions relating to child care, health, housing, local government, primary
and secondary education, town and country planning, new towns, water and
sewerage, roads, forestry, tourism, national parks and historic buildings, and
shared responsibility for the administration of urban grants to areas of acute
58
SCOTLAND
The Department
of Agriculture
and Fisheries
for Scotland
The Scottish
Development
Department
The Scottish
Economic
Planning
Department
The Scottish
Education
Department
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
social deprivation, and (with the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food)
for agriculture in Wales. He has, in addition, a general oversight of government
policy in Wales, and certain responsibilities relating to the national library
and the national museum. The Welsh Office maintains close and continuous
working relationships with the government departments mainly concerned
with economic and social planning through the Welsh Planning Board and
Welsh Council. The Welsh Office is centred in Cardiff; there is also a small
ministerial office in London.
The Secretary of State is responsible in Scotland for a wide range of functions
which in England and Wales are divided among a number of departmental
ministers. He also works closely with ministers in charge of Great Britain
departments on topics of special significance to Scotland within their respon¬
sibility. He is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State (who has
special responsibilities in relation to oil development in Scotland) and three
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law
Officers.
The Secretary of State’s statutory functions are discharged by five mam
departments of the Scottish Office (the Department of Agriculture and Fisher¬
ies for Scotland, the Scottish Development Department, the Scottish Econo¬
mic Planning Department, the Scottish Education Department, and the
Scottish Home and Health Department). He is advised and assisted (parti¬
cularly on questions such as the allocation of resources and forward planning,
with which more than one of the departments are concerned) by a management
group, consisting of the five heads of departments under the chairmanship of
the Permanent Under-Secretary of State. The day-to-day administration of
the departments is conducted in Edinburgh, but there are representatives in
London for liaison and parliamentary duties.
The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland has a general re¬
sponsibility for, and in most cases administers, government measures for the
promotion and development of farming in Scotland. It also has responsibilities
for the oversight and protection of the Scottish inshore, deep sea and fresh¬
water fisheries, and functions relating to certain harbours.
The Scottish Development Department is concerned with a number of services
affecting the physical development of Scotland, such as town and country
planning, housing, roads, water supplies and sewerage, coast protection, flood
prevention, building standards and the prevention of river and air pollution
(most of which are administered locally by town and county councils). The
department is also responsible for general policy in regard to local govern¬
ment organisation and finance.
The Scottish Economic Planning Department advises the Secretary of State
for Scotland on matters relating to industrial and economic development in
Scotland including the Scottish aspects of regional policies in both a British
and European Community context, and on the development of North Sea oil
resources. It is also responsible for general policy in relation to the Secretary
of State’s responsibilities for Highlands and Islands development, transport,
electricity, tourism, new towns, and rural development.
The Scottish Education Department is responsible for supervising the
administration of the Education (Scotland) Acts and for guiding the develop¬
ment of public education in Scotland in all its forms. The department s
GOVERNMENT
59
The Scottish
Home and
Health
Department
Other
Administrative
Departments
The Law
Officers and
Legal
Departments
functions include: the regulation of the training of teachers and of teachers’
salaries; the control and distribution of specific Exchequer grants in aid of
educational expenditure by voluntary bodies; the award of students’ allow¬
ances to those taking full-time courses at universities and colleges of education
and comparable courses at other institutions. The department, through its
Social Work Services Group, has a responsibility for the guidance of local
authorities in their provision and development of social work services. It is
also concerned with sport in Scotland, including the financing of the Scottish
Sports Council, and with the development of the arts in Scotland, having
responsibility in this connection for the administration of the National Galleries
of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum (including the Scottish United
Services Museum), the National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, and the
National Library of Scotland.
The Scottish Home and Health Department is responsible for: (a) the central
administration of functions relating to law and order; and (b) the administra¬
tion of the National Health Service in Scotland. Under (a) the Department is
concerned with the police service, criminal justice and legal aid and is directly
responsible for the administration of penal institutions. It also has responsi¬
bility for legislation relating to public service superannuation schemes in
Scotland and for the administration of the teachers and National Health
Service superannuation schemes. The Home and Health Department is the
central authority in Scotland for the fire service, for civil defence, and for
legislation concerning shops, theatres, cinemas, licensed premises and land
tenure matters.
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish
departments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the
Secretary of State. Such departments include the Department of the Registrar-
General for Scotland (the General Register Office); the Scottish Record Office;
and the Department of the Registers of Scotland. There are also Scottish
branches of the Great Britain and United Kingdom departments under the
direction of controllers, who are responsible for ensuring that the execution in
Scotland of the policy and procedure of their departments is in accordance with
Scottish conditions and needs.
The Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the
Solicitor General for Scotland) are the chief legal advisers to the Government
on Scottish questions and the principal representatives of the Crown for the
purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is also closely concerned
with questions of legal policy and administration and is himself responsible
for the institution and direction of all prosecutions on indictment in Scotland,
and the control of summary prosecutions in the sheriff court, which are
conducted by officials of the Procurator Fiscal Service.
In some of this work the Lord Advocate is assisted by the Lord Advocate’s
Department and the Scottish Courts Administration. The members of the
Lord Advocate’s Department also act as legal advisers on Scottish questions
to certain government departments who have no Scottish legal adviser of their
own. The work relevant to prosecutions is centred in the Crown Office in
Edinburgh.
The Parliamentary Draftsmen for Scotland, incorporated in the Lord
Advocate’s Department, are responsible to the minister concerned and to the
Law Officers for the drafting of government Bills affecting the Law of Scotland.
6o
The Scottish
Courts
Administration
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The Ministry of
Commerce
Ministry of
Community
Relations
The Ministry of
Development
The Ministry of
Finance
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Scottish Courts Administration has a general responsibility to the Secre¬
tary of State for the organisation, administration and staffing of the courts
and court offices, and is responsible to the Lord Advocate for certain functions
in the field of law, including the programme of the Scottish Law Commission,
the jurisdiction and procedure of the Scottish courts, enforcement of judg¬
ments and proposals for the reform of the law.
As at September 1973, the Northern Ireland departments included the
Ministries of Home Affairs, Agriculture and Education (which have functions
indicated by their titles) and:
The Ministry of Commerce is concerned with industrial information and
statistical services; the progress of industrial production and trade in Northern
Ireland; the development of existing enterprises and the attraction of new
ones; and the administration of schemes of financial assistance to industry.
The department also has responsibilities in relation to electricity and gas under¬
takings; harbours; the tourist trade; the regulation and inspection of mines
and quarries; mineral development; scientific development and the provision
of scientific and technical services to industrial and commercial undertakings,
local authorities and central departments; weights and measures; the registra¬
tion of companies and friendly societies; and the administration of the
Assurance Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance Acts.
The Ministry of Community Relations is the department responsible for
formulating and sponsoring policies for the improvement of community rela¬
tions in Northern Ireland, and for assisting in the administration of the public
services to this end. It is also the department responsible for the administration
of the Social Need (Grants) Act (Northern Ireland) 1970, under which the
Ministry makes grants to local authorities and voluntary bodies for a wide
variety of social provision in urban areas of special social need.
The Ministry of Development is responsible for planning, land development
values, new town development, comprehensive development or redevelopment
of town and village centres, expansion of existing towns, conservation, local
government, housing, rent restriction, slum clearance and redevelopment,
water supplies and sewerage. The department is also responsible for public
transport, freight licensing and the planning, construction and maintenance of
roads, including motorways.
The basic functions of the Ministry of Finance are the settlement of financial
questions with the United Kingdom Treasury, the financial control of
Northern Ireland departments, and the management of the Civil Service. In
connection with these functions the Ministry is responsible for the control
of borrowing, the issue of Ulster Savings securities, government loans to
local or public authorities, the collection of stamp duties, death duties and
certain excise duties, the collection of land purchase annuities and the staffing,
recruitment and training of the Civil Service and the regulation of its conditions.
Other responsibilities of the Ministry include the provision of buildings for
the Northern Ireland departments and the Post Office, the preservation of
ancient monuments, the Public Record Office, property valuation, the fixing
and collection of the regional rate, ordnance survey, the Land Registry and
the Registry of Deeds, censuses, the registration of births, deaths and mar¬
riages, and certain duties in relation to charities and charitable funds.
The Ministry of
Health and
Social Services
Office of the
Director of Public
Prosecutions
The
Development
of the
Modern
Service
GOVERNMENT 6l
The Ministry of Health and Social Services is responsible for a wide range of
functions in Northern Ireland, including all aspects of the health, hospital
and personal social services; employment and industrial training; industrial
conciliation and arbitration machinery; and the administration of the social
security schemes, such as national insurance, supplementary benefits and
family allowances.
The functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, include initiating criminal proceedings after consider¬
ing the facts or information brought to his notice by the Chief Constable or
Attorney General or by any other authority or person, representing the Crown
in criminal proceedings, including proceedings for such summary offences
as he considers should be dealt with by him, and initiating, where he thinks
proper, prosecutions for offences against any statutory provision in Northern
Ireland on behalf of any government department, including a department of
the United Kingdom. The Director also has functions in relation to the
granting of bail.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of a
political or judicial office), who is paid wholly and directly out of money voted
by Parliament and works in a civil capacity in a department of government.
There are nearly 700,ooo1 civil servants (one-third of them women), some
278,000 of whom are engaged in the provision of public services—paying
sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes and contributions, running
employment services, staffing prisons, and providing services to industry and
agriculture. About 270,000 are employed in the Ministry of Defence, in¬
cluding the Royal Ordnance factories and Royal Dockyards. The remainder
is about equally divided between: central administrative and policy duties;
service-wide support services, such as accommodation, printing, and informa¬
tion; and services which are largely self-supporting financially, for instance
those provided by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint.
Stability of administration is ensured by the political neutrality of the Service.
Although a civil servant works under the authority and direction of the minister
of the department to which he is appointed, legally he is a servant of the Crown.
A change of minister, whether due to ministerial changes within a government
or the advent of a government of a different political complexion, does not
involve a change of permanent staff.
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years.
Before then, departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying
standards were unknown, there was no central supervision, and political
jobbery was rife. Nineteenth century reforms included the substitution of open
competition for the practice of obtaining Civil Service appointments by favour
or purchase, and the establishment of an independent body, the Civil Service
Commission, to control recruitment. The great expansion in State activity in
the first half of the twentieth century, and the consequent increase in the
numbers of civil servants and the scope of their duties, led to further re¬
organisation, including the creation of service-wide scientific and professional
classes; recruitment was adapted to a developing educational system, and
1 Including part-time staffs—two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent to one
whole-time officer.
62
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
co-ordination between the various departments improved. Civil servants,
though they remained employees of their departments, became members of an
integrated service with common conditions of employment and traditions and
standards of conduct belonging, not to individual departments, but to the
Civil Service as a whole.
More recently the structure and organisation of the Civil Service has again
been under detailed internal scrutiny (as a result of the report of the Fulton
committee1) and is engaged upon a programme of reconstruction and simplifi¬
cation, designed to make it more effective in carrying out its changing tasks.
Civil Service
Structure
General
Category
Science
Category
The structure of the Civil Service, which until recently tended to reflect the
assumption that specific types of work should be allocated to particular groups
of civil servants on the basis of their specialist or vocational qualifications, is at
present being redesigned to provide for a more flexible deployment of staff so
that talent can be used to the best advantage and the highest levels of the Civil
Service seen to be open to people of outstanding ability, whatever their
specialist background or original method of entry to the Service. These
structural changes involve the abolition of classes, and are being allied with
personnel management policies designed to ensure that, although work
requiring specialist skill is always done by appropriately qualified individuals,
people with the necessary aptitudes are given suitably wide experience to fit
them for higher posts.
At the top levels of the Civil Service, where staff are predominantly con¬
cerned with higher management and policy, there is now an open and unified
structure, with three grades—permanent secretary, deputy secretary and
under secretary—available for all types of post. Posts at these levels are filled
by the people most suitable for them without regard to their academic back¬
ground or to whether they were previously in a specialist or generalist stream.
At other levels the structure is being based on a system of categories which
are pay and grading structures and occupational groups which are groups of
staff within each category, whose members have common personnel manage¬
ment and recruitment needs. Three new categories have so far been created,
and the groups of staff that are so far members of them are shown below.
The Administration Group contains some 216,000 staff. Their functions range
from the co-ordination and improvement of government machinery and the
formulation of advice to ministers on matters of policy to the performance of
normal clerical duties connected with the running of departmental business at
lower levels.
The Economist Group contains about 200 staff. They provide economic
advice and undertake economic analysis.
The Statistician Group (some 350 staff) undertakes the collection and
analysis of statistics required for government policies.
The Information Officer Group (some 1,300 staff) carries out a variety of
specialised press, publicity, public relations and information work.
The Science Category contains the Science Group (16,000 staff), which is
responsible for conducting scientific research and testing in numerous govern¬
ment laboratories and testing establishments, and for providing advice on
1 The committee appointed by the Government in 1966 under the chairmanship of
Lord Fulton, then Vice-Chancellor of the University of Sussex, to examine the struc¬
ture, recruitment and management, including management training, of the Civil Service
which published its report on the Civil Service in June 1968.
Professional and
Technical
Category
Others
Typists
Other Support
Staff
Industrials
The
Diplomatic
Service
The
Northern Ireland
Civil Service
Public Services
of Overseas
Dependent
Territories
GOVERNMENT 63
scientific policy. Its members also participate in the planning and management
of advanced technology procurement projects.
The Professional and Technical Category contains some 36,500 staff and
includes a range of professionals—architects, surveyors, quantity surveyors,
and electrical and mechanical engineers—and apppropriate supporting staff,
whose main function is to plan and oversee a wide range of government
construction and procurement activities, and to carry out certain inspection
and regulatory activities.
The three categories already established account for over half the non¬
industrial staff; the remainder are in due course to be allocated to one of the
three main categories or, where this is impossible, to additional categories to
be set up for the purpose. Such staff include those in a number of ‘general
service’ classes (that is to say, classes whose members serve in a number of
departments), for instance, the medical and legal classes.
The Civil Service employs about 24,000 shorthand typists, audio typists, and
copy typists, who work mainly in small groups, and about 3,700 personal
secretaries who work mainly to senior civil servants.
There are about 25,000 other support staff, including paperkeepers, office
cleaners and messengers. (As far as practicable, posts of messengers are
reserved for ex-servicemen, although other men and women over the age of
30 may be recruited.)
There are about 180,000 industrials, mainly manual workers in government
industrial establishments.
The Diplomatic Service is a separate self-contained service of the Crown,
which provides the staff (comprising some 6,300 civil servants) for service in
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom diplomatic
missions and consular posts in foreign and in independent Commonwealth
countries. Its functions include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas
governments and conducting business in international organisations; promot¬
ing British exports and the advancement of British trade; presenting British
ideas, policies and objectives to the people of overseas countries; and protecting
British interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with
that of the Home Civil Service; it also has Secretarial, Communications and
Security Guard branches. Various specialists and advisers from home depart¬
ments or the armed forces may serve at overseas posts on secondment or
attachment to the Diplomatic Service.
Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service which, subject to regional differ¬
ences, is modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain, recruitment being
effected through its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff
between the two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only, and is a matter
for departmental agreement in individual cases.
Britain’s dependent territories fill vacancies in their public services by the
appointment of suitably qualified local candidates wherever possible; but when
vacancies cannot be filled by this means the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, the Overseas Development Administration (see p. 53) and the Crown
64
Recruitment
Training
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations are asked to recruit
other candidates, principally from the United Kingdom.
Recruitment to the Civil Service rests with the Civil Service Commission
which, working in conjunction with departments, is responsible for ensuring
that staff are selected on the basis of fair and open competition, but the
appointment of a successful candidate is made by the department in which he
is to be employed. Junior staff, especially those engaged in clerical and manual
work, are selected almost entirely by departments. The Commission, however,
always issues the ‘certificate of qualification’ necessary for permanent appoint¬
ment.
For the administration group, which forms the central part of the Home
Civil Service, entry is at three levels relating broadly to three levels in the
British educational system: university honours degrees; advanced (‘A’) levels
in the General Certificate of Education (GCE); and ordinary ( O ) levels in the
GCE. The selection procedure for the highest of these levels—the Administra¬
tion Trainee entry—comprises qualifying tests, followed by a series of tests
and interviews at the Civil Service Selection Board and an interview7 by the
Final Selection Board. For most other entries selection from among those
possessing the necessary academic qualifications is normally by interview only.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications in the subject concerned, and selection is on the basis of past
record and by interview.
In all except the smallest government departments, there are full-time training
officers and instructors whose task it is to help identify the training needs of the
staff and to organise courses, both general and technical, to provide for their
varying requirements. The number of management courses run within the
Civil Service, including those provided at the Civil Service College, has
increased substantially during recent years. Some use is also made of external
management courses of business schools, the Administrative Staff College,
Henley, and other centres.
Methods of training within the Civil Service combine lectures, discussion
groups, instructional visits and case-studies with the use of many audio-visual
aids such as closed-circuit television and video-tape recordings, instructional
films and programmed learning: there is also a considerable amount of on-the-
job’ training. Civil servants are regularly moved between the different branches
of their department and sometimes between departments so that they can gain
as wide an experience as possible of Civil Service work.
In order that they may continue their education, arrangements are made for
the release of civil servants under the age of 18 usually on one day a week ( day
release’ schemes) to attend appropriate courses. Adult staff are assisted
financially to undertake, mainly in their own time, private studies leading to
recognised educational or professional qualifications in approved subjects.
There are also opportunities for civil servants in mid-career to obtain fellow¬
ships or otherwise to go on sabbatical leave to undertake research in areas of
interest to themselves or their departments.
Training is co-ordinated by the Personnel-Management (Training) Division
of the Civil Service Department which is responsible, in conjunction with the
Civil Service College, for the analysis and determination of training needs to be
met centrally in the Civil Service, and which exercises advisory functions in
regard to departmental training. All central training is provided by the Civil
Service College which offers a wide range of courses and seminars (some of a
Promotion
Conditions of
Service
GOVERNMENT 65
broad developmental nature and others more job-related) for civil servants,
including those in specialist groups, at various levels up to that of Under
Secretary. Subjects covered include structure and machinery of government,
organisation and staff management, economics, statistics, industrial growth,
social administration, operational research, computers and information systems.
The College also provides courses on European institutions and their
working, and is developing links in a variety of matters, including training,
with other European countries.
A period of probation (varying according to grade, with extensions in certain
instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the Civil Service.
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted examinations and
partly by the departments themselves. Promotions or appointments to most
of the highest positions in the Service, for instance, permanent secretaries,
principal establishment officers and principal finance officers, are approved by
the Prime Minister, who is advised in these matters by the head of the Home
Civil Service.
The consideration governing all promotion is the advancement of the
efficiency of the public service—the criterion being the fitness of an officer for a
more senior, responsible post. Normally promotion is from grade to grade, but
a procedure of accelerated promotion has been worked out for administration
trainees and officers who have shown exceptional promise but are outside the
age and salary limit for a particular grade.
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service
as a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council, which is composed
jointly of official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate
sections of the service is provided through the various staff associations which
civil servants are encouraged to join (for instance, the Civil and Public
Services Association, the Society of Civil Servants and the Institution of
Professional Civil Servants), and through departmental Whitley Councils.
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is based on a fair
comparison with that paid for similar work outside the Service and usually he
receives annual increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to
which he belongs. In addition, although a civil servant holds office at the
pleasure of the Crown and may therefore be dismissed at any time, in practice
he enjoys a considerable measure of security of tenure. Thus every civil
servant who is capable and efficient may reasonably expect a full career in
the public service and is entitled to receive redundancy payments and pension
benefits.
Civil servants are required to work a specified number of hours each week.
Certain grades are eligible for overtime pay for any hours worked in excess of
the standard hours, but this does not apply to the higher grades whose salaries
are determined on the assumption that they will work such long hours as may
be necessary without additional pay. The standard working week for office
staffs is 41 hours in London and 42 hours in the provinces. Annual leave varies
according to grade and length of service up to a maximum of six weeks, that is,
30 working days a year.
Sick leave on full pay, less any national insurance benefit received, may be
granted to civil servants for up to six months in any 12 months, and on
reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s sick leave in any four years; any
officer whose health is permanently impaired may be retired on medical
grounds.
66
Political and
Private Activities
Security
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The position and functions of a civil servant remain the same whichever
political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government of the day
irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which he is free, as a
private individual, to participate in political activities varies according to grade.
For this purpose civil servants are divided into three groups: those who are
completely free to engage in all kinds of national and local political activities
(although if they intend standing for Parliament, they must resign their
appointment before nomination day on the understanding that if not elected
they will be reinstated in their previous capacity within a week of the declara¬
tion of the election result); those who are free, subject to the acceptance of the
need for discretion and with the permission of the department, to take part in
most activities except parliamentary candidature; and those who are debarred
from national political activities though they may seek permission to take part
in local government political activities. In the non-industrial Civil Service, the
completely free groups are members of the minor classes such as cleaners and
messengers. The intermediate group includes mainly members of the clerical
and typing grades and the granting of permission by the department depends,
broadly, on the nature of the work done. The remainder are not allowed to
take part in national political activities. Permission is usually granted to
members of all groups to engage in local political activities to the maximum
extent consistent with the reputation of the Civil Service for political im¬
partiality and the avoidance of any conflict with official duties. Where per¬
mission is granted, it is subject to a code of discretion and to the obligation to
notify the department of election or co-option to a local council.
All civil servants enjoy the right to register their private political opinions
on appropriate occasions, for instance, at general or local authority elections.
They may also engage in such private activities as they wish, provided that
these do not in any way conflict with their official duties, nor with the pro¬
visions of the Official Secrets Acts 19111 and 1920, and the Prevention of
Corruption Act 1906. However, since a civil servant must not use his official
position to further his private interests, he is subject to certain restrictions in
commerce and business: for instance, he may not hold private interests in
public contracts and he may not use official information in writing, broad¬
casting or lecturing without the approval of his department.
The political views of civil servants are not as a general rule a matter of official
concern, but there are some civil service duties in which secrecy is so vitally
important to State security that the Government does not feel itself justified
in employing anyone to carry them out whose reliability is in doubt. For this
reason no one who is known to be a member of, or actively associated or in
sympathy with, the Communist Party or with Fascist organisations, or is liable
to be a security risk in any other respect, is employed in connection with secret
work.
Each government department is responsible for its own internal security,
and the Security Service, which operates independently under a Director-
General who is responsible for its efficiency to the Home Secretary, deals with
national security. In addition, there is a Security Commission which, if
requested by the Prime Minister in consultation with the Leader of the
Opposition, may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public
service and, in certain circumstances, advise whether any change in security
arrangements is necessary or desirable.
1 Proposals have been made to modify this Act by limiting the areas in which the
security of the State requires the protection of the criminal law.
GOVERNMENT
6?
Relationship
between
Central and
Local
Government
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Government on a local basis has been part of Britain’s administrative system
for many centuries. In its present shape much of it dates back to the late
nineteenth century when the conception of a comprehensive system of locally
elected councils to manage various services provided for the benefit of the
community was first incorporated in statute law. Since that time there has
been a large increase in the population, and a massive transformation in the
range, complexity and scale of local authority functions. Because of this, local
government in Greater London was reorganised in the 1960s and in England
and Wales a new local government structure will replace the existing one on
1 st April 1974, while a similar reorganisation in Scotland is proposed for
1975. Changes in the structure and functions of local government in Northern
Ireland are to be made in October 1973.
Local government is conducted by elected local authorities, acting in accor¬
dance with powers and duties conferred on them by Parliament. The actual
administration and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits are the
responsibility of the local authority, but, in respect of certain services, Acts of
Parliament dealing with local government give ministers of the Crown defined
powers, some of which are designed to secure a measure of national uniformity
in the standard of service provided or to safeguard public health, while others
are for the protection of the rights of individual citizens. For some services
the minister concerned has wide powers of supervision; for others there are
strictly limited powers. Government policy is to ensure that central govern¬
ment controls over local authorities are kept to a minimum.
In addition to their statutory powers, ministers concerned with local
government give assistance to local authorities by the general issue of advisory
circulars and by giving advice in individual cases.
The Department of the Environment is the main link between local
authorities and the central Government in England; in Scotland the Scottish
Development Department is responsible for general policy in regard to local
government; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland, the
Ministry of Development.
Until April 1974 the main pattern of local government organisation in England
and Wales (outside the Greater London area) is a division of the country
into county boroughs and administrative counties. The county boroughs are
separate from the counties and independent of them. The administrative
counties are subdivided into county districts—non-county boroughs, urban
districts and rural districts, the last-named being further divided into parishes.
In all there are some 1,200 authorities (excluding parish councils). Under the
plans for reorganisation these authorities are to be replaced by 53 large new
county authorities (see map on p. 68), within which there will be 369 smaller
district authorities. Both types of authority will have independent, locally
elected councils, and will have separate functions to perform. County authori¬
ties will normally provide the large-scale local government services, while the
districts will be responsible for the more local ones (see p. y0)' However, in
six heavily populated English ‘metropolitan’ counties, responsibility for cer¬
tain large-scale services will be given to the district authorities. In England
populations in the non-metropolitan counties will normally range from
280,000 to about 1‘4 million, and in the metropolitan counties from i*2 to 2‘8
million. District authorities within metropolitan counties will have populations
GOVERNMENT
Constitution
and Election of
Councils
69
of between 175,000 and i-i million; non-metropolitan districts’ populations
will average between 75,000 and 100,000. Existing parish councils (community
councils in Wales) or meetings in rural areas and new parishes in small towns
will serve as focuses for local opinion as bodies with limited powers of
local interest.
The Greater London area is administered by the councils of 32 London
boroughs and the City of London, and by the Greater London Council (GLC).
Scotland, until 1975, is divided into counties, counties of cities, large and
small burghs and districts, each with its own elected council—432 authorities
altogether: 33 county councils (two pairs being combined for certain purposes);
201 town councils (including four for counties of cities—Aberdeen, Dundee,
Edinburgh and Glasgow); and 198 district councils (two counties not being
divided into districts). In 1975 it is proposed that these authorities will be
replaced by nine new regional authorities, divided into 49 districts, and three
virtually all-purpose authorities for the Orkney and Shetland Islands and the
Western Isles. Local community councils are to be formed to express local
views and to take action in the interest of the community.
In Northern Ireland local environmental services are to be the responsibility
of 26 new district councils; area boards responsible to the appropriate central
departments will administer other services at a local level.
Local councils comprise a number of elected councillors (and, in some cases,
though not in Scotland, aldermen elected by the councillors), presided over
by a chairman.
The office of alderman is to be abolished on the reorganisation of local
government. Members of local authorities are unpaid; with the exception of
parish councillors, they can claim an allowance for loss of earnings incurred
while on council business as well as travelling and subsistence allowances.
After the reorganisation of local government, a new code will permit county
and district councillors and those of the Greater London Council and London
borough councils to obtain a flat-rate attendance allowance as of right (without
proof of loss of earnings) on the performance of council business.
Boroughs in England and Wales (the general term includes county
boroughs) have been incorporated by royal charter. In most the chairman is
the Mayor; in the City of London and certain important boroughs, the Lord
Mayor; in the Scottish counties, the Convener; and in the burghs, the Pro¬
vost or Lord Provost. Under the reorganisation the chairman of a district
council will be styled Mayor or Lord Mayor only when a royal charter is
granted to the new authority.
The term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local government is
usually three years. The normal term of office for members of the new local
authorities in England and Wales will be four years. County and district
council elections were held in 1973 in anticipation of the local government
reorganisation in 1974 > the next county council elections will be in 1977 and
every fourth year thereafter. From i975> the metropolitan district elections
will be held for a third of the seats in each year when there is no county
council election; the non-metropolitan district councils can adopt the same
procedure or choose block elections in 197th J979 an<^ every fourth year there¬
after. The normal term of office for GLC and London borough councillors is
now four years. The next GLC elections will be held in 1977, and elections to
the borough councils will take place in 1974* Elections are to be held every
four years in Northern Ireland. Procedure at local government elections in
England and Wales is governed by rules made under the Local Government
7°
Functions and
Services
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Act 1972; in Scotland by the Representation of the People Acts 1949 and
1969; and in Northern Ireland by the Electoral Law Acts (Northern
Ireland) 1962-71, the Electoral Law (Northern Ireland) Orders 1972 and
1973-
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to vote
at a local government election in Great Britain provided that he or she is 18
years of age or over, is a British subject or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is
not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local government
elector for the area for which the election is held. A person qualifies for regis¬
tration as a local government elector if, on the qualifying date for the register
(compiled annually), he or she is resident in the council area. In Northern
Ireland, a person must be 18 years of age or over and must have been born in
Northern Ireland or, alternatively, have resided continuously in Britain for
seven years immediately prior to the qualifying date.
A candidate for election as councillor—man or woman—normally stands
as a representative of one of the national political parties, as a member of an
association representing some local interest, or as an independent. He must be
of British nationality and aged 21 or over. In addition, he must be registered as
a local government elector in the area of the local authority to which he seeks
election; or have resided or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or other pre¬
mises in that area during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day on
which he is nominated as a candidate; or, in that 12 months, have had his
principal or only place of work there. A candidate is also subject to a number of
statutory disqualifications designed to ensure that unsuitable people do not
offer themselves for election.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local
council elections. Administrative counties in Great Britain are divided into
electoral divisions returning one or more councillors in accordance with orders
made by the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland. Districts
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are divided into electoral ‘wards’ and
burghs in Scotland are either divided into wards or, if they are small, left as
single units. For rural district council or parish council elections, each parish
or ward of a parish (or, in some cases, a combination of parishes) forms an
electoral area which returns one or more members. For the purpose of elections
to the Greater London Council, parliamentary constituencies form the
electoral areas, with each constituency returning one councillor. After re¬
organisation it will be the function of three advisory local government
boundary commissions (one for England, including Greater London, one for
Scotland and one for Wales) to review regularly local authority boundaries and
their electoral arrangements.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the returning officer
concerned, and under the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the
purpose. The procedure for local government voting is similar to that for
parliamentary elections, although facilities for postal voting are more res¬
tricted. In Great Britain each elector has one vote for each seat contested in
his electoral area: he need not record all his votes, but must not give more than
one vote for each candidate. In Northern Ireland the 1973 l°cal government
elections were held on the basis of proportional representation.
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such
services as Acts of Parliament require. It may provide additional services under
the permissive powers of a general Act or under powers granted to it by local
or Private Bill legislation.
GOVERNMENT
71
Local authority services may be classified under three heads: environ¬
mental, protective and personal. The environmental services are designed to
secure local good order, amenity and public health. They include town and
country planning, bridge and highway construction and maintenance, street
lighting, public safety on the roads, and the provision of recreation grounds,
parks and similar amenities. Other environmental services are those concerned
with drainage, street cleansing, refuse collection and disposal, litter prevention,
rodent control, sewerage, sewage disposal and the supervision of water sup¬
plies,1 measures for ensuring food hygiene and for preventing air pollution,
and the provision of public lavatories.
The protective services are the police, fire and civil defence services. In the
administration of the police and fire services, neighbouring authorities fre¬
quently combine.
The personal services range from education, housing and the health and
social services to the provision of public entertainment. Education and culture
are promoted by the establishment and maintenance of various types of
schools; by the provision of adult education centres, and art and technical
colleges; by the award of grants and scholarships to students; and by the pro¬
vision of libraries, art galleries and museums. Housing needs are met, as far as
possible, by building new houses (mainly to let), acquiring old houses and
converting them to provide additional accommodation, clearing slums, and
laying down the standards to be maintained in both newly built and older houses.
Personal health and social services cover the provision of ante-natal, post¬
natal and child health clinics, and some residential and day nurseries; the
provision and supervision of midwifery services, health visitors and home
nursing facilities; measures for the prevention of illness and the aftercare of
physically or mentally sick persons; the ambulance service (except in Scotland);
the provision of facilities for vaccination and immunisation against certain
infectious diseases; the provision of domestic help where necessary; and the
services for the permanently disabled or handicapped, for the aged and infirm
and for children deprived of a normal home life.2
Some local authorities engage in trading services, such as passenger trans¬
port, water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services; they also have power
to initiate schemes to attract industrial development.
Local authorities’ responsibilities vary according to the type of authority.
In England and Wales (outside Greater London) county borough councils are
all-purpose authorities, while both county councils and county district
councils have particular functions which they exercise to a considerable
extent independently. In Scotland the councils of the cities are all-purpose
authorities; elsewhere the county councils, town councils and district councils
share responsibilities.
In Greater London the basic units of local government are the London
boroughs; the GLC is responsible only for those services which, by their
nature, require unified administration and control over the whole area. In the
City of London (an area of approximately one square mile in the centre of the
metropolis) the City Corporation exercises the general powers administered,
and duties performed, by the London borough councils.
When local government in England and Wales (outside Greater London) is
1 On i st April 1974 ten new regional water authorities will assume responsibility for
water and sewerage services as a whole in England and Wales (see p. 286). Local
sewerage functions not essential to the authorities’ efficient operation will continue to
be provided by local authorities.
2 Some of these services are to be transferred to new area health authorities within the
National Health Service (see p. 140).
72
Internal
Organisation
of Local
Authorities
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
reorganised, local authority functions will be shared between the county and
district authorities; as far as possible these will be mutually independent.
Broadly, county authorities will be responsible for strategic planning, trans¬
port co-ordination, most highways, weights and measures, and (in England)
refuse disposal. Police and fire services will be operated at county level,
though in some cases counties may need to be grouped for these services.
County councils will also be responsible for education, libraries and the
personal social services (except within the metropolitan counties where the
district authorities will provide these services) and will have reserve powers to
deal with certain broad aspects of housing. District authorities will be respon¬
sible for most local plans and development control, building regulations, most
housing functions, refuse collection (and, in Wales, refuse disposal) and many
other environmental health functions including, in certain instances, sewerage.
The two types of authority will exercise concurrent powers over museums and
art galleries, parks and open spaces, playing fields and swimming baths, coast
protection, and the acquisition and disposal of land for planning purposes,
development and redevelopment.
In Scotland the proposed new regional and district authorities will from
May 1975 exercise a separate range of local government functions in a way
broadly similar to that envisaged for the new authorities in England and
Wales, except that the Orkney and Shetland Islands and the Western Isles,
because of their isolation, will have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland, local environmental services will be administered by
the new district councils, but the Ministry of Development will be responsible
for planning, water, roads and sewerage services which are to be administered
through a chain of divisional and local offices. A series of area boards, res¬
ponsible to appropriate central departments, will administer locally education,
public libraries and the health and personal social services.
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own
internal arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they
discharge their responsibilities. Most councils use the committee system,
whereby questions of policy and principle are decided in full council, and
committees are appointed to administer the various services. Parish councils
are often able to do their work efficiently in full session although they appoint
committees from time to time as necessary. In recent years many councils have
rationalised their organisation by reducing substantially the number of their
committees. Some have established policy advisory or co-ordinating com¬
mittees with powers to originate policy, subject to the approval of the full
council. Advice to enable the new councils to determine appropriate manage¬
ment principles and structures has been given in the report of an official study
group (see Bibliography p. 468).
The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be advisory
or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing orders.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees, except its powers in
connection with raising loans, levying rates (see p. 74)> or making financial
demands on other authorities liable to contribute, which are legally reserved
to the council as a whole.
Local authorities can make arrangements among themselves for the dis¬
charge of their functions. These include co-operation through joint commit¬
tees, joint teams and the loan of staff. One authority may discharge functions
on behalf of another, and may also supply others with a wide range of goods and
services.
GOVERNMENT
73
Officers and
Employees
Local
Government
Finance
The public and the press are admitted to all meetings of the council (and of
committees) but may be excluded while a particular item is considered if the
council (or committee) resolves that publicity for that matter would be pre¬
judicial to the public interest.
The execution of council policy rests with salaried officers and employees, of
whom there may be tens of thousands in the larger authorities. Generally
speaking, councils are free to make such appointments as they think necessary
for carrying out their work. Most of the statutory controls and requirements in
relation to the appointment of staff in England and Wales have been removed
by the Local Government Act 1972.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers, whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial
kind; subordinate officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical
capacity; and manual workers who are employed to do the physical work for
which the council is responsible. Senior staff appointments are usually made
at the instance of the committee or committees particularly concerned; most
junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also respon¬
sible for engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements are always
made in conformity with the council’s set establishment and committees are
informed of any appointments which they have not made themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within
the jurisdiction of the employing council (except for the rare case where the
proposed salary of an officer requires the approval of a government department,
as in the case of the clerk of a county council in England and Wales). They are
based on recommendations made by the Whitley Councils (see p. 65), of
which the largest are the National Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Ad¬
ministrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services and the National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Services (Manual Workers). Conditions
of service and salary scales for senior local government officers are determined
by separate joint committees for England and Wales, and for Scotland. The
local government service in Northern Ireland has its separate joint negotiating
machinery at various levels.
In view of the reorganisation of local government the Government has set up
Staff Commissions to advise on the arrangements for transfer and recruitment
of staff and for the safeguarding of staff interests.
Local authority expenditure in Britain exceeds £8,000 million a year. Capital
expenditure (about 28 per cent of the total in 1972) is normally financed by
borrowing (see p. 75). Housing is the major element of capital expenditure,
representing about a third of the total. Current expenditure by local authorities
accounts for just over a quarter of total current-account spending by public
authorities. The education service represents approximately half of this
expenditure, followed by the police, roads and public lighting, the personal
social services, and sewerage services and refuse disposal. Local authority
current receipts derive from three principal sources: government grants1
(some 46 per cent in 1972); local rates paid by occupiers of land and buildings
(33 Per cent); and rents from council houses, and other income (21 per cent).
Government grants are normally related directly to total local authority
current expenditure and payable in aid of revenues generally (when they are
1 The Government has decided to make substantial improvements to the system of
central government grants and to the present rating system in England and Wales before
the reorganisation of local government in April 1974.
74
Rates
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
known as rate support grants). Grants are also paid towards the cost of
specific services (for example, the police), usually towards current expenditure,
but outright grants are made towards the capital costs of certain services,
mainly principal roads, and annual subsidies are payable for local authority
housing. In 1973-74 the estimated rate support grants in England and Wales
amounts to ,£2,904 million, while grants for specific services represent some
£255 million. The grants for Scotland are £362 million and ^33 million
respectively.
The rate support grants are distributed among authorities in three parts: the
‘needs’ element composed of a basic payment which takes into account total
heads of population and, in particular, the number of children under 15 years
of age, together with supplementary payments which take into account such
factors as the number of children under five years old and of people over 65,
the cost of various stages of education, density of population and road mileage;
the ‘resources’ element which is paid to authorities whose rateable resources
are below the average for all authorities in relation to population; and the
‘domestic’ element which compensates rating authorities for loss of rate in¬
come from reductions in rate poundage which they are required to give to
householders—in England and Wales £0-06 in 1973-74, and in Scotland ^0-15.
Grants are also made towards the cost of rate rebates for people with low
incomes.
In Northern Ireland the district councils will receive specific grants plus a
resources element towards the (mainly local environmental) services they
are to provide.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of non-agricultural land and build¬
ings to meet the cost of local services (after allowing for grants and other
income). Each occupier’s payment is calculated annually by the rating autho¬
rity by multiplying the rateable value of his property (broadly equivalent to its
annual rental value) by the rate poundage—an amount per £ of rateable value
fixed by the authority according to its projected financial needs. Rateable
values are assessed periodically in England and Wales by the Board of Inland
Revenue, which is independent of local authorities. New valuation lists came
into force in 1973. Disputes about rating assessments are heard by local valua¬
tion courts, each consisting of three members of an independent local valuation
panel and then, on appeal, by the Lands Tribunal.
In Scotland valuation is on a basis similar to that in England and Wales;
but it is carried out by assessors appointed by the councils of counties and
counties of cities (from 1975 by regional councils). Appeals are heard by the
valuation appeal committee of each valuation area and thereafter by the Lands
Valuation Appeal Court of the Court of Session. In Northern Ireland the
valuation authority is the Commissioner of Valuation, whose department is
part of the Ministry of Finance.
In England and Wales the responsibility for levying and collecting the rates
lies with the councils of county boroughs and county districts (after 1st April
1974 with the district councils) and London borough councils. Expenditure by
county councils and the Greater London Council is met by contributions from
district councils and London borough councils respectively, who take these
into account in the rates they levy. Rates in Scotland are levied by the town
councils in burghs (including counties of cities) and by the county councils
elsewhere (from 1975 by regional councils). County borough and county of
city authorities, which are responsible for all services in their areas, determine
the rates solely on the basis of their own financial needs; elsewhere, where
GOVERNMENT
Loans
Control of Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
75
services are divided, the rating authorities take account in their rate determina¬
tion of the needs of the other, non-rating, authorities, to which part of the
proceeds are passed to cover services provided by them. In Northern Ireland
rates are to be set by the district councils (district rate) and by the Ministry of
Finance (regional rate); both will be collected by the Ministry.
Agriculture throughout Britain is exempted from rate payments, and in
Scotland and Northern Ireland industry and freight transport are rated at a
half and a quarter, respectively, of their net annual value. Householders in
Great Britain benefit from rate reductions financed by government grant (see
p. 74) and they have the right to pay rates in ten instalments a year. House¬
holders with small incomes are entitled to rebates. Charities pay half the full
rate on property they occupy for charitable purposes but may be given further
reliefs by the rating authorities, which are empowered to reduce or remit the
rates for a wide range of non-profit-making bodies.
Loans may be raised by local authorities to finance capital expenditure either
under general powers conferred by national legislation or under special powers
provided by Acts of Parliament of local application. For items of expenditure
in key sectors (such as education, housing and roads) local authorities in
England and Wales must seek approval from the government department con¬
cerned before raising loans. For other capital expenditure, each authority
receives an annual loan authorisation within which it determines what sums
to borrow and what projects to undertake. The GLC applies annually for
parliamentary sanction to raise the money it needs for capital expenditure. In
Scotland and Northern Ireland the government department responsible for
the service also issues the appropriate loan approvals.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by means of private mortgages,
and by issuing stock upon the Stock Exchange and bonds which may or may
not be quoted on the Stock Exchange. Although these bonds may be for any
period, local authorities normally issue them for one year. Local authorities also
have right of access to the Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exche¬
quer, or, in Northern Ireland, to the Government Loans Fund, for long-term
borrowing to finance a proportion of their reckonable capital payments, and
may borrow temporarily for a limited proportion of their current outstanding
loan debt.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned by a
finance committee, whose function it is to keep the financial policy of the
council under constant review. After April 1974 local authorities in England
and Wales will not be required to appoint a finance committee, but will have to
make proper arrangements for the administration of their financial affairs.
Nearly all the accounts of local authorities in England and Wales are subject to
audit by district auditors appointed by the Secretary of State for the Environ¬
ment; from April 1974 the authorities will be able to choose between the
district auditor and an approved private auditor for the audit of some or all of
their accounts. In Scotland the accounts of each authority are audited by a
professional auditor appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland and paid
by the council concerned, and in Northern Ireland by local government
auditors appointed by the Ministry of Development.
The Government has proposed the establishment of a complaints system for
local government in England (similar arrangements are envisaged for Wales)
to come into effect in April 1974. The system would involve the establishment
of an independent statutory Commission for Local Administration, comprising
?6
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a number of local commissioners, each responsible in a particular area of the
country for investigating citizens’ complaints of maladministration by local
authorities. The commissioners would help local authority councillors to pro¬
tect the rights and interests of their constituents.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by certain public
bodies, including all local authorities.
FIRE
AUTHORITIES
IN GREAT
BRITAIN
Central Control
THE FIRE SERVICES
The fire services in Great Britain are organised on a local basis, subject to
a measure of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England
and Wales) and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire service in
Northern Ireland is controlled by the Fire Authority for Northern Ireland,
which is responsible to the Ministry of Home Affairs. Every part of the United
Kingdom is covered by a public fire brigade.
It is the statutory duty of every fire authority to make provision for fire¬
fighting purposes, and in particular to maintain a brigade of sufficient strength
to meet efficiently all normal requirements. In England and Wales there are
132 local authority fire brigades administered by the county and county
borough councils (with some amalgamations) which are the fire authorities for
their areas1. The Greater London Council is the fire authority for London.
In Scotland the local authorities are grouped in 11 areas each with a single
brigade; with the exception of Glasgow, where the town council of the city
is the responsible authority, each area is administered by a joint committee
representative of the councils of the counties and large burghs in the area.
There are also fire-fighting organisations outside the local authority service,
for instance, those maintained by the Army and Air Force Departments of the
Ministry of Defence; by the Department of Trade and Industry at certain of
their establishments; and by some large industrial and commercial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility for the fire service in England and Wales and in Scotland
respectively. Central control is directed mainly towards ensuring that the
operational efficiency of brigades is maintained. To this end these ministers
have powers, under the Fire Services Acts, to make regulations on such
matters as appointments and promotions, standards of training and equip¬
ment, pensions, and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also required for
reductions in the operational establishments of fire brigades. In matters
affecting the fire brigades as a whole (excluding discipline and conditions of
service), each minister is advised by the appropriate Central Fire Brigades
Advisory Council, consisting of officers of the respective home departments,
representatives of the local authority associations, and of the associations
representing members of fire brigades, and other persons with special qualifi¬
cations, appointed by the minister concerned. The National Joint Council
for Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades and the National Joint Council for Chief
Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades are the negotiating bodies on
ranks, pay and conditions of service of members of the brigades in Great
Britain.
1 As a result of reorganisation under the Local Government Act 1972, the number of
brigades will, on 1st April 1974, be reduced to 55. These will be administered by the
new metropolitan county and county councils. The position in London will remain
unchanged.
Establishment
Schemes
Equipment
Operational
Methods
Special Services
GOVERNMENT 77
Inspectorates of fire services advise the ministers on operational and
technical matters.
Each fire authority must draw up a scheme showing the establishment of
officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and
location of fire stations and the number and type of appliances considered
necessary for the provision of fire cover for its area. Establishment schemes vary
according to the fire risks in the area concerned, the strength of individual
brigades ranging from eight whole-time and 89 part-time men (in Merioneth¬
shire) to 4,850 whole-time men (in Greater London). In the whole of England
and Wales there are about 25,200 whole-time and 17,800 part-time firemen,
operating more than 4,130 fire-fighting appliances (including pumps, turntable
ladders, water tenders, and emergency tenders and hose-laying lorries) housed
in some 1,600 fire stations. In Scotland there are approximately 3,000 whole¬
time and 2,960 part-time firemen, 600 fire-fighting appliances, and 350 fire
stations.
It is the duty of every fire authority to buy such appliances and equipment as
may be necessary to meet efficiently all normal fire-fighting requirements in
their area. Certain items of equipment are standardised so that there is com¬
plete interchangeability when a fire is attended by men and appliances from
more than one brigade. The principal types of fire-fighting appliances are
bought by fire authorities to requirement specifications approved by the Home
Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland, on the advice of the respec¬
tive Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. These specifications ensure that
minimum standards are maintained and at the same time allow sufficient free¬
dom of design to meet special circumstances and encourage further develop¬
ments.
Each fire authority must appoint a chief fire officer (firemaster in Scotland)
for its fire brigade. The appointment must be approved by the Home Secretary
or by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Central control is exercised by the chief fire officer from brigade head¬
quarters. Divisional officers, who are in charge of the geographical divisions
into which most areas are divided, are responsible for mobilising their forces
to deal with outbreaks of fire in their divisions. Constant communication is
maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters and if at any time an
outbreak of fire should grow beyond the capabilities of a division, help is sent
from one or more neighbouring divisions, or even from the area of another
fire authority. Under arrangements for mutual help made by all fire authorities,
the nearest available force is sent to the scene of a fire, regardless of area
boundaries.
In England and Wales, the number of fire calls in 1972 (including false
alarms and special service calls—see below) was approximately 488,860. In
Scotland the number was approximately 58,000.
Fire authorities have discretion to employ their brigades and equipment for
purposes other than fire-fighting, and they are in fact used in a variety of
emergencies (such as rail, road and aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings,
flooding of premises, leakage of noxious gas or liquids and the rescue of people
or animals from dangerous situations) for which no charges are made. Brigades
are also used, by prior arrangement, for such purposes as emptying of swim¬
ming pools and filling of water tanks.
78
Fire Losses
Firemen
Finance
Fire Prevention
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Estimated property losses from fire in the United Kingdom in 1972 amounted
to about £i4i,2 million.1
The large cities and urban areas in Great Britain are served in the main by
whole-time firemen but some 60 per cent of county fire brigade establishments
is composed of part-time retained firemen who, in return for a retaining fee
and call-out and attendance fee, undertake to attend fires if called upon, and
volunteer firemen, who receive no remuneration. Many fire authorities employ
women (about 970 in England and Wales and 150 in Scotland in 1972) on
communications and mobilising duties, and some brigades have schemes for
the employment of junior firemen between the ages of 16 and 18 years, with a
view to their being enrolled as regular firemen at the age of 18.
Recruits and junior ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive
practical training in basic firemanship at collective training schools run by the
larger fire authorities. In Scotland similar training is carried out at a central
training school which is the responsibility of the Scottish Home and Health
Department. Management and command training is provided for the higher
and middle ranks at the Fire Service Staff College, Wotton House, near
Dorking, Surrey, where high-level operational studies are also conducted;
fire prevention, practical firemanship, advancement and instructor training
for junior and middle ranks is provided at the Fire Service Technical College,
Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. Both these establishments are main¬
tained by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Facilities for properly accredited officers from overseas fire services to study
the organisation, current training methods, appliances and equipment of the
British fire brigades are arranged by the Home Office Fire Department.
The cost of maintaining the fire service is borne by local authorities, and is
grant-aided by the central Government through the rate support grant
(see p. 73).
Fire authorities are concerned with fire prevention under a wide range of
statutes, including the Factories Act 1961, the Offices, Shops and Railway
Premises Act 1963 and the Fire Precautions Act 1971 (which provides for a
comprehensive system of fire prevention control in places of entertainment
and public resort and in certain kinds of residential premises). Fire authorities
are also under a statutory duty to give, when asked, advice on fire prevention,
restricting the spread of fires, and means of escape in case of fire. The enforce¬
ment and advisory duties involved are mainly carried out by the fire service;
the annual number of inspections made for these purposes in 1972 was 848,094
in England and Wales and about 78,000 in Scotland.
Courses in fire prevention are held continuously at the Fire Service Tech¬
nical College and all brigades have qualified fire prevention officers. Other
sources of advice on fire prevention include the various insurance companies
which advise their policyholders, and the Fire Protection Association, a non-
profit-making body established by the Fire Offices’ Committee2 as an advisory
centre on a nation-wide basis for industry and the general public on protection
of life and property against fire.
1 This figure, which relates to direct losses only, includes malicious damage in Northern
Ireland and is, therefore, not strictly comparable with those for previous years, but
generally there has been a levelling off of normal fire damage in the United Kingdom
over the past three years.
2 The Fire Offices’ Committee is representative of some, but not all, of the fire insurance
companies in Britain.
GOVERNMENT
79
Research
FIRE SERVICE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
Research into the causes, development and prevention of fire is undertaken
by the Joint Fire Research Organisation under the general direction of a
steering committee, whose members are drawn from the Department of the
Environment, the Home Office, the Fire Offices’ Committee, the independent
insurance companies and industry. The annual cost of the organisation is over
£650,000, of which £125,000 is paid by the Fire Offices’ Committee and
participating companies, the balance being met by the Government. The
organisation operates from the fire research station at Boreham Wood, Hert¬
fordshire.
Within the Home Office, a research section has been created to study the
operational problems of fire brigades. This unit, as well as carrying out its own
research programme, supervises projects undertaken, under contract, by
private consultants.
The Fire Authority for Northern Ireland is responsible for fire cover for the
whole Province. The authority, whose members include representatives of the
Council of the City of Belfast, and of the district councils, maintains six whole¬
time and 44 part-time stations throughout the area. Brigade establishment is
437 whole-time officers and men and 739 part-time firemen, manning 158
appliances.
3 Membership of the
European
Community
European
Communities
Act
FORMATION OF
THE EUROPEAN
COMMUNITIES
The European
Coal and Steel
Community
On ist January 1973, Britain, together with the Irish Republic and Denmark,1
joined the original six countries—Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands—in the European Com¬
munity.2 The Treaty of Accession was signed by the applicant countries and
the original member states in January 1972.
The enlarged Community forms a trading area of over 250 million people
and accounts for some 40 per cent of world trade. At a meeting of the nine
heads of state or government held in Paris in October 1972, guide-lines and a
timetable were agreed for the development of Community policies to bring
about a European Union, including the establishment of economic and mone¬
tary union, by the end of 1980.
The European Communities Act became law in October 1972 and made the
legislative changes necessary to comply with Britain’s obligations under the
Treaty of Accession to make provision for the application of future Community
decisions and to exercise the rights of membership. The Act gave the force of
law in Britain to that part of Community law which is directly applicable in
member states. It also contained detailed legislation (in part repealing or
amending existing statutes) to implement Community obligations. Other
Community obligations are being met under existing powers to make sub¬
ordinate legislation, introduced as the measures become applicable.
The European Community consists of three communities set up by separate
treaties—the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Economic
Community and the European Atomic Energy Community. These are des¬
cribed briefly in the following pages; more details of Britain’s participation
are provided in the relevant chapters.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) was established in i952>
by bringing together the coal and steel resources of the six member countries,
and formed the model for the ‘community’ approach to economic integration.
The Community is designed to ensure an orderly supply of coal and steel to
member countries, to promote the rational expansion and modernisation of
production and to provide better conditions of employment and living for the
1 Norway, which had completed negotiations at the same time as the other three
applicants and signed the Treaty of Accession, decided against full membership follow¬
ing a referendum held in September 1972, in which a majority opposed entry.
2 Britain originally applied for membership in 1961 but subsequent negotiations were
broken off in 1963; consideration by the Community of a renewed British application
in 1967 was deferred until 1969. Negotiations for entry began in June 197° and, follow¬
ing agreement on most of the major issues, a decision to join the Community on the
basis of the terms negotiated was approved in principle by the British Parliament in
October 1971.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
8l
The European
Economic
Community
The European
Atomic Energy
Community
employees in the industries. The Treaty of Paris which established the ECSC
and was signed in 1951 provided for the abolition of duties and quantitative
restrictions (or charges having the same effect) on trade in coal and steel
between member states; of discrimination by producers in prices, delivery
terms or transport rates; of any measures which hampered free choice of
supplier; and of restrictive practices resulting in the collusive sharing or
exploitation of markets. The treaty also provided for action by the Com¬
munity over a wide field of activity in the coal and steel industries, the work
of the Community being financed by a levy on production. The Community
provides funds for capital investment, research and other programmes, as
well as loans to help create new jobs in declining coal areas or where restruc¬
turing of the steel industry is taking place. Grants to assist redundant coal
and steel workers until they find new employment, or while undergoing
retraining, are also made.
The European Economic Community (EEC) was created by the Treaty of
Rome signed by the six countries in 1957, and aimed to promote the con¬
tinued and balanced expansion of the members’ economies by their progressive
harmonisation and integration. The preamble to the treaty included among
the basic objectives of the EEC the establishment of the foundations for a
growing unity among European peoples, the improvement of their working
and living conditions, the progressive abolition of restrictions on trade, and the
development of the prosperity of overseas countries. The initial steps towards
the attainment of these objectives were the creation of a customs union, aboli¬
tion of internal tariffs and other barriers to trade and establishment of a
common external tariff, the development of a common policy for agriculture,
and the introduction of measures to establish the free movement of labour,
capital and services. At the same time, provision was made for the overseas
countries which had special links with the member countries to have an asso¬
ciate status with the EEC, with preferential treatment in aid and the develop¬
ment of trade.
At the Paris meeting in 1972 it was agreed that transition to economic and
monetary union should involve parallel progress in regional, social, industrial,
scientific and technological, environmental and energy policies. Joint action in
external relations, particularly trade, and the reinforcement of Community
institutions were also discussed.
The European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) was set up by a
second treaty signed in Rome in 1957 which provided for the co-ordinated
development of members’ atomic energy industries and of their other peaceful
nuclear activities. Euratom has worked to develop a co-ordinated research
programme (for power production, industrial and medical purposes) and to
ensure the dissemination of technical information, to facilitate the co¬
ordination of investment in the nuclear field, and to ensure a proper supply
of nuclear ores and fuels and wider commercial outlets. A common market for
all nuclear materials and equipment came into effect at the beginning of 1959,
with a common external tariff on imports of nuclear materials, while the
Community has established common nuclear legislation and a common control
system for nuclear materials to prevent their diversion to purposes other than
those declared. Following the enlargement of the Community, agreement was
reached in February 1973 on a further four-year programme.
The separate institutions established by the treaties for each of the three
Institutions
82
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Communities were merged in 1967. The Community institutions, comprising
the Council of Ministers, the Commission, the Court of Justice, the Assembly
or European Parliament and others including a number dealing with specific
subjects, provide a framework (see diagram below) within which the interests
of the member states may be effectively represented and reconciled and
common policies formulated and administered while national institutions and
identities are fully safeguarded.
In each of the institutions Britain has a position equal to that of France, the
Federal Republic of Germany or Italy. English is one of the official languages
of the Community.
Institutions of the European Community
/
Governments of
the 9 countries
Parliaments of
the 9 countries
i
Council of
Ministers
v \
\ Decisions \
Proposals
Information
Questions and
Debates
Information
▼
Eutopean
Parliament
/
► Commission
Questions and
Debates
Court of
Justice
—►Appointed by - ■►Appointed by
each member State all members agreeing
separately together
The Council of Ministers is the decision-making body for all major
questions, and is the only institution whose members, usually the foreign
minister or other ministers appropriate to the subject of discussion, directly
represent each member country. Most Council decisions are taken on the
basis of a proposal by the Commission. Although provision is made in the
Treaty of Rome for certain matters to be decided by a qualified majority,
using a system of weighted voting, in practice decisions are taken on the basis
of consensus. On all matters of major importance, affecting vital national
interests, decisions are taken on the basis of unanimity.
The Commission is responsible for formulating policy proposals for sub¬
mission to the Council of Ministers, for promoting the Community interest
and attempting to reconcile national viewpoints and for implementing the pro¬
visions of the treaties and Community measures. It is composed of 13 com¬
missioners nominated by the member governments; two are from Britain.
Each commissioner is responsible for one or more of the main Community
activities. The Commission is pledged to act in complete independence of
The Community
Budget
MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY 83
national or sectional interests and to formulate its proposals and administer
policy in the interests of the Communities as a whole. Its proposals are made
only after extensive consultation with officials of the national governments
and with such organisations as producers, trade unions, employers’ associations
and many others.
The Court of Justice interprets and adjudicates on the meaning of the
treaties and of any measures taken by the Council and Commission under them,
hears complaints and appeals brought by or against the Communities’ institu¬
tions, member states or individuals and gives preliminary rulings on questions
referred to it by courts in the member states. As a court of final appeal its pro¬
cedure in such cases is broadly similar to that of the highest courts in member
states; its rulings are binding on member countries, Community institutions
and individuals. The Court of Justice is being enlarged to consist of nine
judges, assisted by four advocates-general.
The Assembly or European Parliament is composed of nominated members
of the parliaments of member states, sitting according to party affiliation and
not nationality. Britain is entitled to nominate 36 members out of a total of 198.
The parliament is consulted on and debates all the major policy issues of the
Communities. It also examines and approves the Communities’ budget.
Members of the parliament may question the Council and Commission and
have the power to dismiss the Commission by a two-thirds majority.
The Committee of Permanent Representatives consists of representatives of
the member states, of ambassadorial rank, whose task is to prepare for the
meetings of the Council and perform whatever additional functions it might
delegate.
The Economic and Social Committee is a consultative body representing a
cross-section of economic interests. Its members—representing employers’
organisations, trade unions and other groups—are consulted by the Council
and Commission during the formulation of policy. Britain has 24 members out
of a total of 144.
Other Community institutions include the European Agricultural Guidance
and Guarantee Fund, the European Social Fund and the European Investment
bank.
All member countries contribute to a common budget for certain specific
purposes, such as agricultural support (administered by the European Agri¬
cultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, often known by its French initials,
FEOGA), the European Social Fund (used for occupational re-training and
re-adaptation programmes and programmes designed to further manpower
mobility), and administrative costs. Under the direct income system, which
came into effect for the original members in January 1971, the Community is
progressively drawing a greater proportion of the finance for this budget
directly from the revenue of customs duties and of levies on agricultural
imports. Except for a 10 per cent rebate to cover collection costs all levies on
agricultural imports are handed over to the Community; in the case of
customs duties, an increasing proportion is being handed over, so that from 1st
January 1975 all customs revenue, less 10 per cent for collection, will go to the
Community budget. Until 1975 the remaining proportion of the necessary
income (taking into account the new members’ contributions, which in
Britain’s case are described on p. 84) is being made up by contributions from
(six original) member states according to a fixed scale (‘key’); after 1st January
1975 this will be replaced by a proportion (equivalent to up to a 1 per cent
rate) of the proceeds of the value added tax (see p. 216).
84
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain is adapting to the Community system over a period of years. A per¬
centage (or key) has been set, broadly corresponding to Britain’s present share
of the total gross national product (GNP) of the nine countries in the enlarged
Community. This represents the proportion of the budget which Britain
would nominally be expected to pay in the first year of membership. Over the
five years of the transitional period, Britain is to pay a proportion of its
nominal contribution, increasing in annual steps, from some 8-75 per cent of
the budget in the first year to about 19 per cent in the fifth year (1977), the
latter being broadly comparable to Britain’s expected share of the then total
GNP of the Nine. Arrangements have been made for the two-year period after
1977 so that Britain’s contribution will not increase by more than a limited
amount. In 1980 and subsequently Britain will contribute on the full basis of
the direct income system.
4 Law and Order
Sources of Law
Branches of the
Law
THE LAW
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, it does not have a single body
of law applicable universally within its limits. Scotland has its own distinctive
legal system and law courts, and although the existence of a single Parliament
for Great Britain since 1707, common opinions on broader issues, and a
common final court of appeal have resulted in substantial identity on many
points, differences in legal procedure and practice remain. In Northern Ireland
on the other hand, legal procedure and practice have closely resembled those
of England and Wales for centuries but its enacted law derives in certain
spheres from a different source and may differ in substance from that which
operates in England and Wales. However, a large volume of modern legislation,
particularly in the social field, applies throughout the United Kingdom.
The main sources of law in the United Kingdom are legislation, common
law and, since Britain’s accession to the European Community (see p. 80),
Community law, the impact of which is essentially confined to economic
matters. Legislation consists of laws made by or under the authority of
Parliament and may be Acts of Parliament, or Orders in Council, orders,
rules and regulations made by ministers under the authority of an Act of
Parliament, or by-laws made by local government or other authorities exercis¬
ing powers conferred upon them by Parliament. Common law is, broadly
speaking, the ancient law of the land, as deduced from custom and interpreted
by the judges. Although accepted as standard practice by successive genera¬
tions, it has never been precisely defined or codified1 and could not be upheld
by the courts if Parliament decreed otherwise.
Community law is mainly the directly applicable law of the European Com¬
munity treaties and the instruments made under them by the Community
institutions. It has not been incorporated or made identical with domestic law
but operates as a separate system side by side with that law. The English and
Scottish legal systems remain intact and their courts continue to operate as
heretofore. In the event of conflict, however, Community law takes precedence
over domestic law. Community judgments and orders, the formal authenticity
of which has been verified by the designated national authority (the Foreign
Secretary or one of his officials), may be registered and enforced in the United
Kingdom Courts. (See also European Court of Justice, pp. 83 and 97.)
A feature common to the domestic legal systems of the United Kingdom is the
distinction made between the criminal law and the civil law. Broadly speaking,
criminal law is concerned with wrongs against the community as a whole
while civil law is concerned with the rights, duties and obligations of individual
members ©f society between themselves.
1 The Law Commission (see p. 103) is working on the codification of certain branches of
law.
86
CRIMINAL LAW
IN ENGLAND
AND WALES
Criminal Courts
Magistrates'
Courts
The Crown
Court
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are two levels of criminal courts in England and Wales: magistrates’
courts, which try and dispose of the great majority of criminal cases and con¬
duct preliminary investigations into the more serious offences; and the Crown
Court which takes all criminal work above the level of magistrates’ courts.
Magistrates’ courts are for the most part presided over by lay justices of the
peace, of whom there are some 21,000, and who are part-time and unpaid. The
jurisdiction of the courts is local, their areas being the counties which are
divided into petty sessional divisions so that the courts are held in different
places. The function of the court, which consists of between two and seven
justices, is to hear and determine charges against people accused of summary
offences—that is, those minor offences that may legally be disposed of by the
justices sitting together without a jury. In addition, justices may also try
certain offences which would normally be tried on indictment, that is to say,
the more serious offences, if the accused consents to forgo his right to trial by
jury—and, in fact, about 98 per cent of all criminal cases are disposed of in
magistrates’ courts. Magistrates also sit as ‘examining justices’ to conduct pre¬
liminary enquiries to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to justify
the committal of the accused for trial in the Crown Court for a serious offence.
In inner London and a few large provincial cities there are, in addition to
justices, stipendiary magistrates (39 in London and 11 elsewhere), who are full¬
time salaried lawyers, and usually sit alone. In the City of London, the courts
consist of the aldermen of the City who are justices ex officio by virtue of
charters as well as the justices appointed individually. Benches of lay magis¬
trates work with the help and advice of the Clerk of the Court—a barrister or
solicitor or other person with court experience.
To hear cases involving people under the age of 17 brought before the court
in care or criminal proceedings, and to deal with applications for the adoption
of children, magistrates’ courts sit as juvenile courts. Juvenile courts sit either
in a different room or building from other courts, or at a different time, and
only limited publicity is allowed. If a young person under the age of 17 is
charged jointly with someone who has attained the age of i7> the case is heard
in the ordinary magistrates’ court. If the young person is found guilty, that
court remits the case to a juvenile court, unless it wishes to dispose of the case
by discharge or fine.
The Crown Court has jurisdiction throughout England and Wales; it is
served by High Court judges and Circuit judges and, in addition, by Recorders
who sit on a part-time basis. It sits regularly at nearly 90 centres which have
been selected, as far as practicable, to be within daily travelling distance of the
whole population.
There are three kinds of centre: first tier centres where the Crown Court
is served by both High Court and Circuit judges and where the High Court
also takes civil business; second tier centres where, again, High Court and
Circuit judges sit in the Crown Court; and third tier centres, where the Crown
Court is served only by Circuit judges and Recorders.
The jurisdiction of the Crown Court comprises trials on indictment (broadly,
for the more serious offences), the sentencing of those committed for sentence
from magistrates’ courts and appeals from magistrates courts. This appellate
jurisdiction includes civil as well as criminal appeals. In addition the court has a
minor original civil jurisdiction which has little practical importance.
A High Court judge, Circuit judge or Recorder presides at all trials of the
Crown Court with a jury. For the more important criminal trials, a High
Court judge sits without any justices of the peace. A Circuit judge or Recorder
CIRCUITS; HIGH COURT AND
CROWN COURTCENTRES
FOR ENGLAND AND WALES
High Court and Circuit Judges
Civil and Criminal Work #
Criminal Work ©
Chelmsfordjgx/'S0UTH-
W 1 EASTERN
Salisbury-
Southampton^
n . , Poole _?riSh’on-
Dorchester ® Portsmouth
© ^
^\^Newport
Bournemouth
88
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sits with between two and four justices of the peace for appeals and committals
for sentence from magistrates’ courts, and may sit with justices for the less
important trials on indictment. In the City of London, where the Crown Court
continues to be known as the Central Criminal Court, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen are entitled to sit with any High Court judge, Circuit judge or
Recorder in any class of work. The distribution of Crown Court business is
determined by directions given by, or on behalf of, the Lord Chief Justice of
England, with the concurrence of the Lord Chancellor; such directions allocate
the various classes of offences to High Court judges, Circuit judges and
Recorders.
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal against the conviction
or against the sentence to the Crown Court. Where the appeal is on a point
of law either the prosecutor or the defendant may appeal from the magistrates’
court to the High Court by way of case stated, that is, by requesting the
magistrate to ‘state a case for the opinion of the High Court’. In certain cases,
an appeal by case stated may lie to the High Court from the Crown Court,
but normally appeals from the Crown Court, either against conviction or
against sentence, are made to the Court of Appeal Criminal Division. Appeals
against conviction may be brought to the court by right on any point of
law, and with leave of the trial judge or the court on any question of fact or
mixed fact and law. Appeals against sentence come with the leave of the court,
provided that the sentence was in the discretion of the trial judge and not
fixed by law. The Court of Appeal Criminal Division normally consists of
three judges, who may be Lords Justices of Appeal or judges of the High
Court, although the Lord Chief Justice or a Lord Justice of Appeal usually
presides. A further appeal from the Court of Appeal Criminal Division to
the House of Lords can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of
general public importance is involved and it appears to the court or the
House of Lords that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
In addition, a prosecutor or defendant may appeal to the House of Lords
from a decision of the High Court in a criminal case.
In the majority of cases there is no restriction on the right of a private citizen
to institute criminal proceedings, but most prosecutions in England and Wales
are, in fact, initiated and conducted by the police. In some cases the consent
of the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions or, less fre¬
quently, a government department is required. The Director of Public Prosecu¬
tions is also concerned with prosecutions in all the more serious cases of
indictable offences; in courts where a substantial number of cases with which
he is concerned are tried, standing counsel are appointed by the Attorney
General to appear on his behalf. At the Central Criminal Court in London,
for instance, there is a panel of counsel known as Treasury Counsel, who are
retained to prosecute in the Director s cases.
In criminal cases arrest may be effected either on a warrant issued by a judicial
authority on sworn information laid before it or, in certain cases, without
warrant. In the latter circumstances, a police officer may release the defendant
on bail, that is, he may discharge him temporarily, subject to his entering into
a recognisance, with or without sureties, for a reasonable sum of money, to
appear in court or at a police station at an appointed time. If the defendant
cannot be brought before the magistrates’ court within a day, and his alleged
offence is not serious, the police must release him on bail. Magistrates also
LAW AND ORDER
89
have discretion to grant bail, which they exercise according to well-defined
principles. If bail is refused by the magistrates, the defendant is entitled to
apply to the Crown Court or the High Court, and he must be informed of this
right.
Once anyone has been charged with an offence, the police may not put any
further questions to him, save, in exceptional circumstances, to prevent or
minimise harm or loss to any person or to the public, or to clear up an ambi¬
guity in a previous answer or statement. This is laid down by the Judges’
Rules which, although they do not have the force of law, nevertheless carry
very great weight.
A person detained in custody who thinks that the grounds for his detention
are not lawful,1 may sue out a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him, this person then being required to appear before the court on the
day named to justify the detention. An application for such a writ is normally
made to a divisional court of the High Court either by the person detained or
by someone acting on his behalf. If no court is sitting the application may be
made to a single judge who may, and in some cases must, direct that it should
come before a divisional court. An application on behalf of anyone under 18 is
always first made to a judge sitting in chambers or in private. A writ may be
refused only by a divisional court.
Since criminal law in Britain presumes the innocence of the accused until
his guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to employ a legal
adviser for his defence and if he cannot afford to pay he may be granted legal
aid wholly or partly at the public expense; if remanded in custody he may be
visited in prison by his legal adviser to ensure that his defence is properly
prepared. During the preparation of the case, it is customary for the prosecu¬
tion to inform the defence of any relevant documents which it is not proposed
to put in evidence and to disclose them if asked to do so.
Criminal trials are (with rare exceptions) held in open court and the rules
of evidence (which are concerned with the proof of facts) are rigorously
applied. For instance, although generally the evidence of one uncorroborated
witness is, as a matter of English law, sufficient, where the evidence is that of
an accomplice (or accomplices) the judge will warn the jury of the danger of
convicting on uncorroborated evidence and a conviction made without any
such warning would not be upheld on appeal.
During the trial the defendant has the right to hear and subsequently to
cross-examine (normally through his counsel) all the witnesses for the prosecu¬
tion ; to call his own witnesses who, if they will not attend the trial of their own
free will, may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court either
in person or through his counsel—the defence having the right to the last
speech at the trial. Moreover, the defendant cannot himself be questioned
unless he consents to be sworn as a witness in his own defence. The right
to cross-examine him, even when he is so sworn, is limited by law, with the
object of excluding enquiry into his character or into past offences not relevant
to the particular charge on which he is being tried. Furthermore, although
confessions made in the course of previous judicial proceedings are admissible
as evidence if they have been made upon oath, no confessions made in any
1 Lawful grounds are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for contempt of court or of
either House of Parliament; detention of persons found to be mentally disordered;
detention of children by their parents or guardians; and detention expressly authorised
by Act of Parliament. The writ of habeas corpus runs in both criminal and civil cases.
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other circumstances are admitted unless it can be proved that they were made
voluntarily.
In criminal trials by jury the judge determines questions of law, sums up
the evidence for the benefit of the jury, and acquits the accused or passes
sentence according to the verdict of the jury; but the jury alone decides the
issue of guilt or innocence. Verdicts need not necessarily be unanimous; in
certain circumstances the jury may bring in a majority verdict provided that,
in the normal jury of 12 people, there are not more than two dissentients.
If the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of
appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. From a
verdict of ‘guilty’ there is a right of appeal on the part of the defendant to the
appropriate court. The defence or prosecution may suggest that the mental
state of the defendant is such that he is unfit to be tried. A jury must decide
whether or not this is so. If they find in the affirmative, the defendant will be
admitted to a hospital specified by the Home Secretary.
CIVIL LAW IN
ENGLAND AND
WALES
Civil Courts
Magistrates'
Courts
County Courts
The main civil courts in England and Wales are the county courts, which
deal with a wide variety of civil cases, and the High Court, where those that
cannot be decided in the county courts are heard. Magistrates’ courts have
limited civil jurisdiction, as does the Crown Court—mainly in connection with
appeals from magistrates’ courts under various enactments. Most appeals in
civil cases go to the Court of Appeal Civil Division and from there may go to
the House of Lords.
The civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial proceed¬
ings for separation and maintenance orders, adoption, and affiliation and
guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction in respect of such
matters as nuisances under the Public Health Acts and the recovery of rates.
Committees of magistrates exercise quasi-administrative functions in relation
to the licensing of public houses and of betting shops and clubs.
County courts (of which there are 337) are so located that no part of the
country is more than a reasonable distance from one of them. In the busier
centres, the courts may sit every day; in others they may sit weekly, monthly,
or at longer intervals.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the
Crown Court and the High Court) and all Circuit judges and Recorders have
power to sit in the county courts. But, under the Courts Act 1971, each county
court has one or more Circuit judges assigned to it by the Lord Chancellor,
and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by them. The judge
normally sits alone although on the request of a party the court may, m
exceptional cases, order a trial to be held with a jury.
The jurisdiction of the county courts covers: actions founded upon contract
and tort (except libel, slander, and some other types of case) where the
amount claimed is not more than £750; equity matters, such as trusts and
mortgages, where the amount does not exceed £5,000; and actions for the
recovery of land where the net annual value for rating does not exceed £1,000.
Cases outside these limits may be tried in the county court by consent of the
parties, or may be transferred to the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the
Rent Act, landlord and tenant, and adoption. In addition undefended divoice
cases1 are heard and determined by county courts designated as divorce
1 Defended cases are transferred to the High Court.
LAW AND ORDER
91
The High Court
of Justice
Appellate Courts
Civil
Proceedings
county courts; outside London bankruptcies are dealt with in certain county
courts; and complaints of racial discrimination brought by the Race Rela¬
tions Board are heard in selected courts where the judge sits with assessors.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction, which is both original
and appellate and covers all civil and some criminal causes, is vested in all its
divisions. In general, however, particular types of work are assigned to a
particular division—distribution of work being governed by statute, the rules
of court and the practice of the court. For instance, the Family Division deals
with all jurisdiction of a family kind, including matrimonial cases, and cases
relating to wardship, adoption, and guardianship; while Admiralty and prize
jurisdiction rests with a specially constituted Admiralty Court of the Queen’s
Bench Division.
There are 71 High Court judges each of whom is attached to one division
on appointment but may be transferred to any other division during his
term of office. The Lord Chancellor is president of the Court of Appeal and
of the Chancery Division—the administration of the Chancery Division being
the responsibility of the senior judge known as the Vice-Chancellor. The
Queen’s Bench Division is presided over by the Lord Chief Justice of England,
who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in the legal hierarchy, and the Family
Division is headed by the President. Outside London (where the High Court
sits at the Royal Courts of Justice) sittings of the court are held at 23 places
which are known as first tier centres (see p. 86).
For the hearing of cases at first instance, High Court judges sit singly.
Appellate jurisdiction in civil matters from inferior courts is exercised by
divisional courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of
the appropriate division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial proceedings heard by magistrates’ courts lie to a
divisional court of the Family Division of the High Court. Affiliation appeals
are heard by the Crown Court, as are appeals from decisions of the licensing
and betting licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High Court
and the county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal Civil Division and
may (with leave of the court or of the House of Lords) go on to the House of
Lords, which is the ultimate court of appeal in civil cases.
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal Civil Division are the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the President of the Family Division and
the Master of the Rolls; the ordinary members are 14 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the ten Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals
(which normally takes place in a committee room and not in the legislative
chamber), but peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit.
The president of the House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor,
and proceedings take the form of the normal proceedings of the Plouse of
Lords: judgments are given in the form of speeches to a motion, and the
decision of the House is taken by a vote.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person;
no preliminary enquiry as to the authenticity of the grievance is required. The
most common form of proceedings is an action commenced by a writ of
summons served on the defendant by the plaintiff, which notifies the defendant
that the plaintiff has a claim against him and states the nature of the claim.
92
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
If the defendant intends to contest the claim, he ‘enters an appearance’ by
informing the court to this effect and documents setting out the precise
question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court.
A decree for divorce can be obtained only after a hearing in court, whether
or not the case is defended. Other civil proceedings, because they are a private
matter, can usually be abandoned or compromised at any time without leave
of the court—the parties to a dispute being able to settle their differences
through their solicitors before the stage of actual trial is reached. Actions that
are brought to court are usually tried by a judge without a jury, except in cases
involving claims for defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution,
when either party may insist on trial by jury, or in a case of fraud, when the
defendant may claim this right. In trials where a jury is present, the jury is
responsible for deciding questions of fact (as in criminal trials) and also the
amount of damages to be awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts may
be accepted.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by
seizure of the debtor’s goods or by attachment of earnings (a court order
requiring an employer to make periodic payments to the court by deduction
from the debtor’s wages). Refusal to obey a judgment directing the defendant
to do something or to refrain from doing something may result in imprison¬
ment for contempt of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be
effected only on a warrant of the court. }
The general rule is that the costs of the action (the barrister’s fees, solicitor’s
charge, court fees and other disbursements) are in the discretion of the court;
normally, the court orders the costs to be paid by the party losing the action.
CRIMINAL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Courts of
Criminal
Jurisdiction
Burgh (or Police)
Courts
Justice of the Peace
Courts
The Sheriff Court
The High Court
of Justiciary
Criminal cases in Scotland are heard either under solemn procedure, when
proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a jury, or under
summary procedure, when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the
High Court of Justiciary and the more serious ones in the sheriff court are
tried under solemn procedure. Proceedings are taken under summary pro¬
cedure in the less serious cases in the sheriff court, and in the justice of the
peace and burgh (or police) courts.
These courts are established in burghs. The judges are town councillors who
are serving (or have served) in the office of magistrate of the burgh. In
Glasgow stipendiary magistrates act as judges of three of the courts.
These courts are organised on a county (and county of city) basis, the judges
being the justices of the peace for the county (or county of city).
Scotland is divided into sheriffdoms, each consisting of a county or combina¬
tion of counties, and these sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff couit
districts. A sheriffdom has a sheriff-principal and a number of sheriffs who
act as the judges of the court. The sheriff courts exercise an extensive civil
jurisdiction, as well as a criminal jurisdiction.
The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court of first instance.
Any one of the following judges is entitled to try cases in the High Court : the
Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of Session),
the Lord Justice Clerk, or any one of the 18 Lords Commissioner of Justiciary
who are also judges of the Court of Session. The seat of the court is in Edin¬
burgh, but the judges go on circuit to preside at trials in other towns.
LAW AND ORDER
93
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
Trial
A person convicted in the High Court or in a sheriff court on indictment may
appeal to the High Court of Justiciary (a) against his conviction on any ground
which involves a question of law alone, or, with leave of the High Court or
upon the certificate of the judge who presided at the trial that it is a fit case
for appeal, on any ground, and (b) against his sentence, with the leave of the
High Court, unless the sentence is one fixed by law. Appeals are heard by
three or more judges, and there is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
A person convicted summarily may appeal to the High Court, but only on
questions of law and procedure, and not on issues of fact.
In Scotland the police make preliminary investigation of all cases of crime
discovered by or made known to them, but it is for the Public Prosecutor
concerned (the Lord Advocate in the High Court, the Procurators Fiscal in
the sheriff court, and the justice of the peace fiscal and burgh prosecutor in
the justice of the peace and burgh courts respectively) to decide whether or
not to prosecute and, in the case of the Procurator Fiscal, to decide whether
to proceed summarily or to charge the accused by petition with a view to
proceedings on indictment.
The police in Scotland have very broadly the same powers of arrest as have
the police in England and Wales. The Judges’ Rules do not apply in Scotland,
but when anyone is arrested he must be cautioned and have the charge read
over to him. Thereafter, only his voluntary statements are used in evidence
at his trial, and the court will reject any statements made by him unless it is
satisfied that they have been fairly obtained.
As in England and Wales, when anyone is apprehended in Scotland he
must be brought before the court competent to deal with his case with the
least possible delay. Where a prosecution on indictment is contemplated,
the accused is brought before a judge for judicial examination and the judge
may then commit him for trial or for further examination. Eight days may
elapse between commitment for further examination and commitment for
trial.
People in custody, other than those charged with murder or treason, may
be liberated on bail by the sheriff or, if the offence is within the jurisdiction
of a summary court other than the sheriff court, by that court or by the police.
Even in the case of murder or treason, bail may be granted at the discretion
of the Lord Advocate or the High Court of Justiciary. There is a right of
appeal to the High Court by the accused person against the refusal of bail,
by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by either party against the
amount fixed.
The writ of habeas corpus does not apply in Scotland, but the High Court
of Justiciary has power to release anyone unlawfully detained and trials must,
in any event, be brought to a conclusion within no days of committal.
In trials on indictment, the first ‘pleading’ diet takes place in the sheriff court,
when the accused person is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty. If he
pleads not guilty, the case is continued to the second ‘trial’ diet in the appro¬
priate court. If he pleads guilty, and it is a case which is to be dealt with in the
sheriff court, the sheriff may dispose of it at once. If it is a High Court case
it is continued to the second diet in the High Court for disposal.
The second diet is held at least nine days after the pleading diet, either
before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury. Evidence is led (without
opening speeches) and there are closing speeches for the prosecution and for
CIVIL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Sheriff Courts
The Court of
Session
The Scottish Land
Court
Civil
Proceedings
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the defence, followed by the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return
a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’, both of which result in acquittal,
or they may find the accused ‘guilty’, in which case the court proceeds to
deliver sentence. The verdict may be by a majority of eight to seven. Fairness
to the accused is ensured by the fact that, with a few minor exceptions, no
person may be convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or
corroboration of one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly impli¬
cate the accused in the crime.
At summary trials the accused is asked to plead to the charge at the first
calling of the case and, if he pleads guilty, the court may dispose of the case.
Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court may proceed to trial at once or it
may appoint a trial diet for a later date.
The main courts of civil jurisdiction in Scotland are the sheriff courts which,
in their civil capacity, correspond roughly to the county courts in England
and Wales, and the Court of Session, which is the supreme civil court in
Scotland.
The civil jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to nearly all actions and is
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff,
against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or
directly to the Court of Session.
The Court of Session has universal jurisdiction, sits only in Edinburgh, and
has sole jurisdiction, inter alia, in divorce actions. The court is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
which is mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions
of equal status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being presided
over by the Lord President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk.
From the Inner House an appeal may lie to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court is a special court that deals with certain agricultural
matters. The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank
and dignity of a judge of the Court of Session.
In Scotland civil proceedings are initiated by the service on the defender of
a writ or summons, which sets out the nature of the decree which the pursuer
seeks, a statement of facts upon which the pursuer founds his claim, and a
statement of the legal propositions upon which the pursuer maintains that he
is entitled to the remedy which he seeks. In Court of Session actions the next
step is the calling of the summons, which is the publication of the action in
the court lists. If the defender intends to contest the action, he must ‘enter
appearance’ within two days of calling and thereafter lodge defences to it. In
ordinary sheriff court actions ‘entering appearance’ is followed by the ‘tabling
of the cause’, which involves a formal appearance in court by solicitors, or, in
some cases, by the parties to the dispute. In summary and small debt actions
the defender is simply given notice of the date on which the action will be
heard. It is much more common in Scotland than in England and Wales to
have legal debates in court as to the competency or relevancy of the written
pleadings prior to the proof. ...
In Scotland a pursuer can abandon his case, including any matrimonial
case, at any time, but, where abandonment is sought after the commencement
of the proof or trial, only with leave of the court. Trial by jury in civil action
in Scotland is more common than in England and Wales, being the usual form
LAW AND ORDER
95
COURTS IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SPECIAL COURTS
Coroners’
Courts
Administrative
Tribunals
of procedure in actions for damages for personal injuries in the Court of
Session. In the sheriff court they are relatively rare, being confined to actions
between employer and employee.
The superior courts in Northern Ireland comprise the Supreme Court of
Judicature (consisting of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal)
and the Court of Criminal Appeal. The High Court is the superior court of
first instance, is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench
Division (including probate, matrimonial and Admiralty proceedings) and the
circuit courts and is constituted of the Lord Chief Justice, as president, and
four judges. The Court of Appeal, which is the appellate tribunal, is constituted
of the Lord Chief Justice and two Lords Justices of Appeal.
The inferior courts are the county courts and courts of summary jurisdiction
(petty sessions). The county courts exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction
and are presided over by county court judges, of whom there are five (two
of them having a title of Recorder—of Belfast and of Londonderry). At least
four sittings of the court are held annually in each division. Petty session courts
are composed of one resident magistrate (who corresponds to a stipendiary
magistrate in England and Wales) who sits alone except in some specific cases,
for instance, in a special crimes court, where two may adjudicate. Juvenile
courts, which deal with children or young persons between the ages of 10 and
17 unless charged jointly with an adult or committed for jury trial in the case
of a more serious offence, are composed of one resident magistrate and two lay
members, one of whom must be a woman.
Coroners’ courts are common law courts convened when a person appears to
have died a violent or unnatural death or a sudden death of which the cause
is unknown, and in certain other circumstances. Such cases may be brought to
the notice of the local coroner (who must be a barrister, a solicitor, or a legally
qualified medical practitioner, of not less than five years’ standing, appointed,
after 1st April 1974, by the county council or, in London, by the Greater
London Council) by medical practitioners, by the police, by various public
authorities or by members of the public, and it is his duty to hold an enquiry
into how, when and where the deceased died. He may hold an inquest in court
for this purpose, and he must do so if he has reason to believe that the deceased
has died a violent or unnatural death or has died in prison or in circumstances
for which an Act of Parliament provides than an inquest must be held. If the
coroner has reason to suspect that the death was due to murder, suicide,
manslaughter, or infanticide, or was caused by an accident arising out of the
use of a vehicle on the public highway, he must summon a jury.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal
enquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and
may report the result of his enquiries to the Crown Agent in order that Crown
Counsel may consider what proceedings, if any, are required.
In Northern Ireland coroners must, on appointment, be either barristers-at-
law of not less than five years’ standing practising in Northern Ireland or
practising solicitors of the Supreme Court of Judicature in Northern Ireland of
not less than five years’ standing.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial or
quasi-judicial functions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a
rule, they are set up by Act of Parliament or under powers conferred by
statute, which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure.
96
The National
Industrial
Relations Court
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Board
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The continuing expansion of governmental activity and involvement in the
social and economic affairs of the nation has greatly multiplied the occasions
on which the individual may find himself at issue with the administration,
with a group of people or with another individual; consequently there has
been a substantial growth during the past 30 years of administrative tribunals
with a regular or permanent existence and the function of deciding or adjudi¬
cating in disputes arising under regulatory or welfare legislation. Such tribunals
include those concerned with: land and property; national insurance; supple¬
mentary benefits and family allowances; the National Health Service, trans¬
port; taxation; and many which do not fall into any specified group. Their
constitution follows a fairly general pattern: usually they consist of an uneven
number of persons so that a majority decision can be reached; members are
usually appointed by the minister concerned with the subject but other
authorities (for instance, the Lord Chancellor) have the power of appointment
in appropriate cases; the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord President of the Court
of Session in Scotland, makes appointments in most cases where a lawyer
chairman or member is required; and, with some exceptions, members of
tribunals hold office for a period specified in the warrant or instrument by
which they are appointed.
There are also tribunals which enforce professional discipline, such as the
General Medical Council and the Disciplinary Committee administered by the
Solicitors Acts 1957-65, but these are entirely different in constitution from
the statutory tribunals and have no jurisdiction over the general public.
Appeals from all the more important tribunals may be made, at least on a
point of law, to the High Court, or, in Scotland, to the Court of Session. An
appeal may also lie to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a minister of
the Crown or to an independent referee. An advisory body known as the
Council on Tribunals (appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and the Lord
Advocate) exercises general supervision1 over tribunals and reports on parti¬
cular matters, those peculiar to Scotland being dealt with by the Scottish
Committee of the Council.
The National Industrial Relations Court, set up under the Industrial Rela¬
tions Act 1971, consists of a judge of the High Court nominated by the Lord
Chancellor, a judge of the Court of Session nominated by the Lord President
and other members (appointed by the Crown) with special knowledge or
experience of industrial relations. The function of the court is to hear appeals
on questions of law arising from decisions of an industrial tribunal (see p. 387)
in England, Wales, or Scotland under the Contracts of Employment Act
1963, the Redundancy Payments Act 1965, and those provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act which enable a complaint to be presented to a
tribunal. It also has jurisdiction to hear complaints of unfair industrial
practices and has exclusive jurisdiction over legally enforceable collective
agreements.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board consists of a chairman of wide
legal experience and eight other legally qualified members appointed by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland after consultation
with the Lord Chancellor. Its function is to entertain applications for ex gratia
payments of compensation, in certain circumstances, to victims of crimes of
violence in Great Britain or on a British vessel or aircraft. Compensation,
1 Excluding supervision of the professional disciplinary tribunals.
LAW AND ORDER
97
Courts Martial
European Court
of Justice
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE
JUDICIAL
SYSTEM
which is assessed on the basis of common law damages and usually takes the
form of a lump sum payment, amounts to over £3 million a year. Some
12,000 applications a year are currently received.
Courts martial have statutory j urisdiction over serving members of the armed
forces and, in certain circumstances, their dependants and other civilians who
accompany them outside the United Kingdom. Courts martial may not deal
with the more serious charges: treason; murder; manslaughter; felony; rape;
aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring suicide; or an offence of genocide;
committed in the United Kingdom. Civil offences committed in the United
Kingdom by members of the armed forces are also normally dealt with in the
ordinary courts.
A court martial (which consists of a president and a number of serving
officers) may be convened by any authorised officer. A judge advocate is
appointed to sit with the court in more serious cases brought under the
Army and Air Force Acts (and at every trial brought under the Naval
Discipline Act) to advise upon law and procedure and, in the former case, to
sum up the evidence. The judge advocate in the case of the Army and the
Air Force is a civilian and a barrister appointed by the Office of the Judge
Advocate General. In the case of the Navy he is a legally qualified serving
officer appointed by the convening authority.
Appeals lie to the Courts Martial Appeals Court, and from that court to
the House of Lords if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or to the House of Lords
that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
Under the European treaties, questions of the validity and interpretation of
Community law may be referred by the courts of the United Kingdom to the
European Court (see p. 83), and must be so referred when there is no judicial
remedy under national law, that is, when the question arises in a final court of
appeal, such as the House of Lords. In a case of this kind, the European Court
would make a preliminary ruling, which would be binding on the national
court on that particular point. It would, however, remain with the national
court to make a substantive decision on the whole issue.
In the United Kingdom the judiciary is independent of the executive and is
therefore not subject to ministerial direction or control in regard to the
judgment of the courts. Responsibility for administrative matters in England
and Wales, when it does not rest with the courts themselves, lies partly with
the Lord Chancellor and partly with the Home Secretary; in Scotland it lies
with the Secretary of State. In England the Lord Chancellor is concerned with
the composition of all courts, both criminal and civil, with parts of criminal
procedure and with everything relating to civil law, and the Home Secretary
with criminal law, preventing offences, apprehending offenders, part of the
process of trying them, and virtually the whole of their treatment. The Prime
Minister is concerned in that he is responsible for recommending to the
Crown the highest judicial appointments. The Secretary of State for the
Environment is responsible for providing accommodation for all the superior
courts, except the Central Criminal Court which is the special responsibility
of the City of London.
The administrative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature (the Court
of Appeal, the High Court and the Crown Court) and the appointment of the
officers of the court are in the hands of the Lord Chancellor. The Lord
98
THE PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chancellor is a member of the Supreme Court, the Crown Court and the
Matrimonial Causes Rule Committees; and he appoints the County Court
Rule Committee, and has power to alter or disallow the rules made by it.
The Lord Chancellor’s responsibility for the administration of the High
Court, the Crown Court and the county courts is exercised through a unified
court administrative service organised on a circuit basis under a senior officer,
known as a ‘circuit administrator’. Two High Court judges, known as ‘presid¬
ing judges’, are assigned to each circuit; these judges are not concerned with
administrative detail and continue their normal judicial work, but they
exercise a supervisory and advisory function in the circuit, with particular
responsibility for the allocation of work among all the judges. The Lord
Chancellor has also appointed 18 advisory committees, consisting of lawyers,
magistrates, police officers, and representatives of local authorities, the police
and probation services, and the press, to advise him on such matters as he
may refer to them on the running of the courts. These committees normally
meet under the chairmanship of the circuit administrator.
Magistrates’ courts are mainly administered by the magistrates themselves,
chiefly through committees known as magistrates’ courts committees (the com¬
mittee of magistrates in inner London) but the local authorities, with financial
assistance from the Government, are responsible for meeting their costs, and
the Home Secretary, besides exercising a general oversight, has certain specific
responsibilities, including the approval of boundary changes to petty sessional
division areas, approval of the appointment of justices’ clerks, and deciding
disputes on financial matters.
In Scotland the Secretary of State appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the staffing and
general organisation of the sheriff courts. The Lord Advocate appoints the
members of the Scottish Law Commission (which has functions similar to
those of the English Law Commission).
In Northern Ireland the administration of the superior courts is the
responsibility of the United Kingdom Parliament. The judges are appointed by
the Crown and are removable only on an address of both Houses of that
Parliament. The Ministry of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland is responsible
for the staffing and general organisation of the county and petty sessions
courts.
The operation of the law requires the participation of judges, with whom,
aided in certain cases by juries, the decision of disputed cases rests, and of the
officers of the court, who have general or specialised functions of an adminis¬
trative (and sometimes of a judicial) nature in the courts to which they are
attached. Barristers (advocates in Scotland) and solicitors who are entrusted
with representing the interests of the parties to a dispute are also involved
because, although the law allows an individual to conduct his own case if he
wishes, most people prefer to be legally represented.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts (since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power) and the Sovereign, acting on the
advice of ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary. In
England and Wales appointments to the highest positions the Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the
President of the Family Division and the Lords Justices who are the judges of
the Court of Appeal—are made on the recommendation of the Prime Minister,
LAW AND ORDER
99
Juries
while the Lord Chancellor recommends the appointment of High Court
judges, Circuit judges and Recorders and the metropolitan and other stipendi¬
ary magistrates. Justices of the peace are appointed on behalf of the Crown by
the Lord Chancellor,1 who is advised by advisory committees which he has
established for this purpose.2
In Scotland the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appoint¬
ment of the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord
Justice Clerk. Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies
with the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State is responsible
for the appointment and removal of justices of the peace.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor
who, as well as being head of the judiciary and speaker of the House of Lords,
is a leading member of the Government in power. With the exception of
justices of the peace, judges are normally appointed from practising barristers,
advocates or solicitors and neither their training nor their career is in any way
dictated by the State. Justices of the peace need no legal qualifications, being
appointed for their qualities of integrity and understanding and as broadly
representative of the community which they serve. On appointment, however,
they give an undertaking to complete a period of basic training, so that they
may obtain a sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of evidence,
and may understand the nature and purpose of sentencing. In certain cir¬
cumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or proven incapacity) judges
of the inferior courts in England and Wales may be removed from their
position by the Lord Chancellor, and in Scotland, subject to specified con¬
ditions, by the Secretary of State on a report prepared at his instance by the
Lord President of the Court of Session and the Lord Justice Clerk. In order to
safeguard and perpetuate the independence of the judiciary from the executive,
however, superior judges in England and Wales (other than the Lord Chancel¬
lor who, as a Cabinet Minister, changes with the Government) are subject
to a power of removal only by the Sovereign on an address presented by both
Houses of Parliament; in Scotland there is no statutory provision for removal
of judges of the Court of Session or High Court of Justiciary from office and
it is probable that special legislation would be required to effect such a dis¬
missal.
A jury in England and Wales summoned to a criminal or civil court consists of
12 persons (except in county courts, where it consists of eight persons). In
Scotland the jury consists of 15 persons in criminal cases, 12 persons in civil
cases in the Court of Session and seven in civil cases in the sheriff court. In
Northern Ireland the jury numbers 12 in ordinary criminal3 and seven in civil
cases. Jury service is confined in England and Wales to householders and in
Scotland to persons aged between 21 and 60 who own heritable property or
goods to a certain value. But under new provisions which are expected to come
into force in March 1974 the householder qualification will be replaced in
England and Wales by a qualification based on the electoral register and all
1 Except in Lancashire, where the Chancellor of the Duchy acts on behalf of the Crown
in this matter.
2 Following the reorganisation of local government, there will be an advisory com¬
mittee for each county, except for the metropolitan counties, where there will be a
committee for each district.
3 Under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1973, trials of ‘scheduled
offences’ (generally speaking, offences involving terrorism) are heard by a single judge,
sitting without a jury.
IOO
The Legal
Profession
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
citizens between the ages of 18 and 65, subject to a five-year residence qualifica¬
tion, will be liable for jury service. However, certain persons following certain
occupations either will be ineligible or entitled to claim excusal, and certain
persons with criminal records will be disqualified as before.
A jury is completely independent of both the judiciary and the executive.
In criminal cases the accused can have up to seven jurors (in Scotland, five)
changed without giving reasons and both defence and prosecution can object
for cause shown (for instance, lack of impartiality), but once members of the
jury have been sworn, they are protected by law from interference of any kind.
At certain inquests at coroners’ courts in England and Wales and Northern
Ireland and at fatal accident enquiries in Scotland, a jury is required to be
piesent to return a verdict on how, when and where a deceased person died.
Juries in this instance consist of from seven to eleven jurors, and the coroner
may accept a majority verdict provided that the minority consists of not more
than two. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner to decide
whether objects of gold or silver found in the ground are ‘treasure trove’.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers1 (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Each performs distinct duties—solicitors undertake
legal business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems sub¬
mitted through solicitors and present cases in the higher courts—though
certain functions are common to both.
To become a barrister in England a student must have reached an accepted
educational standard, have passed certain examinations and attended certain
courses prescribed by the Council of Legal Education. He must also have
become a member of one of the four Inns of Court Lincoln s Inn, the Inner
Temple, the Middle Temple and Gray’s Inn—where he must keep a number
of terms. He may then be called to the Bar, but is normally not allowed to
practise until he has kept further terms and completed six months pupilage
with a practising barrister of at least five years’ standing. A barrister with a sub¬
stantial junior practice may apply to the Lord Chancellor for a patent appoint¬
ing him Queen’s Counsel—a proceeding known as ‘taking silk’. Most of the
higher judicial offices are filled from the ranks of Queen s Counsel. The
professional conduct of a barrister is subject to the scrutiny of the General
Council of the Bar; discipline is vested in the Senate of the four Inns.
A prospective solicitor in England and Wales must be considered suitable
by the appropriate committee of The Lawr Society (the professional organisa¬
tion of solicitors) and he must enter into ‘articles of clerkship with a practising
solicitor of not less than five years’ standing before he can begin his profes¬
sional career. The term of articles lasts for two, two and a half, or five years,
depending upon the educational qualifications of the student. An articled clerk
must pass the necessary examinations prescribed by The Law Society and,
unless he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is
generally required to attend a course of studies at a recognised law school.
Once a solicitor is qualified, he may become a member of The Law Society.
In Scotland prospective advocates and solicitors undergo much the same
training. While the respective professional organisations—the Faculty of
Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland—have their own professional
examinations, candidates usually obtain exemption from them by including
the necessary subjects in a law degree of a Scottish university. "I he prospective
advocate must, thereafter, undergo a period of training (either of 21 months
1 Known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and collectively and individually as ‘counsel’.
LAW AND ORDER
IOI
LEGAL AID
Legal Aid in
Civil Cases
Legal Aid in
Criminal Courts
or of 12 months depending on whether or not he has been granted exemption
from nine months’ training) in a solicitor’s office, followed by about nine
months’ pupilage with a practising advocate. The prospective solicitor must
serve an apprenticeship of two years in a solicitor’s office before he can begin
his professional career.
In Northern Ireland barristers are members of the Inn of Court of Northern
Ireland; there is also a General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The
professional organisation for solicitors is the Incorporated Law Society of
Northern Ireland.
In Britain the legal aid scheme covers free or contributory legal aid for nearly
all types of civil and criminal proceedings in nearly all courts of law and for all
proceedings before the Lands Tribunal, the National Industrial Relations
Court and the Commons Commissioners.
Free legal aid in civil cases is available to persons with very small incomes and
capital, and contributory legal aid to those with larger but still limited means.
The majority of people are financially eligible for some form of legal aid.
The legal aid scheme in England and Wales is run by The Law Society
under the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor, assisted by an advisory
committee. It is operated by 14 area committees and a network of local com¬
mittees composed of barristers and solicitors (who may be paid a fee), with a
salaried staff. The cost is met from the Legal Aid Fund, drawn from three
sources: contributions from assisted persons; costs recovered from opposite
parties in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer.
Applicants for legal aid must show that they have reasonable grounds
for asserting or disputing a claim. A successful applicant is allowed to select
from a panel a solicitor who, if necessary, instructs a barrister, and the case
is then conducted in the ordinary way. Action for libel and slander are excluded
from the scheme.
In Scotland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of
Scotland through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court
Committee and 16 local committees. To obtain legal aid in civil cases an
applicant must have a probable cause of action, that is to say, reasonable
grounds for taking, defending, or being party to the legal proceedings in view.
Assistance is available in connection with appeals to the House of Lords
from the Court of Session, in civil proceedings before the Court of Session,
the Lands Valuation Appeal Court, the Scottish Land Court, the Lands
Tribunal for Scotland and the sheriff courts, and in matters not involving
litigation. Where litigation is not involved, the applicant must show he has
reasonable grounds for taking the proposed legal action.
In Northern Ireland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Incorpora¬
ted Law Society of Northern Ireland under the general guidance of the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The scheme provides for legal aid in proceedings
in the Supreme Court, the county courts and in certain civil proceedings in
magistrates’ courts.
In the criminal courts in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made
by the court or courts concerned if it appears that a defendant’s means are
such that he requires financial help in meeting the costs of the proceedings in
which he is involved. (An order must be made when a person is committed for
trial on a charge of murder or where the prosecutor appeals or applies for leave
to appeal from the Court of Appeal Criminal Division or the Courts Martial
V X
£ ^ .0
102
Legal Advice
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Appeal Court to the House of Lords.) Further, no person may be sentenced
for the first time to a term of imprisonment, a suspended sentence of imprison¬
ment, borstal training, or detention in a detention centre unless he is legally
represented or has been refused, or has failed to apply for, legal aid after having
been informed of his right to do so. No limit of income or capital above which
a person is ineligible for legal aid is specified, but the court has power to order
applicants to pay a reasonable contribution towards the cost of the case
according to their means. Legal aid in criminal proceedings may consist of
representation by a solicitor and counsel assigned by the court, but in most
proceedings in magistrates’ courts the recipient is entitled only to the services
of a solicitor, and in Crown Court proceedings the court may, in cases of
urgency (when there is no time to instruct a solicitor), order that legal aid
shall consist of representation by counsel alone. A solicitor may appear in,
conduct and address the court in criminal proceedings in the Crown Court on
appeal from a magistrates’ court or on committal of a person to be sentenced
or dealt with if he (or any solicitor in his employment or by whom he is
employed) appeared on behalf of the defendant in the magistrates’ court.
In appeal cases before the Crown Court legal aid may be granted by a
magistrates’ court or the Crown Court. The granting of legal aid for appeals
to the Court of Appeal Criminal Division rests with that court, which may
also grant legal aid for the purposes of a further appeal to the House of Lords.
The cost of legal aid in magistrates’ courts is paid out of the Legal Aid Fund.
In the higher courts payments are borne by the central Government.
Legal aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland is available to all persons in
custody on their first appearance in the sheriff courts. Otherwise, it is granted
for proceedings in these courts, and in the High Court of Justiciary, at the
discretion of the courts themselves except in appeals, when the final decision
whether or not it should be granted is in the hands of the Supreme Court
Committee of the Law Society of Scotland.
In Northern Ireland free legal aid is available in trials on indictment before
courts of assize and in county courts and in criminal proceedings before
magistrates’ courts. It is also available for appeals from magistrates’ courts
to the county court and in appeals from county courts and courts of assize
to the Court of Appeal Criminal Division.
Legal advice and assistance is available throughout the United Kingdom under
the Legal Advice and Assistance Act 1973 to people who, after a simple means
test, can show that they are eligible for legal aid. For clients in this category
solicitors are able to provide, either free of charge or on a contributory basis,
any service normally regarded as within a solicitor’s practice, including giving
advice, writing letters, drafting wills, obtaining counsel’s opinion, and visiting
a police station or prison, up to a value of £25 (which must include his own
costs and expenses and counsel’s fees if any), or a greater sum in certain circum¬
stances. Under this scheme a solicitor cannot take any step in court proceedings
or represent anyone before a tribunal, but he may advise a client as to what the
client can do for himself and prepare an application for legal aid in civil or
criminal proceedings. There is also provision in the Act for Legal Advice
Centres, run by the Law Societies, to be set up at a later stage. In a magistrates
court, the court may, if an unrepresented defendant appears to be in urgent need
of advice, refer him to a solicitor present in court.
The duty of keeping the law under review in order to ensure that it meets the
needs of modern society lies, in England and Wales with the Law Reform
LAW REFORM
Penalties
LAW AND ORDER I°3
Committee, the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Law Commission,
and in Scotland with the Scottish Law Commission. The Law Reform
Committee and the Criminal Law Revision Committee are standing commit¬
tees of judges and lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord Chancellor and
the Home Secretary, to examine such aspects of the civil and criminal law
as may be referred to them by the appropriate minister. The Law Commission
is a permanent body consisting of five lawyers of high standing, charged with
the duty of scrutinising the law with a view to its systematic development and
reform, including the possibility of codification, the elimination of anomalies,
the repeal of obsolete and unnecessary enactments, and the reduction of the
number of separate enactments. The Commission submits programmes of
reform to the Lord Chancellor and may recommend further examination of
specified topics by itself or by some other body, such as a Royal Commission
or the Law Reform Committee or Criminal Law Revision Committee. The
Lord Chancellor may also ask the Commission to prepare draft Bills or to
advise government departments. In the course of its work the Commission
seeks information about the legal systems of other countries in so far as this
may assist its work. The Scottish Law Commission has a constitution similar to
that of the English body and similar functions in relation to the law of Scot¬
land. It reports to the Lord Advocate.
PENAL SYSTEMS
The chief aims of the penal systems of the United Kingdom are to deter the
potential law-breaker and to reform the convicted offender. The element of
deterrence is intended to lie in the fear of detection, public trial and possibility
of punishment rather than in the severity of the punishment itself. In England
and Wales the Home Secretary is assisted by an Advisory Council on the Penal
System, which makes recommendations on such matters relating to the pre¬
vention of crime and the treatment of offenders as the Home Secretary may
refer to it. In Scotland the Scottish Council on Crime keeps under review
questions relating to the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders in
Scotland, in consultation with the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Methods current in British penal practice include imprisonment and, for
certain categories of young offender,1 other forms of custodial treatment:
borstal training; training in detention centres (in England, Wales and Scot¬
land); training in attendance centres (in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland); training in a remand home or training school approved by the
Ministry of Home Affairs (in Northern Ireland only). In addition an offender
may be put on probation; ordered to perform a specified number of hours of
unpaid service to the community; fined; given an absolute or (in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland) conditional discharge for up to three years, or
‘bound over’—that is to say, required to pledge money, with or without
sureties, ‘to keep the peace and be of good behaviour’. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland, he may be given a suspended sentence,2 which means that
the sentence will not actually be served unless he commits a further offence
punishable with imprisonment within a specified period (maximum two
1 Recent legislation has provided that juveniles who appear before the courts in care or
criminal proceedings may be made subject to a care order committing them to the
care of a local authority.
2 In England and Wales a suspended sentence of over six months may be accompanied
by a supervision order operative for the whole or part of the period for which the
sentence is suspended.
04 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
years).1 If he is given a suspended sentence of over six months, he may, in
England and Wales, be made subject to a supervision order for whole or part
of the period during which the sentence is suspended. An offender may also
have his sentence deferred for up to six months with his consent.2
The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for any personal
injury, loss or damage resulting from his offence and, in certain circumstances,
may order the forfeiture of property used, or intended for use, in the committal
of a crime. In the case of major crimes against property the Crown Court has
power to make a criminal bankruptcy order against the offender, which can
form the basis of bankruptcy proceedings against him. The Crown Court also
has power to disqualify from driving an offender convicted of one of the more
serious crimes, if a motor vehicle was used in its commission.
The mandatory penalty for murder in the United Kingdom, where the
death penalty has been abolished, is imprisonment for life. A life sentence is
also the maximum penalty which may be imposed for manslaughter and certain
other offences, including rape, robbery with violence, and arson.
Except in cases of murder, for which the penalty is prescribed by law, the
court which tries the offender has discretion to select the penalty that it
considers most suitable in the light of the nature and gravity of the offence
and the information available about the character and needs of the offender.
In certain cases this discretion is modified by statutory provisions designed
for the most part to ensure that prison sentences are kept to a minimum.
In England and Wales, no offender under the age of 17 may be sentenced to
imprisonment; for those aged 17 and under 21 prison sentences must be for
less than six months or for more than three years except in the case of an
offender who has served a sentence of borstal training or a prison sentence of
not less than six months, who may be sent to prison for 18 months or more.
In Scotland no offender under 21 may be sent to prison; in cases involving
young people aged 16 and under 21, where neither borstal training nor deten¬
tion in a detention centre is thought appropriate, detention in a young offen¬
ders’ institution may be ordered. (For special sentences for young offenders,
see p. 109) In England and Wales a person who has not previously served a
custodial sentence of a particular kind may not be sentenced to custodial treat¬
ment of that kind unless he is legally represented or has chosen not to be, and
unless the court is satisfied that no other sentence will suffice. On the other
hand, special sentences of somewhat longer duration (extended sentences)
may be imposed on persistent offenders.
In Northern Ireland special ‘extra legal’ procedures are provided under the
Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 19733 for dealing with people
suspected of terrorism.
Administrative In England and Wales the Home Secretary is the minister generally respon-
Authorities sible for legislation relating to the treatment of offenders, for collecting
statistical and other information about the operation of the penal system,
for keeping penal methods under review, and for bringing information about
these methods to the attention of the courts. He has specific responsibilities
for promoting the efficiency of the probation service, and for providing, main-
1 If a crime is committed within the period of a suspended sentence, that sentence will
normally take effect and a further sentence may be imposed.
2 This is intended to enable a court to arrive at the most appropriate sentence, taking
into account the offender’s conduct after, for instance, some expected change in his
3 This Act wiil expire at the end of one year unless it is prolonged with the express
approval of both Houses of Parliament.
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
LAW AND ORDER I°5
taining and managing prisons, borstal institutions, detention centres, remand
centres and attendance centres. Prison policy is carried out by the Prison
Department of the Home Office through the agency of the prison service which
operates under a director-general and includes a headquarters organisation,
regional directors, the governors and staff of the penal establishments and
members of particular professions, such as medical officers, chaplains and
social workers.
Reports to the Home Secretary on the administration of institutions in the
penal system are made by boards of visitors appointed by the Home Secretary,
not less than two members of which must be justices of the peace. The other
functions of these bodies include acting as the superior disciplinary authority
for reports of a more serious nature against prisoners and providing an inde¬
pendent channel of complaint for any prisoner having a grievance.
The boards of visitors also advise on the release on licence of the inmates
of borstals. The work of boards helps to preserve local interest, and is
voluntary.
The penal systems in Scotland and Northern Ireland are based on principles
similar to those applied in England and Wales. In Scotland the system is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, and in Northern Ireland
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The aims of the prison service are briefly to provide for the detention of those
committed to custody under the law in conditions generally acceptable to
society and to develop constructive methods of treatment and training designed
to lead to the prisoner’s rehabilitation and reform. To this end prisoners are
classified into groups, according to their record, character, potentialities and
the risk they present to security, and assigned, so far as circumstances permit,
to the establishment best suited to their needs. Untried prisoners are separated
from convicted prisoners and, as far as practicable, those under 21 are
separated from those over that age.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known
as ‘local prisons’; all are closed establishments. Other prisons, which may be
open or closed, receive prisoners on transfer from local prisons. To relieve
overcrowding in local prisons and generally to improve prisoners’ conditions,
new prisons are being built and existing establishments redeveloped and
modernised. During the last ten years the accommodation available in England
and Wales has been increased by some 9,500 places, and the current building
programme envisages an additional 11,500 places by 1975-76. In Scotland
1,500 new places have been provided and there is to be an average annual
increase of 350 places in the future.
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to im¬
prisonment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence
provided that this does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in Scotland,
30 days). In addition, except in Northern Ireland, prisoners serving fixed
sentences become eligible for consideration for release on parole after serving
one-third of their sentence, subject to a minimum of one year. Each eligible
prisoner is first considered by a local review committee which reports to the
Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland on his suitability for
parole. In some cases the minister concerned has power to grant or refuse
parole, while others he refers to the Parole Board for England and Wales or the
Parole Board for Scotland, each of which consists of a chairman and a number
of other members (about 30 in England and Wales and 14 in Scotland),
I06 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
appointed by the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland
respectively. Where the Parole Board recommends favourably, the decision
whether or not to release a prisoner depends finally on the minister, but where
the Board does not recommend release the minister has no power to grant
parole. The licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner would
have been released if he had not been licensed or, for prisoners serving extended
sentences (in England and Wales only) and offenders sentenced while under
21 years of age, until the end of the sentence.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence. In
Great Britain the usual practice in such cases is to seek the views of the local
review committee after the offender has served seven years. Each case is
considered by the Home Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland and
forwarded to the Parole Board concerned. The Lord Chief Justice in Eng¬
land or the Lord Justice General in Scotland (as the case may be) and, if he is
available, the judge who presided at the trial must, by law, be consulted
before any life sentence prisoner is released. In Northern Ireland, where the
Ministry for Home Affairs is responsible for the release on licence of prisoners
serving life sentences, the judiciary is similarly consulted before any such
release takes place.
Employment In England and Wales prison work is controlled by the Directorate of
Industries and Supply of the Prison Department of the Home Office, which
comprises an administration group and executive, professional and technical
staff. Technical advice and services to workshops are provided by visits from
regional and headquarters staff. Industrial managers at establishments assist
governors with the day-to-day running of the workshops. Farms and gardens
attached to penal establishments are controlled by the Chief Farms and
Gardens Manager at the Directorate’s headquarters. Prison catering is con¬
trolled by the Catering Manager, also from headquarters. In Scotland there
is a Supervisor of Industries and Training, who advises the Director of the
Prison Service on industrial employment (including agriculture) and training.
A deputy supervisor, two technical officers and four industrial managers work
under the supervisor. In Northern Ireland general supervision of prison work
is exercised by the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation, where necessary,
with other government departments.
The main aim of prison industries is to give an offender in custody a training
and experience that will fit him to get and retain a job on discharge.
The primary source of work lies in the requirements of the prison service
itself, that is to say, building and maintenance, domestic services and equip¬
ment. Goods and services are also supplied to other government departments
and, on an increasing scale, to other purchasers, both inside and outside the
public service. A few prisoners are employed outside prison in agriculture and
on work such as archaeological excavation and the presentation of canals.
In England, Wales and Scotland, small payments are made to inmates for
the work they do; in some prisons payments above the minimum are made on
the basis of output and skill; in Northern Ireland a progressive system of
earnings, related to work done, is being gradually introduced.
Any prisoner serving a sentence of four years or more may be considered
for employment in an ordinary civilian job outside prison for about six
months before his discharge. Prisoners selected for the scheme may live
either in prison or in a prison hostel; they are paid normal wages, from which
they support their families and meet their own expenses.
Education for those in custody in Great Britain is provided by local education
Education
Medical Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
LAW AND ORDER I07
authorities in close liaison with the Department of Education and Science, and
in Scotland with the Scottish Education Department. Most prisons have an
education officer assisted by a number of part-time teachers and, usually, one
or more full-time teachers. Prisoners may attend evening classes and take
correspondence courses when these are available; other educational facili¬
ties, such as physical training, concerts, plays, films, lectures and group
discussions, are arranged where facilities allow; prisoners may also use the
prison libraries, which depend largely upon the local public libraries for their
stocks. For selected prisoners vocational training courses, leading to an
acknowledged qualification, such as that of the City and Guilds of London
Institute, are provided, and experiments with Open University studies and
full-time education are being undertaken. Education in prisons in Northern
Ireland is the responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Facilities
similar to those in Great Britain are provided under the direction of the Prison
Service Education Officer.
Medical attention is provided by full-time and part-time medical officers
whose duties include the care of the physical and mental health of prison
inmates, and the oversight of those services which affect health in prisons.
In a few prisons there are large, fully equipped hospitals where major
surgery can be undertaken and treatment by visiting specialists given both to
inmates and to prisoners from other establishments. There is also one
psychiatric prison (in England and Wales) with accommodation for some 350
people.
Several prisons have their own psychiatric clinics, to which prisoners
from other establishments may be referred and, in England and Wales, there
is a prison psychological service, whose officers assist governors and medical
officers in their work of examining and classifying prisoners. The hospital
facilities of the National Health Service (see Chapter 6) are available for the
treatment of prisoners in appropriate cases and arrangements may be made,
where necessary, for prisoners to receive treatment after release.
All prisoners, from the beginning of their sentence, have a legal right to
write and receive letters and to be visited by their relations at regular intervals.
They also have such privileges as additional letters and visits, the use of
books, periodicals and newspapers, and the right to make purchases from the
canteen with money they have earned in prison. Depending on the facilities
available at individual establishments, they may be granted the further
privileges of dining and recreation in association and watching television in the
evening.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or board of
visitors, who have power to order, among other penalties, forfeiture of re¬
mission and forfeiture of privileges.
Welfare in prisons is the general concern of the prison staff as a whole, and in
particular of the chaplains and assistant governors, but special responsibilities
attach to prison welfare officers, who, in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, are probation officers seconded by the probation and after-care
service. (In Scotland, prison welfare officers are specially appointed for this
purpose.) The functions of these officers include helping the prisoner in his
relationships with individuals and organisations outside the prison, and
making plans for the prisoner’s after-care, working closely in this connection
with colleagues in the probation and after-care service and with other agencies
jo8 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in the community whose help the prisoner or his family may need either during
sentence or after release.
For the spiritual welfare of the inmates, a chaplain of the Church of
England (in Scotland of the Church of Scotland, and in Northern Ireland of
the Church of Ireland and of the Presbyterian Church), a Roman Catholic
priest and a minister of the Methodist Church are appointed to every prison.
Ministers of other denominations are either appointed or specially called in as
required. Chaplains not only hold regular services, but also visit every
prisoner soon after reception, shortly before release and regularly during
sentence, and pay daily visits to all prisoners who are sick or confined to
their cells and to any others who apply to see them.
Prisoners may also receive visits from specially appointed prison visitors,
whose work is voluntary and in England and Wales is co-ordinated and
guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
In England and Wales pre-release courses are conducted at all prisons.
During these courses experts hold open forum with prisoners nearing their
release on the domestic, social and employment problems with which they
are likely to be faced. Certain categories of prisoners may be granted home
leave towards the end of their sentences to enable them to preserve links with
their families and friends, or to make new contacts with people, including
potential employers, who may be able to assist them on release. Some categories
are considered for two periods of home leave, one allowing five clear days and
the other a week-end at home, and others for one period of five days at home.
Probation Probation is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender while he
and After-care continues his ordinary life under the supervision of a probation officer, whose
duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. After-care, which includes
compulsory supervision for certain categories of offenders (including prisoners
released on licence and people who have been given suspended sentence of
more than six months) is aimed mainly at helping former prison inmates to
adjust themselves to life in a free community. In England and Wales both
services are provided by probation and after-care officers employed by pro¬
bation and after-care committees.1 In Scotland the responsibility for statutory
and voluntary after-care is vested in social workers from the local authority
social work departments. In Northern Ireland the Secretary of State has
parliamentary responsibility for the probation and after-care service, the
Ministry of Home Affairs advises upon its organisation.
Before making a probation order (which may be for not less than one and not
more than three years) the court must explain its effects and make sure that
the probationer understands that if he fails to comply with the requirements of
the order he will be liable to be dealt with again for the original offence. A
probation order can be made only if the offender is 17 years of age or over and
must have his consent; it usually requires the probationer to keep in regular
touch with the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to lead an
industrious life. It may also require him to live in a specified place, or to
submit to treatment for his mental condition.
Probation and after-care committees may, with the approval of the Home
Secretary provide and maintain day-training centres (which offenders may be
required to attend for up to 60 days for intensive supervision and social
education as a condition of a probation order), bail hostels, probation hostels
and other establishments for use in connection with the rehabilitation of
1 Composed for the most part of justices.
LAW AND ORDER
YOUNG
OFFENDERS
Borstal
Training
Detention
Centres
109
offenders. The service is also responsible for administering the scheme of
service to the community, whereby courts have the power to require offenders
to perform, in their spare time, up to 240 hours (within 12 months) of such
work as painting and decorating for families in need, the physically handi¬
capped, and the elderly; building adventure playgrounds; clearing sites at
redevelopment areas; and nature conservation tasks.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation and
after-care officers are available to every criminal court. In England and Wales
their appointment is the responsibility of probation and after-care committees
—first appointments, except in the case of professionally trained officers,
being subject to confirmation by the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the
Ministry of Home Affairs appoints probation officers.
In Scotland, where there is no separate probation service, the local authority
social work departments provide the services and officers required by the
criminal courts in their areas. Offenders subject to probation orders or to
after-care supervision following release from a penal institution are super¬
vised by specially approved social workers from these departments. Recruit¬
ment is the responsibility of the local authority concerned, and appointments
are not subject to ministerial confirmation. Unqualified staff appointed to posts
in social work departments can be seconded for professional training after
one year in post.
Responsibility for the promotion, and recognition of courses for the training
of social workers, including probation officers, is vested in the Central Council
for Education and Training in Social Work.
The borstal training system, which is available for offenders who have
reached the age of 15 but are not yet 21 (16 to 21 in Scotland and Northern
Ireland), consists of different borstals specialising in different types of young
offender, classified according to such criteria as age, intelligence and criminal
sophistication. There are also a few borstals for special purposes, such as
allocation or recall. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the period of
training ranges from six months to two years and is followed, in England and
Wales, by supervision for two years and in Northern Ireland for one year
from the date of release. In Scotland, where there is no minimum period of
detention, the maximum is two years and the supervision period is for one
year from the date of release. The system is essentially remedial and educa¬
tional, based on personal training by a carefully selected staff. Emphasis is
placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is much freedom of move¬
ment and many borstals are open establishments.
Detention centres provide a means of training, and are intended to deter
from further crime, young offenders for whom a long period of residential
training does not seem necessary but who cannot be taught respect for the
law by such measures as fines or probation. In England and Wales there are
five centres for boys of not less than 14 and under 17, and 13 centres for young
men aged 17 and under 21. In Scotland there is one senior centre. Detention
in England and Wales may be for not less than three and not more than six
months for those over 17; if consecutive sentences are passed, the total term
may not exceed nine months at any one time. Remission of up to one-third of
the sentence may be earned for good conduct. In Scotland the fixed period for
all detention centre sentences is three months and the age ranges from 16 to 21.
The regime at detention centres provides a normal working week of
44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to physical training. Boys of
no
Attendance
Centres
CRIMINOLOGICAL
RESEARCH
POLICE IN
GREAT BRITAIN
Police Forces
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
compulsory school age have day-time and evening classes, and further education
is provided for others in the evenings. Nearly all young offenders discharged
from detention centres are subject to statutory supervision for 12 months.
Sixty attendance centres have been established in England and Wales for boys
between the ages of 10 and 17 found guilty of offences for which older people
could be sentenced to imprisonment. Boys ordered to attend must do so
during their spare time on Saturday mornings or afternoons; they may be
required to attend for up to three hours on any one occasion and for a total of
not less than 12 hours (with certain exceptions) and not more than 24. The
activities include physical training and instruction in handicrafts or some other
practical subject. Efforts are made at the centres to induce the boys to join a
youth club or other suitable organisation.
In Northern Ireland there is one attendance centre; it operates on the same
lines as the centres in England and Wales, but caters for boys between the
ages of 12 and 17.
Criminological research, particularly research directed to the question of the
treatment of offenders, is carried out by the Home Office Research Unit
(which also serves the Scottish Home and Health Department), by university
departments and by various other research organisations; much of it is
financed by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Studies undertaken by the Home Office Research Unit are mainly concentrated
on subjects of direct interest to the home departments. Research and teaching
in criminology are provided at the Institute of Criminology at Cambridge
University and at Edinburgh University, at both of which postgraduate
courses are available. Courses in criminology are also available at the univer¬
sities of Durham, Reading, Oxford, Manchester and Southampton; the Lon¬
don School of Economics, and University College in the University of London;
and the universities of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Strathclyde in Scotland.
These institutions likewise conduct research.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised in a number of large forces
linked with local government and subject to the influence and eventual control
of the Home Secretary in England and Wales and the Secretary of State for
Scotland in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, it is organised in a single force.
There are 67 regular police forces in Great Britain: 47 in England and Wales
and 20 in Scotland. Each police force is responsible for a separate police area,
but there is constant co-operation between them.
In England and Wales the forces are defined according to area of res¬
ponsibility as: county forces (5); county borough forces (6); combined forces
which are forces whose area of responsibility extends over two or more coun¬
ties or county boroughs (34); the Metropolitan Police Force, which is respon¬
sible for an area of approximately 15 miles radius from Charing Cross, but
excluding the City of London; and the City of London force. In Scotland
there are four burgh forces, 15 combined forces, and one county force.
The strength of the regular police force in Great Britain is over 111,000, the
size of individual police forces depending on the area and population which
they serve. In England and Wales, outside Greater London, establishments
range from about 750 to 7,000, the average being 1,850 officers. The strength
LAW AND ORDER
III
Police
Authorities
and Chief
Constables
Central
Authority
of the Metropolitan Police Force is about 21,200. In Scotland forces range in
strength from about 130 to 2,800.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are constabularies maintained
by the statutory transport and other public authorities, and by the Ministry
of Defence.
Each of the regular police forces is maintained by a police authority. In the
counties of England and Wales the authority is a police committee and in the
county boroughs a watch committee. Both are committees of the local council
and consist of councillors and justices in a proportion of two to one. Com¬
bined police authorities, which also consist of councillors and justices, contain
representatives from each constituent area covered by an amalgamation scheme.
The police authority for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Sec¬
retary. In the City of London the Court of Common Council is the police
authority, although it usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all
police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the police authority for the county is the county council; in
the burghs it is the town council; and where there are combined forces there
is a joint police committee.
The primary duty of the police authority is to provide an adequate and
efficient police force for the area for which it is responsible. To enable it to
carry out this duty, it is empowered, subject to the approval of the Home
Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland, to appoint the chief constable
and the deputy and assistant chief constables of the force, and fix the authorised
establishment. It may also retire the chief constable in the interests of efficiency,
if the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland agrees, and
must keep itself informed of the way in which chief constables deal with
complaints from the public against police officers. In addition, police authori¬
ties, with the consent of the Secretary of State, provide the buildings and
equipment needed for their forces. In the Metropolitan Police District the
chief officer of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the
Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police
forces and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below
deputy or assistant chief constable; they are, however, generally answerable
to the police authorities on matters of efficiency, and are required to submit
a written annual report.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who have a
general responsibility for the preservation of law and order throughout Great
Britain, are concerned both in the overall organisation of the police service
and in its administration and operation. In this regard, they not only approve
the appointment of chief constables, but may require a police authority to
retire a chief constable in the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a
chief constable on any matters relating to the policing of his area, or cause
a local enquiry to be held. They are also empowered to make regulations as
to the government, administration and conditions of service in police forces.
The police regulations cover such matters as rank; qualifications for appoint¬
ment, promotion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and
allowances; and uniform and equipment. Some of these are first negotiable
on the Police Council; the others are discussed on representative advisory
bodies together with any general questions affecting the police service.
The Home Secretary is advised on all matters concerning police efficiency
112
Police Officers
Police Cadets
Civilian Staff
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and five Inspectors of
Constabulary. The inspectors are individually responsible for the inspection
of a number of forces, and must be satisfied of their continuing efficiency
through formal annual inspections and by maintaining close touch on all
matters with the forces for which they are responsible. The inspectors report
to the Home Secretary on the condition of all the forces in England and Wales,
with the exception of the Metropolitan Police Force. The Secretary of State
for Scotland is similarly assisted by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Con¬
stabulary in Scotland and one other Inspector of Constabulary.
All police authorities receive a government grant equal to half their net
expenditure, except the Common Council of the City of London, which
receives one-third. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land are empowered to withhold the grant, in whole or in part, permanently
or for such time as they may determine, if they are not satisfied that a police
area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly maintained and administered,
or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved by them.
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the ages
of 19 and 30, and to women in England and Wales between the ages of 19 and
35, and in Scotland between 19 and 3°' An individual chief constable may
approve appointment of especially suitable older men and women.
There are about 380 graduates serving in the police forces of Great Britain,
and over 80 police officers reading for university degrees.
The standard police ranks in Great Britain, except in the Metropolitan
Police District, are: chief constable, assistant chief constable, chief super¬
intendent, superintendent, chief inspector, inspector, sergeant and constable.
In the Metropolitan Police District the chief officer is the Commissioner of
Police of the Metropolis. He is assisted by a deputy commissioner and four
assistant commissioners. Next in rank are deputy assistant commissioners, and
then commanders; from chief superintendent the ranks are the same as in
the rest of the country. In the City of London the ranks are the same as in the
regions except that the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police and the
second in command is an assistant commissioner.
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union since it is a
basic principle of the service that its members must not only be free from
political bias, but must also be seen to be free of it. All ranks, however, have
their own associations which can make representations to ministers or to
police authorities on matters of interest or concern to their members.
Police cadets are recruited from among boys and girls1 between 16 and i8|-
years of age. They have no police powers but in addition to their educational
studies and physical and adventure training, are given instruction in elementary
police work. During the latter part of their training they do practical police
work on attachment to the local force. Cadet training is designed to prepare
boys and girls for a career in the police service upon attaining the minimum
age for constables.
In order to release as many police officers as possible for operational duties
police authorities employ a large number of civilians (about 34,700) on
administrative (pay, records, finance, and other general subjects) and other
duties (fingerprint, scenes of crime and control room work). Some civilian staff
are also employed on catering and domestic duties.
1 There are a few forces which do not recruit girls.
Traffic Wardens
Special
Constables
Police Duties
Co-ordination
between
Police Forces
LAW AND ORDER H3
Traffic wardens (of whom there are about 7,000) are extensively employed to
discharge specified duties connected with road traffic and vehicles, normally
undertaken by the police. In this connection they may be authorised to serve
fixed penalty notices1 for minor offences to which the fixed penalty system
applies; to man police car-pounds (except in Scotland); to enforce the vehicle
excise laws; and to obtain the name and address of people thought to have
committed a traffic offence of the type with which traffic wardens are com¬
petent to deal. They may also be employed to direct traffic, to act as parking
attendants at street parking places, and as school-crossing patrols, if the police
agree. Traffic wardens remain under the control of the chief constable of the
force to which they are attached, whatever duties they may perform.
Each of the regular police forces has an attachment of special constables, who
are volunteers willing to perform police duties without pay in their spare time.
In England and Wales the function of special constables is to act as auxiliaries
to the regular force when required. In Scotland they are employed only in
emergencies although they may be assigned for duty for training purposes.
A police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office
and exercises his powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by
common law, by virtue of his office; he is an agent of the law of the land, not
of the police authority nor of the central Government and although his chief
officer of police has a vicarious liability for any wrongful act he may commit
in the performance of his functions as a constable, he himself may also be sued
in respect of his own wrongful act.
The many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from
the protection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic
control to crime prevention, criminal investigation and the apprehension of
offenders.
The main departments in all police forces are the uniform department and
the criminal investigation department; many forces also have specialised
departments, including traffic departments, river police (in districts which
include long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted branch (for main¬
taining order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
In all aspects of police work, the application of scientific aids has reached
an advanced stage: about £20 million is spent annually on police equipment,
including upwards of £3 million on radio communications; the police have
some 30,000 personal radio sets operational; and a police computer project is
being developed for rationalising the keeping of records and seeding up the
dissemination of information.
A number of common services are provided by the central government depart¬
ments for the benefit of all forces to supplement those provided by the police
authorities for their own use and by communal arrangements made between
the forces themselves. The most important of these services are: training
services, which in England and Wales provide training centres for recruit
training and a central police college for higher training and in Scotland a
central police college with courses of recruit training and higher training; a
forensic science service in England and Wales which provides eight regional
laboratories (in addition to the Metropolitan Police Laboratory); telecom¬
munications services, including depots, which in England and Wales supply and
1 A fixed penalty notice gives the recipient the option of paying a specified sum to the
clerk of the appropriate magistrates’ court (in Scotland, burgh court) instead of having
his case tried in the ordinary way.
114 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scientific Research
and Planning
Metropolitan
Police Force
Services
maintain wireless equipment for the police; and central and provincial criminal
records which are available to all forces. In addition, regional crime squads,
consisting of teams of experienced detectives from several forces, operating
under a committee of chief constables, are employed in England and Wales to
investigate major crimes involving enquiries in more than one police area. In
Scotland the Scottish Crime Squad assists Scottish police forces in the investi¬
gation and prevention of crime and in the collection and maintenance of in¬
formation concerning criminals. Arrangements are also made for everyday
assistance by one force to another.
There are three inter-related branches of the Home Office Police Department
devoted to scientific research and medium- and long-term planning. The Police
Scientific Development Branch and the Police Research Services Branch,
which are staffed by senior police officers, are concerned with operational
research into police methods and the development of equipment for police
forces throughout Great Britain; the Police Management and Planning group,
which is composed mainly of economists and accountants, is responsible for the
development of a planning-programming-budgeting system for the police, and
for the medium- and long-term planning of police resources.
Services provided by the Metropolitan Police Force for other forces include
(1) the publication of the Police Gazetted which contains particulars of people
wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is supplied without charge
to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain other Common¬
wealth and foreign forces; (2) the organisation and control of the special branch
of the criminal investigation department at New Scotland Yard, whose duties
include the protection of royalty, some ministers and distinguished foreign
visitors; and (3) the carrying out of extradition orders made by the courts. The
Metropolitan Police Force is also available, on request, to assist any other
police force in England and Wales in criminal investigations. Similarly, the
services of the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police Force
and the City of London Police, are available throughout Great Britain for the
investigation of serious company frauds. The National Central Bureau, which
handles the business of the International Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol) on behalf of Great Britain and the British dependencies, is part of
the Metropolitan Police Force. For certain of these services, the Metropolitan
Police Force receives an additional Exchequer grant.
POLICE IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) operates under the direction of a
chief constable who is responsible to the Police Authority for Northern
Ireland.
The RUC, which has a strength of over 4,000 (all ranks), operates through¬
out the Province on a divisional basis. Ranks, conditions of service, pay and
general duties follow closely on the lines of the police service in Great
Britain. The Police Authority, which consists of a chairman, a vice-chairman
and between 14 and 20 other members, is responsible for the management of
police services.
The RUC is assisted in its police duties by the Royal Ulster Constabulary
Reserve, the members of which receive nominal remuneration. While on duty,
they have the same powers, privileges and duties as, by the law for the time
being in force, may be exercised by, or are conferred upon, members of the
regular force.
1 The Scottish Criminal Record Office in Glasgow is responsible for the publication of
the Scottish Police Gazette.
5 Defence
Europe
Beyond Europe
The United
Nations
POLICY
Defence policy is designed to enable Britain, together with allied countries, to
assume a proper share of responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
stability in the world. Britain’s basic security depends on the strength of the
North Atlantic Alliance, and it is to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) that by far the greater part of Britain’s military forces is committed.
Britain makes a major contribution to the full range of deterrent capabilities,
both conventional and nuclear, required to maintain NATO’s defensive
posture. Within NATO, Britain has played a leading part in the efforts of the
European members to assume, through closer co-operation, an increasing
responsibility for Western defence. In the Eurogroup Britain and nine other
European members have worked to improve their contribution to the Alliance
and to achieve a more effective collective result from the available resources.
Through the European Defence Improvement Programme and additional
expenditure on their national forces they have increased the effectiveness of
the Alliance’s conventional capabilities and strengthened their co-operation in
such areas as training, logistics and the procurement of equipment (see p. 125).
Britain has played a major part in the efforts to reduce tension and achieve
more lasting peace in Europe, and has worked to ensure that the negotiations
with the Soviet Union and Eastern European countries on security and co¬
operation in Europe and mutual and balanced force reductions will contribute
to increased stability and improved mutual relations.
At the same time it is recognised that British interests and responsibilities are
not confined to the NATO area, and Britain continues to co-operate on a
scale appropriate to national resources, in maintaining stability outside Europe.
Britain is an active member of the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO),
the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), and contributes, with
Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore, to the Five-Power defence
arrangements in Malaysia and Singapore, which involves the continuing
deployment of British forces in the area. Britain is also responsible for the
defence and internal security of its remaining dependencies and maintains
garrisons and other forces for the protection of these territories and of those
to whom Britain owes a special duty by treaty or otherwise. British forces visit
the Gulf and provide military training and other assistance there and in
Africa, Asia and the Middle East. In addition, the armed forces give extensive
non-military assistance to communities overseas, particularly in such activities
as disaster assistance and development work.
Britain supports the peacekeeping and other efforts of the United Nations—
supplying the largest national contingent to the UN Peace-Keeping Force in
Cyprus—and other international authorities working to eliminate the sources
of tension and conflict between nations and to promote arms control and
disarmament. Britain played a leading part in the negotiations for the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and the Sea-Bed Treaty, and Britain’s proposal for a
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
convention for the prohibition of biological methods of warfare led to the
conclusion of a further international arms control agreement.
PLANNING AND CONTROL
Supreme responsibility for national defence rests with the Prime Minister and
the Cabinet, who are responsible to Parliament. Defence problems and their
relationship with foreign and economic policy are dealt with on the Cabinet’s
behalf by the Committee on Defence and Oversea Policy, under the chair¬
manship of the Prime Minister.
The formulation of defence policy is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Defence. In recent years the emphasis in defence organisation has
been on increased central policy control and the co-ordinated planning of
the defence effort as a whole. The Ministry of Defence (see p. 51) ensures
effective co-ordination on policy and administration concerning the Services.
One of the most recent developments was the creation of a Procurement
Executive within the Ministry of Defence to be responsible for the procure¬
ment of defence equipment. The Secretary of State is assisted by a Minister
of State, and by three Under-Secretaries of State for the Navy, Army and
Air Force respectively. They, together with the Chief of the Defence Staff,
the three Service Chiefs of Staff, the Chief of Personnel and Logistics, the
Chief Scientific Adviser, the Chief Executive of the Procurement Executive
and the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence, form the Defence
Council, which deals with major defence policy under the chairmanship of the
Secretary of State. The Chiefs of Staff Committee, comprising the Chief of
the Defence Staff as chairman and the Chiefs of Staff of the three Services, is
responsible for giving professional advice on strategy and operations, and on
the military implications of defence policy. The day-to-day management of the
three Services is the responsibility of the Admiralty, Army and Air Force
Boards of the Defence Council.
Information about defence policy and the armed forces is provided in an
annual Statement on the Defence Estimates (Cmnd. 523T I973) published in
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE EXPENDITURE 1973-74
Navy general
Miscellaneous expenditure and receipts - £30 million TOTAL £3365 million
DEFENCE
NATO Strategy
Europe
Northern
Ireland
Outside Europe
117
February. The defence estimates for 1973-74 totalled £3,365*5 million, which
represents about 5*75 per cent of the gross national product and a real increase
of about 5*6 per cent over the 1972-73 estimates. Of the total expenditure
£1,586*5 million (47*1 per cent) is on personnel (pay, allowances, pensions),
£1,247*6 million (37*1 per cent) on equipment and the remainder, £531*4
million (15*8 per cent), on works, lands, miscellaneous stores and services. A
functional analysis of expenditure is shown in the diagram on p. 116. Pro¬
jections of public expenditure for the next five years are published at the end
of each year (see p. 209): Public Expenditure to (see Bibliography
p. 476) envisages an average annual rate of growth of defence expenditure of
2*4 per cent over this period.
DEPLOYMENT
The basis of the present NATO strategy of flexible response, which retains
the principle of forward defence, is that credible deterrence of military actions
of all kinds is necessary. While NATO must be ready to use nuclear weapons
if necessary, its conventional forces must be maintained to enable it to respond
to aggression at a variety of levels, providing an alternative to a nuclear
response against anything but a major attack, and thereby enabling it to gain
time for negotiations to end a conflict. The strategy requires mobile and well-
equipped conventional forces and tactical and strategic nuclear weapons.
Britain makes a contribution to the forces required by NATO’s present
strategy unmatched by any other European member of the North Atlantic
Alliance. The British Polaris force forms the contribution to the Western
strategic deterrent. Virtually the whole of the Royal Navy is earmarked for
assignment with all major units having NATO commitments in the Channel,
Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean. The Royal Navy also contributes to
NATO’s Standing Naval Force Atlantic, Standing Naval Force Channel and
Naval On Call Force Mediterranean. The British Army of the Rhine (BAOR),
an independent brigade in Berlin and RAF Germany are deployed in the
Federal Republic of Germany. BAOR is organised as a corps of three divisions
with five armoured brigades, one mechanised brigade and two artillery
brigades. Its peace-time strength of around 58,000 would be doubled on
mobilisation from Britain’s reserves (see p. 124). Royal Air Force Germany is
a tactical air force including strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support and
air-defence aircraft. In addition, most of the air and ground combat units
based in the United Kingdom have primary roles in support of NATO, to
provide an important part of NATO’s mobile reinforcement capability. These
include the ground elements of the United Kingdom Mobile Force, the
United Kingdom Joint Airborne Task Force and the British contribution to
the Allied Command Europe Mobile Force (Land). RAF Strike Command
provides forces for strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support, air defence
and maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare, together with transport
forces and air support for the United Kingdom Mobile Force and Allied
Command Europe Mobile Force (Air).
At home a major task of the armed forces since 1969 has been to assist the
civil authorities in Northern Ireland in the maintenance of law and order, and
they have operated to counter the terrorist activities of extremist organisations.
Britain continues to declare forces to certain contingency plans of the South-
East Asia Treaty Organisation. Forces based in Malta and Cyprus provide
Deployment of the Armed Forces-early 1973
1 Great Britain
RN
Commander-in-Chief Fleet
Polaris Force
Other ships of the Fleet
Royal Marine Commando Brigade
less two Commando
Army
UK Land Forces including land
element of UK Mobile Force (one
Division, three Brigades and one
Parachute Brigade)
UKelement of Allied Command
Europe Mobile Force (Land)
Special Air Service Regiment
Gurkha Infantry Battalion
RAF
Strike Command including
Buccaneer, Canberra, Lightning,
Nimrod, Phantom FG1, Airborne Early
Warning S/7acA-/efo/?, Victor and
Vulcan aircraft plus Harrier, Phantom
FGR2, strategic and tactical transport
aircraft and tactical helicopters.
Command provides air element of
U K Mobile Force and Allied Command
Europe Mobile Force
Six Squadrons RAF Regiment
8 British Honduras
Army
One Infantry Battalion (less one
Company)
RAF
Detachment RAF Regiment
10 Caribbean
RN
Frigates
Royal Marine Detachment
11 Lisbon
RN
Standing Naval Force Atlantic
Frigate visiting
12Atlantic
RN
Destroyers and Frigates on exercise
2 Northern Ireland
RN
Royal Marine Commando in Infantry
role
Coastal Minesweeper Patrol
Army
HQ Northern Ireland
Three Brigade HQ
One Armoured Reconnaissance
Regiment
Three Armoured Reconnaissance
Squadrons
Three Field Engineer Squadrons
17 units in Infantry role
Four Army Aviation Squadrons
11 Battalions Ulster Defence
Regiment
RAF
Wessex helicopters
Squadron RAF Regiment
3 Norwegian Sea
RN
Distant Water Fishery Protection
Patrol
13Gibraltar
RN
Frigate
Royal Marine Special Boat
Detachment
Army
One Infantry Battalion
RAF
Hunters
14West Africa
RN
Destroyer and Frigate on passage
toUK
15 Falkland Islands
RN
Royal Marine Detachment
^16 Antarctica
RN
Ice Patrol Ship
4 Federal Republic of Germany
Army (British Army ofthe Rhine)
One Corps
Three Division HQ
Five Armoured Brigades
One Mechanised Brigade
Two Artillery Brigades
RAF (Germany)
Buccaneers
Phantom FGR2s
Harriers
Lightnings
Wessex helicopters
BloodhoundSudace-Xo-fK\t Missiles
Two Squadrons RAF Regiment
6 Cyprus
Army
Two Armoured Reconnaissance
Squadrons
Two Infantry Battalions
RAF
HQ Near East Air Force
Hercules
Vulcans
Lightnings
fl/ooc//?oty/7cfSurface-to-Air Missiles
Helicopters
Two Squadrons RAF Regiment
7 Hong Kong
RN
Frigate
Patrol craft
Army
Two UK Infantry Battalions
Three Gurkha Infantry Battalions
Artillery Regiment
RAF
Helicopters
Detachment RAF Regiment
5 Berlin
Army
Infantry Brigade
17 Malta
RN
Royal Marine Commando
RAF
Canberras
Nimrods
19 Masirah and Gan
RAF
Staging posts
RN
Frigate
Army
Infantry Battalion Group
RAF
Nimrods
18 Mediterranean 20 Indian Ocean and 22 South China Sea
RN Mozambique Channel RN
Destroyer RN Frigates
Frigate Frigates Patrol craft
120
Five-Power
Defence
Service
Organisation
Women’s
Services
Manpower
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
support for the Central Treaty Organisation. A force of six ships provides a
presence in the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia areas as well as contributing
to the Five-Power defence arrangements and enforcing the United Nations’
embargo on the import of oil to Rhodesia.
The Five-Power defence arrangements in Malaysia and Singapore are based
on a political commitment of a consultative nature undertaken equally by all
five powers relating to the defence of Malaysia and Singapore. The British
contribution to the arrangements, designed to complement the forces of the
other four countries, consists of a battalion group, with appropriate staff and
logistic elements, in Singapore, a detachment of long-range maritime recon¬
naissance aircraft and support helicopters and two frigates or destroyers and a
submarine attached to the Royal Australian Navy. For further details of these
and other deployments see map on pp. 118-19.
THE ARMED FORCES
Britain’s armed forces are organised on a tri-service basis, and consist of the
Royal Navy and Royal Marines, the Army and the Royal Air Force.
The Royal Navy has four main arms: the Naval General Service, which
mans and maintains the surface fleet; the Fleet Air Arm; the Submarine
Service; and the Royal Marines, who primarily provide an amphibious striking-
The Army is organised into some 30 arms and services which include the
Guards division and divisions of infantry, the Royal Armoured Corps, the
Royal Regiment of Artillery, the Household Cavalry, the Corps of Royal
Engineers, the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, the Royal Corps of
Signals, the Royal Corps of Transport, the Army Air Corps, the Royal Army
Ordnance Corps and the Royal Army Education Corps.
The Royal Air Force is organised in commands, on a functional basis at
home and on a geographical basis overseas. These comprise Strike Command
and Training and Maintenance Commands, Royal Air Force Germany and
Near East Air Force. The Royal Navy has a unified sea command, Commander-
in-Chief, Fleet: shore commands have been reorganised under a single
Commander-in-Chief, Naval Home Command, Portsmouth, with subordinate
commands at Plymouth, Chatham and Rosyth. At home the Army is under a
single command, United Kingdom Land Forces: overseas commands are
British Army of the Rhine, Near East Land Forces, Land Forces Hong Kong,
and British Troops Malta and Gibraltar.
The assigned British forces in Malaysia and Singapore, along with the forces
of Australia and New Zealand, are under an integrated ANZUK command m
Singapore.
The three women’s services, the Women’s Royal Naval Service (WRNS), the
Women’s Royal Army Corps (WRAC) and the Women’s Royal Air Force
(WRAF), are integral parts of the armed forces, and servicewomen serve
alongside servicemen in Britain and overseas. Nursing services are provided by
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval Nursing Service, Queen Alexandra’s Royal
Army Nursing Corps and Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force Nursing Service.
Britain’s armed forces totalled 371,100 on 1st January i973> 82,300 in the
Royal Navy and Royal Marines, 181,400 in the Army and 107,300 in the Royal
Air Force. The forecast total for 1st April 1974 was 353,000. Recruitment to
DEFENCE
121
Engagements
Training
the armed forces has improved significantly in recent years, a record level of
46,500 recruits having been achieved in 1971-72 and about 40,000 in 1972-73.
The total number of civilian staff employed by the Ministry of Defence on
1 st April 1973 was about 324,000. A functional analysis of personnel is shown
in the diagram below.
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL 1973-74
Military personnel: Total 370,000 Civilian personnel: Total 323,900
Nuclear strategic
force 2,200
Navy general purpose
combat forces 34,300
Production, rep
and associated
facilities
in Britain 10,700
Research and
development 900
Reserve and
auxiliary formations'
2,400
Other army
combat forces
18,600
force general
purpose combat forces
49,900
Nuclear strategic
force 3,500
Navy general
purpose combat
forces 10,100
European theatre
ground forces
30,100
Other army
combat forces
7,900
Air force general
  purpose combat
forces 13,200
Air mobility 3,300
Reserve and
Research and auxiliary formations
development 3,800
34,100
Notes 1. The above are average strengths and include locally enlisted personnel.
2. Civilian personnel comprise 144,300 non-industrial staff and 179,600 industrial staff.
Britain’s armed forces consist entirely of personnel serving on a voluntary
basis. Engagements available to non-commissioned ranks range from three to
22 years, with a wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service.
In 1972 a new type of engagement was introduced for non-commissioned
ranks of all three Services, under which recruits are committed for only a
minimum period of productive service (about three years) and, subject to that
minimum, may leave at any time at 18 months’ notice. Discharge may also be
granted on compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on grounds of conscience,
for which there is an independent tribunal to assess cases. Commissions may
be granted for short, medium and long terms. In all three Services there are
opportunities for promotion from the ranks, and almost half of each year’s
officer intake is on such promotion. Entry to commissioned ranks is on the
basis of educational and other qualifications (O and A levels and their equiva¬
lents or degrees): all three Services have schemes for university cadetships
which enable young men to take a degree before commencing their training.
Entrants to non-commissioned ranks are given basic training, and further and
specialist training is given during the course of their careers. Young service¬
men are encouraged to study for secondary educational qualifications, all three
Services providing extensive facilities for the consolidation and development
of Service personnel’s education. Trade and technical training, though pri¬
marily designed for Service purposes, leads for about half the total number of
servicemen to nationally recognised qualifications including qualification for
membership of trade unions.
Service technical training is highly valued in industry, which is a significant
advantage on return to civilian life. To assist such resettlement the Services
provide an advisory service, familiarisation attachments to civilian organisa¬
tions and, for those without technical qualifications, opportunity and assistance
to study for suitable civilian qualifications.
122
COMBAT FORCES
Nuclear
Strategic Force
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equipment
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Entrants to commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia
Royal Naval College Dartmouth, the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, the
Royal Air Force College Cranwell or similar institutions. This is followed by
specialist training, often including degree courses at university or Service
establishments.
Staff training is provided by the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich, the
Army Staff College at Camberley, or the Royal Air Force Staff College at
Bracknell. The National Defence College (formerly the Joint Services Staff
College) at Chesham is designed to provide mid-career officers with training for
posts involving inter-Service staff work. Specially selected and more senior
officers from the Services, the Civil Service, and from the Commonwealth, the
United States, and allied European countries attend the Royal College of
Defence Studies (formerly the Imperial Defence College) in London, which
provides the wider background necessary for senior posts in the direction of
defence.
Considerable operational training is done through joint-Service and inter¬
allied exercises. All three Services provide training facilities for the armed
forces of allied and Commonwealth countries.
Combat forces are functionally divided as the nuclear strategic force (costing
an estimated £39 million in 1973-74)) Royal Navy general purpose combat
forces (£419 million), European theatre ground forces (£497 million), other
Army combat forces (£63 million), Royal Air Force general purpose combat
forces (£496 million) and air mobility forces (£116 million).
The British contribution to the Western strategic deterrent is provided by the
Royal Navy’s force of four Polaris nuclear submarines—itoo/afrow, Repulse,
Renown and Revenge. Each has indefinite underwater cruising range and carries
16 Polaris A3 missiles, with a range of about 2,800 miles and thermonuclear
warheads.
The naval general purpose combat forces comprise amphibious and naval air
forces, submarines (excluding the Polaris force), helicopter-cruisers, des¬
troyers, frigates, and mine countermeasure forces and support and other ships.
The following section contains detail of some of the equipment of these forces.
The aircraft carrier Ark Royal operates Phantom and Buccaneer strike aircraft,
Gannet airborne early warning aircraft and Sea King anti-submarine heli¬
copters. Amphibious forces are provided by the commando ships Bulwark
and Hermes and the assault ships Fearless and Intrepid. The command-
helicopter-cruisers Blake and Tiger also carry Sea King helicopters and are
responsible for directing and controlling naval forces. There are also eight
County class guided missile destroyers equipped with Seaslug and Seacat
surface-to-air missile systems; four of this class will be among the first ships
to be fitted with the Exocet surface-to-surface guided missile system. The
Type 82 guided missile destroyer Bristol has recently joined the fleet and is
equipped with the Seadart area air defence missile system and the Ikara anti¬
submarine guided weapon system. There are also 26 Leander class and seven
Tribal class general purpose frigates, three anti-aircraft frigates, four aircraft
direction frigates and 20 anti-submarine frigates. The frigate classes are
variously armed with automatic guns, surface-to-air missile systems, under¬
water detection and anti-submarine weapons. Most have the Wasp helicopter
embarked which will in due course be replaced, where appropriate, by the
DEFENCE
I2J
European
Theatre Ground
Forces
Other Army
Combat Forces
Equipment
Royal Air Force
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equipment
Air Mobility
Forces
Equipment
Lynx. The balance of the Fleet is made up of the minesweeper and mine-
hunter forces, patrol vessels, survey and trials ships. Under construction is the
Invincible, the first of a new class of command cruiser, which will be equipped
to operate Sea King helicopters and will have the optional capability of operat¬
ing maritime vertical short-take-off and landing aircraft. In addition six of the
new Sheffield class Type 42 Seadart destroyers and eight of the Amazon class
Type 21 frigates are building. The first of a new class of frigate, Type 22, to be
armed with the Seawolf surface-to-air missile system, is planned and work is in
hand on a new class of mine counter-measure vessel in glass reinforced plastic.
Besides the four Polaris submarines (see p. 122) there are seven nuclear-
powered fleet submarines in service together with 22 conventional patrol
submarines. A further four nuclear submarines are under construction.
Tankers and store ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service provide worldwide
afloat logistic support.
The European theatre ground forces consist of the BAOR, and the forces
stationed in Britain, the main elements of which have primary roles in support
of NATO (see p. 117).
This category comprises land forces stationed abroad to meet treaty commit¬
ments to Commonwealth and other countries (see p. 117).
Some of the equipment of this and the previous category is described below.
Armoured and mechanised units are equipped with the Chieftain main battle
tank, the Swingfire anti-tank guided missile, tracked armoured personnel
carriers (FV 432), some fitted with the 81-mm mortar or the Wombat 120-mm
anti-tank gun, and the Scorpion armoured reconnaissance vehicle. Artillery
units are equipped with a 105-mm light gun, the Abbot 105-mm self-propelled
gun, 155-mm and 175-mm self-propelled guns, and Field Artillery Computer
Equipment (FACE). Tactical nuclear support is provided by the Honest John
missile and the 203-mm self-propelled howitzer. Air defence is provided by
the Thunderbird and Rapier mobile surface-to-air missile systems and the
Blowpipe man-portable missile system.
The Royal Air Force general purpose combat forces consist of aircraft for
air defence, strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support and tactical recon¬
naissance, maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare together with RAF
Regiment field squadrons.
Lightning and Phantom FGi aircraft, and Bloodhound, Tigercat and Rapier
surface-to-air missiles are employed in air defence, reporting and control
being provided by the computerised Linesman system. Vulcans, Buccaneers
and Phantom FGRzs operate in the strike/attack role; Victors, Canberras
and Phantom FGRzs in the reconnaissance role; Harrier V/STOL aircraft and
Jaguar aircraft in the close support and tactical reconnaissance role; and
Nimrods in maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare. RAF Buccaneers
and Phantom FGis also provide maritime strike and air defence; a number of
Shackletons have been converted to provide airborne early warning over the sea.
Air mobility forces are made up of the strategic and tactical transport forces,
tanker aircraft to refuel combat aircraft in flight, support helicopters and
communications aircraft.
The strategic transport force is equipped with Comet 4C, Britannia, Belfast and
VC10 aircraft. Tactical transport support over medium ranges is provided by
124
RESERVE
FORCES
Royal Navy
Army
Ulster Defence
Regiment
Royal Air Force
CIVIL DEFENCE
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Hercules (which also has a strategic capability), while for short-range tasks
the Wessex and Puma helicopters and the Andover aircraft are available. A
force of Victor tanker aircraft provides in-flight refuelling, which gives added
range and flexibility to the operations of air defence, maritime strike and
other aircraft.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. Apart
from their essential military role—to supplement the regular forces in time of
war or emergency with trained personnel able immediately to take their places
in the Services either as formed units or as individual reinforcements—they
form an important link between the Services and the civil community. Some
of their members have a reserve liability following a period of regular service
(regular reserve): others are volunteer men and women who devote their spare
time to training for the roles they would undertake in war or an emergency. On
1st January 1973 regular reserves totalled 360,000 and volunteer reserves and
auxiliary forces 76,500. Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to
recruitment to the regular forces, totalled 134,500.
The regular reserve consists of various categories of former full-time officers
and ratings liable to recall in emergency, including the Royal Fleet Reserve
of men with recent experience of active service. The volunteer reserves com¬
prise the Royal Naval Reserve, with its associated women’s reserve, and the
Royal Marines Reserve. Both carry out regular part-time training, the former
to man a number of operational minesweepers and support maritime and other
headquarters, the latter to reinforce the regular corps and in particular the
Royal Marine Commandos.
The Army reserves comprise the Army Regular Reserve, the Army General
Reserve, consisting of certain former National Servicemen, and the Terri¬
torial and Army Volunteer Reserve (TAVR).
The TAVR has recently been expanded: its primary role is to reinforce the
ground forces committed to NATO and to assist in maintaining a secure
United Kingdom base in support of the forces deployed in Europe. It consists
of independent units, organised on a local basis with regular Army and perma¬
nent civilian staff, and sponsored units of specialists recruited on a country¬
wide basis. They are liable for call-out in an emergency. There is also a
number of miscellaneous units (including university officer training corps) and
pools of individuals (known as Group B) which have a variety of functions.
The Ulster Defence Regiment is a locally recruited, part-time force designed
to support the regular forces in their security tasks.
The Royal Air Force Reserve consists of former regular officers and personnel
with a reserve liability, and the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, which
includes the 16 university air squadrons. The Royal Auxiliary Air Force
consists of maritime headquarter units which would support regular forma¬
tions in an emergency.
Civil defence arrangements are principally based on the extended and adapted
use of existing public services operated by nationalised industries, by local
authorities, police authorities and government departments. Supplementary
effort from individual volunteers and voluntary organisations would be brought
in either at the discretion of local authorities or in response to a national appeal
DEFENCE
125
in time of crisis. A central point of recent policy has been to improve the pre¬
paredness of local government to meet a war emergency; there is much
common ground between such planning and the preparations and organisation
for a major peace-time emergency or national disaster. Activities have therefore
also been directed towards creating a closer relationship in local planning for
the different emergencies of peace and war.
Within an annual budget of £10 million emphasis is placed on a high level
of central and local government planning. Studies and seminars are arranged
by the Home Office on staff college lines.
Arrangements also include an emergency system for decentralised govern¬
mental control and communications. The United Kingdom Warning and
Monitoring Organisation, including the civilian Royal Observer Corps, is
organised to provide public warning of an attack, of the location and power of
nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level of radioactive fall-out.
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT
Responsibility for the procurement (that is, research, development and pro¬
duction) of defence equipment, including aircraft, ships, ordnance, guided
weapons and electronics, lies with the Procurement Executive within the
Ministry of Defence. The Executive was set up in August 1971 following a
reorganisation of the departments responsible for defence procurement and
civil aerospace. The main objectives of the reorganisation have been to establish
a closer liaison between the Service users and the machinery for procurement,
closer co-ordination with industry in the formulation of programmes, and
stronger and more accountable management, so ensuring a co-ordinated and
cost-effective approach.
Research The major part of research is undertaken by the Ministry of Defence’s research
and Development and development establishments, but the Ministry also sponsors a sub¬
stantial amount of research by industry and the universities. The research and
development establishments have a very wide technological capability, which
has civil as well as military applications: for example, support is given to civil
aerospace projects such as Concorde and advanced aero-engines. On the
development side, the establishments collaborate closely with the Ministry’s
contractors by monitoring their progress, assisting in testing programmes, and
in solving particular technical problems.
Modern defence equipment is becoming ever more complex, and its
development requires a high initial investment; in 1973-74 the total cost of
British equipment research and development is estimated at ^418 million.
The search for a more efficient use of these resources has caused attention to be
concentrated on collaborative projects, which enable the cost of development
and production to be shared. On occasions, the outright purchase of foreign
equipment is the most economical solution. Nevertheless, the importance of
maintaining a sound national industrial base for defence procurement is
recognised, and there is close consultation between government and industry
both in the National Defence Industries Council and through other specialised
machinery.
Collaboration between Britain and European countries is already extensive,
and may be expected to increase, particularly through the work of the Euro¬
group (see p. 115). The most important single project, the multi-role combat
aircraft, is being developed by Britain, Italy and the Federal Republic of
Germany. A number of Anglo-French projects—the Jaguar aircraft, the
126
National Projects
Production
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Martel air-to-surface missile, the Puma and Gazelle helicopters are reaching
completion, and the Lynx helicopter is well advanced. Britain, the Federal
Republic of Germany and Italy are collaborating in the development of 155-
mm towed and self-propelled howitzers and an artillery rocket system, while
Britain and the Federal Republic are studying the possible collaborative
development of a future main battle tank. Britain and Belgium are partners in
the programme for the development and production of a family of air-
portable, armoured combat reconnaissance vehicles.
Britain has co-operated with Canada in the development of a surveillance
drone, with Australia on the Ikara anti-submarine equipment, and is working
with both these countries on a sonobuoy system.
A considerable number of projects, covering all the main equipment areas, are
under development. They include the HS1182 jet trainer, the Blowpipe man-
portable air defence missile, an underwater-launched anti-ship guided missile,
navigation and attack systems for aircraft, radar, sonar and communication
systems, the Type 22 frigate, and a new range of logistic vehicles for battlefield
support.
Following the development of defence equipment, either nationally or in
co-operation with allies, production is usually undertaken by private industry
on a contract basis or by the Royal Ordnance Factories and Royal Dockyards.
Production may also be undertaken on a collaborative basis. The Defence Sales
organisation provides support, assistance and advice to British industry and the
Royal Ordnance Factories in promoting the sales of defence equipment over¬
seas. In 1973-74 the value of exports of British defence equipment is expected
to be £405 million.
6 Social Welfare
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain central and local government are responsible for a wide range of
health and social services. Central government is responsible directly for the
hospital service of the National Health Service and for social security, includ¬
ing family allowances, national insurance and financial help to those in special
need, and has a supervisory responsibility for the rest of the National Health
Service and many local authority services. Local authorities are directly
responsible for education (see chapter 7) and housing (see chapter 9) and for a
variety of personal social services for children and mothers, the chronic sick
and handicapped (physically or mentally), the elderly and homeless (all des¬
cribed in this chapter). They are also until April 1974 still responsible for
public health and for a variety of personal health services. From 1st April
1974,1 however, responsibilities for all health matters will pass to new health
authorities (see p. 140) who will be agencies of central government. Public
authorities in Britain are spending over £14,000 million a year on this range
of services, that is, over £250 a year per head of the population.
The publicly provided services are supplemented by those provided by
voluntary organisations and by individual voluntary workers. Voluntary
organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of nearly all the
social services. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics, dispensaries, and
social and recreational clubs before these were provided by the State. They
made themselves responsible for the welfare of the very young and the very
old, the homeless and the handicapped. Gradually the State accepted the
primary responsibility for the major services, supplementing the voluntary
services and developing a comprehensive structure that ensured a minimum
standard of living and well-being for all citizens.
State and voluntary social services are now complementary and co-operative.
Both central and local authorities make grants to the voluntary social services.
The officers of central and local government plan and carry out their duties
taking account of the voluntary help available and co-operating with the
voluntary agencies, which have specialised in meeting particular needs, while
the residential provision made by central and local authorities for the care of
children, the chronic sick, the mentally disordered, the disabled and the aged
is supplemented by voluntary homes of various types.
The Charity Commission, a government department, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate
their administration when necessary; it maintains central and local registers
of charities which are open to public inspection; and it works to promote co¬
operation between charities and State services.
In 1972 the Home Office took on the responsibility for the co-ordination of
government interests in voluntary social service. The Volunteer Centre, a
national centre for information and research on voluntary work, was estab¬
lished in London in 1973 with the aid of a government grant of £75,000. Its
initial focus is on the health and social services.
1 In Northern Ireland reorganisation of the health and social services is taking place
in October 1973 (see p. 152).
128
Voluntary
Organisations
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The number of voluntary organisations in Britain runs into thousands; they
range from national organisations to small individual local groups. Most
organisations, however, are members of larger associations or are represented
on local or national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly
concerned with giving personal service, others in the formation of public
opinion and exchange of information.
Organisations concerned with personal and family problems include the
voluntary family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Association,
Family Service Units, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage
Guidance Council; the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisa¬
tions; the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her Child; and the
Samaritans, who help people near to committing suicide.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people, particularly
those belonging to a number of national and local organisations, for example,
the Young Volunteer Force Foundation, Community Service Volunteers,
Task Force, Scouts, Girl Guides and school groups.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled in general is given by among
others—the British Red Cross Society, the St. John Ambulance Association
and Brigade, the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service and the Leagues of
Hospital Friends, but a number of societies exist to help people with particular
disabilities and difficulties. Such societies, some of which are constituent
members of the Central Council for the Disabled, include the Royal National
Institute for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the National
Association for Mental Health, the National Society for Mentally Handicapped
Children, the Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern and their
Scottish equivalents. .
Bodies working on a national scale whose work is specifically religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H the Com¬
mittee on Social Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England
Children’s Society, the Church of England Council for Social Work, the
Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion, the Society of Friends, the Crusade of Rescue, the Society of St. Vincent
de Paul, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Jewish Welfare
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women s Royal
Voluntary Service, which gives help in every kind of practical difficulty, brings
‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and old people, provides flatlets
and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family problems and assists in
hospitals and clinics, as well as doing relief work in emergencies.
The main voluntary body in England and Wales providing central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies concerned with social
service is the National Council of Social Service, which brings together most
of the principal voluntary agencies for consultation and joint action, either as a
whole or in groups of those concerned with particular aspects, such as youtn
work or work among the handicapped. There are also the Scottish Council of
Social Service and the Northern Ireland Council of Social Se™e- which
perform similar functions. The Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, of which there are
now some 570 in Britain, are steadily increasing in number. The primary role
of the bureaux is to give explanation and advice to the citizen who is in doubt
about his rights or who does not know about the State or voluntary services
which could help him.
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Urban
Programme
A four-year urban programme providing for government-aided local authority
expenditure of some £20 million-^25 million was launched at the end of 1968
to assist areas of special social need, in particular to relieve problems resulting
from overcrowding, inadequate housing and schools, and other forms of
deprivation. In 1970 the programme was extended to 1976 with total expendi¬
ture for the period 1968-76 of £60 million-^65 million. Projects being under¬
taken include help for playgroups and the provision and improvement of
nursery schools and classes, day nurseries and playgrounds, language classes
for immigrants, in-service training courses for teachers, children’s homes,
family advice centres, housing aid services, family planning clinics, help for
community centres and summer holiday schemes for deprived children. A
particular aim of the programme is to support the work of voluntary bodies.
An experiment in community development is also being undertaken by the
Government. This involves bringing together those services, both statutory
and voluntary, which are concerned with relieving various forms of social
handicap and encouraging the resources of self-help within the community.
SOCIAL SECURITY
National insurance, industrial injuries insurance, family allowances, family
income supplements and supplementary benefits together with (in a special
category) war pensions constitute a comprehensive system of social security in
the United Kingdom.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers these services
in Great Britain; within the Department the Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission is responsible for the system of supplementary benefits. In Northern
Ireland the first five of these schemes are administered by the Ministry of
Health and Social Services which contains the Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission for Northern Ireland. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners
and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Health and
Social Security throughout the United Kingdom. Appeals relating to claims
for the various benefits are decided by independent authorities.
Although the development of public provision for social security in Britain
can be traced back for several centuries (the Poor Relief Act of 1601 may
be regarded as especially important in England and Wales), the modern system
of comprehensive provision is a creation of the twentieth century. Non¬
contributory old age pensions were introduced in 1908, and the first con¬
tributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans in 1926. A contributory
National Health Insurance Scheme was begun in 1912, and in the same year
a scheme of unemployment insurance was introduced which in 1920 was
extended to cover the great majority of employees. By the beginning of the
second world war social security provision in Britain was among the best in
the world, but lacked co-ordination because of its piecemeal development, and
not everyone came within its scope. In the immediate post-war years a series
of Acts introduced the present comprehensive system, which became fully
operative in July 1948. Statutory provision for the war disabled goes back to
the end of the sixteenth century, but the main lines of the present war pension
provisions were laid down during the first world war with further develop¬
ments during and after the second world war.
Family allowances and national insurance and industrial injuries benefits
or allowances, other than maternity, unemployment, sickness, invalidity,
injury or disablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which
income tax is assessed. On the other hand, various income tax reliefs and
130
Reciprocity
FAMILY
ALLOWANCES
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of
dependants. Family income supplements, attendance allowance and war dis¬
ablement pensions are not taxable.
Under the Social Security Act 1972 the social security system will be
radically changed from April 1975. Everyone will then have two pensions—a
basic pension from the Government and an earnings-related pension from his
job. A new tax credit system with important repercussions on social security is
being planned by the Government (see p. 214).
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a
single system. Reciprocal agreements on industrial injuries, family allowances
and most national insurance benefits are in operation with Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Jersey and Guernsey,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia. Agreements with Cyprus,
France, the Irish Republic, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands
and Turkey cover industrial injuries and most national insurance benefits.
With Australia and New Zealand there are agreements on family allow¬
ances and most national insurance benefits. There are limited agreements
with Bermuda, Canada, Jamaica and the United States. Northern Ireland and
the Isle of Man are also party to most of these agreements with other countries.
Since April 1973 British nationals working for an employer or receiving social
security benefits in any country of the European Community (including the
United Kingdom) are entitled to benefit under the social security arrangements
of any country of the Community where they are working or visiting.
Family allowances are provided in Great Britain under the Family Allowances
Act 1965 (which consolidated the Acts of 1945-64), and in Northern Ireland
under its own legislation. They are being paid in Great Britain to about 4 4
million families with over 11*4 million children, and in Northern Ireland to
some 140,000 families. The allowances are payable to families with two or
more children who are under minimum school-leaving age or under 19 and
either in full-time education or apprentices with low earnings.
The rates of the allowances are ^0-90 a week for families with two children
below the age limits and a further j£i R week for each additional child.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit
the family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid either to
the mother or to the father. There is no insurance qualification for title to the
allowances, but there are certain residence conditions.
FAMILY INCOME Family Income Supplement is designed to help families (and single people)
SUPPLEMENT with small incomes where the wage-earner is in full-time work and there is at
least one dependent child. It is payable when the weekly sum of a family s
resources falls below a prescribed amount, fixed at £21-50 a week where mere
is one child plus £2-50 for each additional child. The weekly rate of the
supplement is half the difference between the family’s income and the
prescribed amount up to a maximum of £5 for one- or two-child families or
£6 if the family has three or more children.
NATIONAL The National Insurance Acts apply, in general, to everyone over minimum
INSURANCE school-leaving age living in Great Britain. There are similar schemes in
Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. (The National Insurance Act 1965
consolidated the provisions of the National Insurance Acts 1946-64.)
SOCIAL WELFARE
Contributors
131
The national insurance scheme provides benefits in specified contingencies
where contribution conditions have been fulfilled. The benefits are paid for
partly by insured persons’ contributions, partly by contributions of employers
in respect of their employees, and partly by a contribution made by the
Exchequer out of general taxation.
The original system was based on contributions varying only with the sex,
age (under or over 18 years), and insurance class (see below), while benefits
were at standard rates for people over 18. Additional earnings-related contribu¬
tions and benefits were subsequently introduced in two stages (1961 and 1966).
In November 1970 pensions were introduced for elderly people who had
been over pension age when the scheme started, and in April 1971 for widows
aged between 40 and 50 when widowed or when entitlement to widowed
mother’s allowance ended. From September 1971 an old person’s pension
became payable to all other non-pensioners aged 80 and over; at the same time
an invalidity pension was introduced for those who had received sickness
benefit for six months, with an additional invalidity allowance for people
becoming chronically sick more than five years before retirement age. An
attendance allowance for severely disabled people needing attendance or
supervision both night and day became payable in December 1971. Over the
next two years an allowance at a lower rate will be extended to those needing
attention or supervision either night or day.
Contributors under the national insurance scheme are divided into three
classes:
Class 1. Employed people. Most of those who work for an employer under a
contract of service or are paid apprentices—over 23 million.
Class 2. Self-employed people. Those in business on their own account and
others who are working for gain but do not work under the control of an
employer—about 1^ million.
Class 3. Non-employed people. All those insured who are not in class 1 or
class 2—about a quarter of a million.
There is a general liability to pay flat-rate contributions according to this
classification but certain people are excepted. These include full-time students,
prisoners and most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. Self-
employed and non-employed persons whose income is below £469 a year can
apply for exception. Married women can choose to pay contributions and
receive benefit in their own right or not to pay flat-rate contributions (if they
are working they must pay graduated contributions) and rely upon their
husband’s insurance for maternity grant, retirement pension (at a lower rate),
widow’s benefit and death grant. If a married woman works for an employer
he must pay his full share of the flat-rate contributions even if she has chosen
not to pay flat-rate contributions.
Flat-rate contributions are credited to students up to the age of 18, and
to most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. People who are
excepted from liability to pay but are not entitled to credits may pay con¬
tributions at the non-employed rate if they wish to safeguard entitlement to
retirement pension and widow’s benefit.
An employed person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions
at the age of 70 (for a man, 65 for a woman), or when he retires from regular
employment after reaching minimum pension age (65 for men, 60 for women),
whichever is the earlier. If he does any work as an employed person thereafter,
he must pay an industrial injuries contribution; the employer still has to pay
his full share of the flat-rate contribution.
132 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Contributions Flat-rate contributions are normally paid by means of national insurance
stamps bought from a post office and fixed, for each contributor, to a single
contribution card. All three classes pay flat-rate contributions (see Table 6)
and these include the national health service contribution (which for con¬
venience is paid with the national insurance contribution although the two
services are separate). The stamps for class 1 contributors also include the
employer’s redundancy contribution (to help to provide for payments in
certain circumstances to employees whose work is terminated, see p. 378). It
is the employer’s responsibility in the first place to see that the class 1 contribu¬
tions are paid, but he can deduct the employees’ share from their wages. The
self-employed and non-employed must stamp their own cards. Flat-rate
contributions are usually credited for weeks of unemployment, sickness or
injury, or if certain widow’s benefits are being paid.
TABLE 6
Standard Adult
Contributions®
Employed men:
Contracted out
Not contracted out
Employed women:
Contracted out
Not contracted out
Self-employed men
Self-employed women
Non-employed men
Non-employed women
Insured
Person
Employer Total
0-96
0-84
0-79
0-71
1-93
1-61
1-52
1T9
1-247
1-127
1-061
0-981
2-207
1-967
1-851
1-691
1-93
1-61
1-52
1-19
0 Including National Insurance, Industrial Injuries and National Health Service Con¬
tributions, but excluding Redundancy Fund Contribution. Rates given to three decimal
places are expressed in this way for accounting purposes only. Lower rates of contribu¬
tion are payable for boys and girls and for certain married women.
TABLE 7
Some Principal
Standard Benefits
Invalidity, Widow’s and Retirement
Pensions and Widowed Mother’s
Allowance
Unemployment and Sickness
Benefit
Widow’s Allowance (first 26 weeks
of widowhood)
Attendance Allowance:
Higher Rate
Lower Rate
Injury Benefit
Disablement Benefit (100 per cent)
Private’s War Pension
(100 per cent)
Insured
Person
7-75
7-35®
10-85
6-20
4-15
10-10
12-80
12-80
Wife or
other Adult
Dependant
4-75
4-55
4-75
4-55
4-75
4-75
First6
Child
3-80
2- 30
3- 80
2- 30
3- 80
3-80
“ Married women living with a husband of working age and capable of work get ^S'tS
6 For subsequent children the relevant family allowance is deducted.
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
Benefits
Amounts
In general graduated contributions are payable by employed people (in¬
cluding married women) aged between 18 and 70 (65 for women) who earn
more than £9 a week. Employees whose job provides them with an occupa¬
tional pension of at least £3-48 a year for each year of service (£2-90 for
women) may be ‘contracted out’ of part of the graduated pension scheme.
Accordingly while all employees pay 5 per cent of their weekly earnings
between £18 and £54, contracted out employees pay only 075 per cent on
their weekly earnings between £9 and £18, while those not contracted out pay
the full 5 per cent on this lower range as well. Their employers pay the same
amount.
Graduated contributions provide a graduated addition to retirement pension
and meet the cost of earnings-related supplements to sickness and unemploy¬
ment benefit and to widow’s allowance. The contributions are collected
through the same machinery as is used to collect pay-as-you-earn (deduction
at source) income tax.
The scheme provides payments to contributors in the event of unemployment
(if normally working for an employer), sickness (if normally working for an
employer or self-employed), and confinement and the weeks immediately
before and after (for women normally working for an employer or self-
employed and paying national insurance contributions at the full rate). Retire¬
ment pensions are paid to people who have reached 65 (60 for women) if they
have retired from regular work and from the age of 70 (65 for women) even if
they continue to work; people aged 80 and over who have not participated in
the scheme are eligible for an old person’s pension; widows normally receive
benefit in the first 26 weeks after bereavement and subsequently while they
have young children or if they have reached the age of 40 when widowed or
before their children have grown up; and there are two kinds of allowance in
respect of orphan children where a widow’s pension is not payable. The scheme
also provides lump-sum cash grants for two expensive contingencies—the
birth of a child and a death.
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before
benefit can be paid at all, a minimum number of contributions must actually
have been paid since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit
cannot be paid unless a specified number of contributions have been paid or
credited over a specified period. There are special rules to help a widow who
does not become entitled to a widow’s pension at widowhood or when her
children have grown up, to qualify for sickness or unemployment benefit in
the period before she can have established or re-established herself in insur¬
ance through her own contributions; there are also provisions to help a
divorced woman who was not paying contributions during her marriage.
The standard flat-rate benefit for single men and women is £7-35 a week for
unemployment or sickness, while for invalidity, widows’ and retirement
pensions it is £775. Benefit, other than invalidity pension for those under
retirement pension age, may be reduced if insufficient contributions have been
paid, but is not affected by other unearned income or the previous level of
earnings. Earnings received while the benefit is in payment, however, may
cause its reduction or withdrawal: unemployment benefit cannot be paid to a
person earning more than a specified amount from a subsidiary occupation;
retirement pensioners under the age of 70 (65 for women) have their pensions
reduced in step with earnings over certain specified amounts; sickness and
invalidity benefits, though not affected by continued payment of wages during
I34
Duration
BRITAIN 1974: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
illness, are not normally payable to a person doing any actual work. Widows’
benefits, however, are not affected by earnings. Exceptions to the basic flat
rates are the higher rate of ^10-85 a week payable to widows during the first
26 weeks after bereavement, the increased retirement pension earned by some¬
one who has continued at work and paid contributions beyond minimum
pension age and the invalidity allowance paid to people becoming chronically
sick more than five years before pension age; and the lower rate of £5-15 a
week unemployment or sickness benefit payable to married women who pay
contributions and the rates for widows between 40 and 50 which reduce on a
scale to 3^2*33 a week for a woman aged 40 at the date of entitlement. An age
addition of £0-25 a week is paid to pensioners aged 80 and over, and people
over 80 who have failed to qualify for a national insurance pension receive an
old person’s pension to bring their total pension up to ^4‘^5 a week {Li'S0 f°r
a married couple). Invalidity allowance is ^0-50, £1 or ^i-6o, depending upon
the age at which incapacity begins. An attendance allowance of £6-20 a week
is paid to severely disabled people requiring a great deal of help from another
person both by day and by night. A lower rate of £4-15 may be paid to those
who need help either by day or by night.
Additions to benefits are payable for dependants. For invalidity and retire¬
ment pensions the additions are ;£4’75 f°r a w^e or other adult dependant and
for these pensioners and for widow’s benefit ^3-8o for each child inclusive of
family allowances. For other beneficiaries the additions are less—X4’55 f°r an
adult and £2-30 for each child, inclusive of family allowances.
A guardian’s allowance of £3-80 a week is payable to a person who has in
his or her family a child who has lost both parents, one of whom was insured
under the National Insurance Acts. The allowance can sometimes be paid
on the death of one parent. For certain fatherless children there is a child’s
special allowance also of £3'8o a week inclusive of family allowances; this is
payable to a woman whose marriage has been dissolved or annulled and who
has not remarried, if her former husband dies and she has a child to whose
support he was contributing before he died.
The graduated addition to retirement pension is at the rate of £0-02% a
week for each £j‘SO of all graduated contributions paid by a man and for each
£g of such graduated contributions paid by a woman (with in each case, the
matching amount of graduated contribution coming from the employer). The
earnings-related supplements to flat-rate unemployment and sickness benefits
are one-third of that part of a person’s average weekly earnings between ^10
and £30 and 15 per cent of that part between £30 and £42, but the supple¬
ments cannot raise the total benefit, including increases for dependants,
beyond 85 per cent of earnings. The supplement is also paid on this basis to
widow beneficiaries who have the appropriate record of earnings, if they
become unemployed or sick. A supplement based on the late husband s earn¬
ings is also paid, as an addition to the widow’s allowance, to widows whose
husbands were under 70 and had not retired from regular employment.
A £23 maternity grant is payable for a confinement and a further £23 for
each additional child born at the same confinement living 12 hours after birth;
while a £30 death grant is payable on the death of an adult (less for a child,
or for an adult who was within ten years of minimum pension age when the
scheme started).
In general, national insurance payments are paid as long as the situation
requiring them lasts. However, invalidity pension cannot be paid and sickness
benefit can only be paid for one year if fewer than 156 employed or self-
ANTI¬
POLLUTION
EQUIPMENT
Complete pulveris'
ation system for
converting refuse
into clean, high-
density, re-usable
material.
Above:
Beater of a waste
re-cycling plant,
converting inedible
offal into high-
protein meal
additive.
Above right:
Electronic heart of
a suspended solid
monitoring unit.
Advanced noise cell
for developing
quieter engines.
FOOD
TECHNOLOGY
mm
Meat substitutes:
Right: Checking the
microbial content
of protein from
field beans;
Belozv: Fungal
mycoprotein.
Below right:
Equipment for
conserving feed
grain.
Beloiv:
Researching the
partial replacement
of wheat flour by
other starch sources.
Plant producing
yeast protein grown
on refined oil and
used for animal
feed.
Manufacturing
flavours, for use
in food production.
HHI
LEISURE
FACILITIES
Right and below:
Picketts Lock
Leisure Centre in
the Lee Valley.
Built on what was
once a municipal
refuse site.
SOCIAL WELFARE
135
employed contributions have been made (possible in three years for a contri¬
butor continuously at work), while unemployment benefit is payable for a
maximum of one year. The supplement to unemployment and sickness benefit
is paid for a maximum of six months starting from the thirteenth day of
unemployment or incapacity for work. Maternity allowance begins n weeks
before the expected week of confinement and ends after the sixth week follow¬
ing the expected week or the actual confinement if this is later.
Similarly, a widowed mother’s allowance at the full rate ceases when her
children are no longer dependent on her, though a mother can continue to
receive £7-75 a week for herself while she has living with her a son or daughter
under 19. The widow’s pension payable to the childless widow, provided she
is 40 or over at the time of being widowed, or the similar pension payable to
the widowed mother who has reached 40 before her widowed mother’s allow¬
ance ends, normally continues until she has reached minimum pension age and
retired, or at most till the age of 65. On retirement she receives a pension at a
rate not lower than her widow’s pension.
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
(INDUSTRIAL
INJURIES)
Benefits
Injury Benefit
Disablement
Benefit
The industrial injuries insurance scheme, which, in 1948, replaced the work¬
men’s compensation scheme (first introduced by the Workmen’s Compensa¬
tion Act of 1897), provides benefits for personal injuries caused by accidents
arising out of, and in the course of, employment, and for prescribed diseases
due to the nature of employment. It covers practically everyone in class 1 of
the national insurance scheme and certain others. Like the national insurance
scheme, the industrial injuries scheme is financed partly from contributions
(see Table 6) and partly from taxation. The legal basis of the scheme is the
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act 1965 which consolidated the 1946
Act and subsequent legislation. Similar cover against industrial injuries and
diseases is provided by Northern Ireland’s legislation.
Injury benefit for an adult is j£io-io a week plus ^4-55 for an adult dependant,
3^2*30 for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits, ^1-40
for the second child and ^1-30 for each other child in addition to any family
allowance payable. It is paid when the insured person is incapable of work as
a result of an industrial accident or prescribed disease, and payment can
continue for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning on the date of the accident or
development of the disease. A person entitled to sickness benefit who draws
injury benefit instead, also receives any earnings-related supplement (see p.
134) to which he is entitled.
Disablement benefit may be paid (but not at the same time as injury benefit)
when, as the result of industrial accident or prescribed disease, there is a loss
of physical or mental faculty. The amount depends on the extent of the
disablement as assessed by a medical board; it varies from £12-80 for 100 per
cent disablement to £2-56 a week for 20 per cent disablement, but for disable¬
ment of less than 20 per cent a gratuity of up to £850 is normally paid.
In certain circumstances disablement benefit may be supplemented as
follows: unemployability supplement, at the weekly rate of £7-75; constant
attendance allowance of up to £5*15 weekly normally, or a special rate of
£7-75 or £10-30 a week in exceptionally severe cases; an allowance of £5-15
a week for exceptionally severe disablement; a special hardship allowance of
up to £5-12 for a person who is unfit to return to his regular job or to do work
of an equivalent standard; and hospital treatment allowance which raises the
benefit to that for a 100 per cent assessment during hospital treatment for the
136
Death Benefit
SUPPLEMENTARY
BENEFITS
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industrial disability. Increases of benefit for dependants are payable with un¬
employability supplement and hospital treatment allowance. People receiving
unemployability supplement may also receive an additional allowance similar
to invalidity allowance (see pp. 131 and 134).
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit
may be paid to the dependants.
For a widow a pension of £10-35 a week is payable for the first 26 weeks of
widowhood. In addition she receives any earnings-related supplement (see p.
134) that would have been paid had she claimed widow’s allowance under the
main national insurance scheme. Thereafter, the widow can receive a pension
of £8*30 a week if she was aged 50 at the date of her husband s death, or has
dependent children or other special needs; otherwise she receives £2-33 a
week. If she had been living apart from her husband, the pension is limited to
the weekly rate of maintenance he was paying, if less than the rate otherwise
appropriate.
In addition, allowances are paid for children under the family allowances
age limits at the higher rate of £3’8o to widows but at the lower rate of £2-30
for other beneficiaries.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, may be
entitled to pensions, allowances or gratuities.
The Ministry of Social Security Act 1966 provided for a scheme of supple¬
mentary benefits to replace the system which had been administered by the
former National Assistance Board since 1948. The Act established within the
then Ministry of Social Security a Supplementary Benefits Commission re¬
sponsible for guiding the scheme and for determining awards of benefit.
Parallel legislation in Northern Ireland made similar provision.
Every person in Great Britain aged 16 or over who is not in full-time work,
attending school or involved in a trade dispute and whose resources are in¬
sufficient to meet his requirements is entitled to a supplementary benefit. The
benefit takes the form of a supplementary allowance for people under the
statutory retirement age, and a supplementary pension for those over. The
benefit is the amount by which a person’s requirements exceed his available
resources, both being defined by rules laid down by the Act. The calculation
of requirements is based on different amounts for single people and family
groups (for blind people there are special higher amounts) with, in each case,
an addition for rent. For the old and most other long-term cases a special
addition is made. Available resources include certain income and capital; the
main national insurance and industrial injury benefits, family allowances,
family income supplement and maintenance payments from a husband or the
father of the claimant’s children are taken into account in full but some part
of all other resources is disregarded.
The payment of a supplementary allowance in the case of an able-bodied
person of working age may be conditional on registering at an employment
exchange of the Department of Employment.
The Supplementary Benefits Commission also has a duty to influence people
without a settled way of living to lead a more normal life. The Commission
provides temporary accommodation for them in 19 reception centres, three of
which are administered by local authorities on behalf of the Commission. For
men who have been unemployed for long periods and who are leceiving
supplementary allowances or are using reception centres, it runs 14 re¬
establishment centres, three of which have residential accommodation where
they are given help to fit them again for work.
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
WAR PENSIONS
AND RELATED
SERVICES
Pensions and allowances for people disabled or bereaved through war or
service in the Forces since the second world war are paid under Royal
Warrants and other instruments administered by the Department of Health
and Social Security.
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private soldier
is j£i2-8o a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the degree of
disablement. The latter is assessed by comparing the condition of the person
disabled by service with that of a normal healthy person of the same age and
sex. Allowances for a wife and children are paid in addition to the basic
pension. There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones
being for unemployability (^8-40 a week), constant attendance (up to £5-15
and, exceptionally, ^10-30 a week), comforts (£i-io or £2-20 a week), and
lowered standard of occupation (up to £5-12 a week). An additional allowance
of £4-50 a week is payable to war pensioners who are receiving constant attend¬
ance allowance at a rate above the normal maximum. An age allowance
(between £o-6o and ^i-8o a week) is payable to disablement pensioners who
are aged 65 or over and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary allowances are
free of income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any
family allowances payable.
Pensions are also paid to war widows and war orphans. The standard rate
of pension for widows of private soldiers is j£io*io a week, with additional
allowances for their children and, in certain cases, a rent allowance (up to
£3-90 a week). There is an additional allowance of ^0-65 for widows aged 65
which is increased to ^1-30 at the age of 70. Parents or other relatives who
were dependent on a person whose death resulted from service in the Forces
may receive pensions if they are in financial need.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service
for war pensioners and war orphans which is available to help any who require
advice or assistance. War pensioners have priority for treatment of their war
disablements in National Health Service hospitals subject only to needs of
emergency and other urgent cases.
Many voluntary associations and ex-Service organisations give financial aid
and personal service to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
The Department’s welfare officers work in close co-operation with these and
other statutory bodies.
HEALTH AND PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of
the years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second half
of the nineteenth century was notable for the growth of the environmental
or public health services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal
of refuse and cleaning of streets, and the first half of the twentieth century
for the development of publicly provided personal health services, as distinct
from environmental services, culminating in the introduction in 1948 of a
comprehensive National Health Service available to every resident. Scientific
discoveries of importance to medicine and health, including the development
of new drugs, and the improved services of the last 70 years, particularly in
maternity and child health, school health services and school meals, are
reflected in declining mortality rates (see p. 10) and improved physique. The
infant mortality rate has more than halved since the National Health Service
was inaugurated; this and the maternal death rate are among the lowest in the
. 
138
PUBLIC HEALTH
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
Pure Food
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
world. The health of children has steadily improved and emphasis is now
placed on prevention or early detection of disease or disability. Deaths from
such diseases as tuberculosis, poliomyelitis and diphtheria have fallen so
markedly that they are no longer major health problems. Diseases now in the
forefront of research programmes include cancer and diseases of the central
nervous system, such as muscular dystrophy. Efforts are also being made to
combat some of the most prevalent diseases, which include, besides the
common cold and influenza, bronchitis, rheumatism and arthritis, and heart
diseases.
The Public Health Acts of 1936 and 1961 and the Health Services and Public
Health Act 1968 constitute the present basic public health code in England and
Wales. Local authorities (under the general direction of the Department of
Health and Social Security or the Welsh Office and the Department of the
Environment) have extensive powers for making and administering by-laws on
matters of public health. All local authorities are concerned, though parish
councils have only a limited involvement.
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed
on much the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on
separate Acts and there is a different allocation of services between the various
types of local authority (working under the direction of the Scottish Home and
Health Department and the Northern Ireland Ministries of Health and Social
Services and of Development). The Public Health (Scotland) Act 1897 and the
Burgh Police (Scotland) Act 1892 as amended by later statutes constitute the
basic legislation for Scotland. The local authorities concerned are the councils
of counties and burghs. The reorganisation of local government and the
restructuring of health and welfare services in Northern Ireland, which
becomes effective from 1st October 1973 > ^as had the effect of transferring
responsibility for most public health services to four boards (see p. 152) and
responsibility for water and sewerage services (under new legislation) to the
Ministry of Development. The district councils have environmental health
responsibilities under the Public Health Acts (Northern Ireland) 1878—1971*
Local authorities are responsible for investigating outbreaks of infectious
diseases and for disinfection and various other preventive measures. Local
authorities have appointed their own medical officers of health to carry out this
work, but from April 1974, when the reorganisation of the National Health
Service takes effect (see p. 140), it is expected that most local authorities will
use the services of medical officers on loan from the newly formed area health
authorities. Health inspectors will remain local authority employees.
Port health authorities supervise health control at seaports and airports, the
primary object of which is to prevent the introduction of infectious disease
into the country. Control is undertaken by health authorities using the services
of medical officers, public health inspectors, rodent inspectors and others.
The composition, labelling and description of food, food hygiene and the
safety and fitness of food are controlled by the Food and Drugs Act 1955
England and Wales, by the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act 195^ Scotland
and by the Food and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland) 1958 in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales the question of the composition, adulteration and
description of food are the concern of food and drugs authorities (from 1st
April 1974 these are in England the county, London borough and City of
London councils and in Wales the county councils) and questions of food
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Other Public
Health Duties
THE NATIONAL
HEALTH SERVICE
Health Service
Administration
in Great Britain
hygiene and the safety and fitness of food are the concern of all local authorities,
except parish councils. The Department of Health and Social Security and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are the central departments res¬
ponsible for giving advice and making regulations. Premises where food or
drink is prepared, handled, transported or sold must conform to certain
hygienic standards. Authorised officers of the councils may take for analysis or
for bacteriological or other examination samples of any food for sale for human
consumption. There are special regulations for milk, meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of
counties and large burghs.
In Northern Ireland administration is in the hands of the county and county
borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry of
Health and Social Services.
Local authorities are also responsible for the public health aspects of water
supply, sewerage and drainage; street paving and housing; and the abatement
of noise nuisance. They have power to establish smoke-controlled areas to
secure cleaner air, and to arrange with statutory water undertakings for the
addition of fluoride to water supplies to reduce dental decay.
The Acts setting up the National Health Service—the National Health Service
Act 1946, the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947 and the Health
Services Act (Northern Ireland) 1948—came into force simultaneously on 5th
July 1948.
The object of the National Health Service Act 1946 was ‘to promote the
establishment in England and Wales of a comprehensive health service
designed to secure improvement in the physical and mental health of the
people of England and Wales and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of
illness, and for that purpose to provide or secure the effective provision of
services’. The service is available to people normally resident according to
medical need, without regard to any insurance qualification. It was originally
free to users but various charges have been introduced under subsequent
legislation, though these can be waived under certain conditions.
National insurance contributors are required to pay a weekly national health
contribution (see Table 6) but contributors and non-contributors are entitled
to the same full range of services. Visitors from other countries who come to
Britain specifically for treatment are expected to pay for it, but treatment can
be given under the emergency provisions of the National Health Service to any
who fall ill or meet with an accident during a visit to Britain. Reciprocal health
agreements have been concluded between Britain and certain countries and in
any member country of the European Community the families of British
nationals and stateless persons permanently resident in Britain and working
for a British employer or receiving British social security benefit are entitled to
urgent medical treatment on the same basis as the nationals of that country.
The general form of the organisation established in 1948 to administer the
National Health Service has persisted ever since. Essentially it has been a
tripartite structure, corresponding to the three main parts of the service: the
hospitals service, the general practitioner service and the local health authority
services, comprising a range of home and clinic services for prevention of ill
health and for treatment or care. A new and functionally unified National
Health Service administration on a country and area basis is, however, to
140
Proposed
Reorganisation
BRITAIN 1974: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
come into operation from April 1974 at the same time as the proposed new
structure of local government (see p. 67).
In the meantime the National Health Service in Great Britain continues to
be organised as follows:
1. The hospital and specialist services for which the Secretary of State for
Social Services, the Secretary of State for Wales, and the Secretary of State
for Scotland are directly responsible.
2. The general practitioner services consist of the family doctor service, the
dental service, the pharmaceutical service and the ophthalmic service.
3. The local authority health services.
In addition, the Secretary of State for Social Services has power to conduct,
or assist others to conduct, research work and he provides a public health
laboratory service and a blood transfusion service. He is advised by the Central
Health Services Council, by standing advisory committees on various aspects
of the service and by the Hospital Advisory Service, set up in 1969, on hospital
problems, in particular those of ‘long stay’ hospitals.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the health ministers
in England and Wales but it is their responsibility to provide hospital clinical
facilities for the training of medical students. The universities are responsible
for the provision of teaching.
The Secretary of State for Scotland has similar duties.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 151.
The basis of the planned reorganisation of the National Health Service for
England and Wales and Scotland will be the establishment of area health
authorities responsible for all health services in their area, including the public
health services and the school health service (see p. I57)* These area authorities
will in general cover the same areas as the new major local authorities (see
p. 67), but will be quite independent of them, though they will co-operate on
many matters. Areas will be divided into districts, each with a district general
hospital serving a population usually of between 200,000 and 500,000 people.
In Scotland and Wales the area authorities will report directly to the Scottish
and Welsh Offices respectively, but in England, because of its greater size,
there will be an intermediate tier of regional authorities between the area
authorities and the Department of Health and Social Security.
The authorities, both area and regional, will consist mainly of unpaid part-
time members, appointed in the case of regional authorities by the health
minister concerned (the Secretary of State for Social Services), but in the case
of area authorities also by local authorities and universities.
In the reorganised service representation of the users’ point of view and
safeguarding of their interests is being provided by district community health
councils and by the appointment, as a channel for complaints, of a health
service commissioner or ‘ombudsman’ with duties similar, within the
specialised area of health, to those of the Parliamentary Commissioner (see
p. 42). In practice the duties of the existing Parliamentary Commissioner have
been extended to cover the responsibilities of the Health Commissioners for
England, Wales and Scotland. District community health councils are to
consist of 20-30 members, half of them appointed by local government district
councils and the rest mainly on the nomination of voluntary bodies.
Public expenditure on the health services in Britain was estimated at ^2,730
million in 1972—73- Most of the cost falls on the Exchequer while the rest is
Finance
Practitioner
Services
SOCIAL WELFARE I4I
met from local rates and from the national health service contribution paid
with the national insurance contribution. In addition charges paid by people
using certain services amount to some 3^90 million.
There are charges for prescriptions (except for children, expectant and
nursing mothers, people aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain
medical conditions, war and Service pensioners, and families with very low
incomes, including those receiving supplementary benefits and family income
supplement), for treatment in the dental service (but not for examination only
or for treatment given to people under 21 years or women who are pregnant
or have borne a child in the past year), for dentures (except for children under
16 or still at school, and women who are pregnant or have borne a child in the
past year), for spectacles (except children’s standard spectacles) and for certain
other articles and for some local authority services (see p. 144). Certain
exemptions or refunds are made and help with health service dental and
optical charges can be given under the supplementary benefits scheme to
anyone aged 16 or over whose income is below a certain level. A limited
number of beds may be made available for hospital patients wishing for
privacy, provided that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds
for non-paying patients; a charge for part of the cost of the accommodation is
made. Provision is also made at certain hospitals for patients to be treated as
private patients on payment of the whole cost of their accommodation and
treatment. Such patients may make private arrangements for treatment by
doctors of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried, or part-time; part-
time medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept
private patients. General medical practitioners in the National Health Service
are paid according to the number of patients on their list with adjustments to
reflect differences in work and responsibility; certain practice expenses are also
directly reimbursed.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees according to the treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists
dispensing on their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions they
dispense. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking
part in the general ophthalmic service are paid approved fees for each sight
test made; opticians who dispense spectacles are paid according to the number
and type of pairs supplied.
The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to in¬
dividuals by doctors and dentists of their own choice from among those
taking part in the service. Doctors and dentists normally work at their own
surgeries; practice in health centres established under the National Health
Service Acts is increasing. About 98 per cent of the 25,000 general medical
practitioners (principals and assistants) in Great Britain take some part in the
service, more than 75 per cent of them in partnership or group practice. The
attachment of local authority midwives, health visitors and home nurses to
doctors’ practices is becoming more widespread.
Doctors wishing to enter practice have to apply through the executive
council for the area to the Medical Practices Committee, so that a balanced
distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated. The maxi¬
mum number of patients’ names permitted to be on a family doctor’s list is
normally 3,500; the average number in Great Britain is about 2,400. It is
normally through the patient’s own doctor that access to most other parts of
the health service is obtained.
142
Hospitals and
Specialist
Services
Hospitals
Rehabilitation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are about 11,000 dentists in England and Wales and some 1,000 in
Scotland in the general dental service.
Some 900 ophthalmic medical practitioners and over 6,000 ophthalmic
and dispensing opticians in England and Wales, and about 70 ophthalmic
medical practitioners and about 700 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in
Scotland are engaged in the general ophthalmic services. These services provide
for the testing of sight and provision of spectacles. Patients requiring treatment
are dealt with through the hospital eye service.
There are about 11,900 retail pharmacies under contract to the National
Health Service in Great Britain. They are responsible for the dispensing of all
prescriptions except for the small number dispensed by certain general
practitioners and hospital pharmacies.
The hospital and specialist services provide hospital accommodation of all
kinds, including district general hospitals with treatment and diagnostic
facilities for in-patients, day-patients and out-patients, hospital maternity
departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and geriatric facilities,
rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of specialised treat¬
ment.
A large proportion of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built
in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable
foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’ and St. Bartholomew’s Hospitals
in London. Much has been done in recent years to improve and extend existing
hospitals, some of which are housed in inconvenient buildings, and a number
of new hospitals have been built. In 1962 long-term plans for hospital building
were published by the Government and a revision made in 1966 set out the
probable future pattern of the hospital service and contained assessments of
the work to be undertaken in the ten years ahead. These plans were revised
upwards in 1972 and it is intended to spend ;£8oo million on hospital building
in England in 1971-72 to 1975-76 compared with £550 million in the previous
five years.
Nearly 2,500 of the existing hospitals in the National Health Service are in
England and Wales, including the 25 teaching hospitals in London (actually
groups of hospitals, convalescent homes, branches, annexes, or treatment
centres, numbering over 100 altogether) and the 10 teaching hospitals else¬
where in England and Wales (comprising some 50 hospitals and other
establishments). They have 450,000 beds available for use and a nursing and
midwifery staff of some i()5,ooo full-time and about 110,000 part-time. There
are 368 hospitals in Scotland with some 65,000 beds and nearly 30,000 full-time
and over 16,000 part-time nurses and midwives.
A small number of hospitals remain outside the service for special reasons.
Most of these are run by religious orders. Some, such as the Italian and Jewish
Hospitals, were set up to serve a special group of patients; others are maintained
for the chronic sick or for convalescents by charitable organisations. There are
also private nursing homes which must be registered.
Rehabilitation is an important aspect of medical care and today treatment is
not limited to the relief of pain or cure of pathological conditions but aims at
helping people to resume normal living as soon as possible. Medical rehabilita¬
tion has been applied with advantage in the care of many patients, including
the chronic sick, the mentally disabled, the aged and the handicapped and has
enabled many patients to become self-sufficient and to resume an independent
life in their own homes. Specialised medical rehabilitation facilities are pro-
SOCIAL WELFARE
H3
Drug Dependence
Abortion
Blood Transfusion
Chest Radiological
Service
vided in the majority of hospitals and at medical rehabilitation centres. The
work is carried out under the supervision of the appropriate medical specialist
by physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists together with
social workers acting as a team. The hospital departments work closely with the
Disablement Resettlement Service of the Department of Employment. Reports
published in 1972 by sub-committees of the Standing Medical Advisory
Committees of the Central and Scottish Health Services Councils called for
improved co-ordination and development of medical rehabilitation services.
Medical rehabilitation includes the provision, free of charge, of artificial
limbs and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, invalid chairs, certain types of
invalid vehicles, and other appliances. Nursing aids for the handicapped at
home can be borrowed through the service.
Responsibility for the provision of social workers in hospitals is being trans¬
ferred to local authority social service departments in April 1974. They are
available in most hospitals to help those patients who have difficulties con¬
nected with their illness. They help to solve social and emotional problems
and are concerned with the rehabilitation and resettlement of patients especi¬
ally where the illness has been long or where the disability results in changes
in the patient’s life.
The hospital service plays a major part in the treatment of drug dependence,
providing treatment for both in-patients and out-patients either in specialised
drug dependence units or as part of the general psychiatric service. Only
doctors licensed for the purpose by the Home Secretary may prescribe heroin
and cocaine to addicts in the treatment of addiction and all medical practi¬
tioners are required to notify the Chief Medical Officer of the Home Office of
any patient they consider to be addicted to dangerous drugs.
The Abortion Act 1967, which came into force in Great Britain in 1968
permits the termination of a pregnancy by a registered medical practitioner if
two registered medical practitioners are of the opinion that its continuance
would involve risk to the life of the pregnant woman, or of injury to the physical
or mental health of the pregnant woman or of any children in her family
greater than if the pregnancy were terminated, or if there is a substantial risk
that if a child were born it would be seriously physically or mentally handi¬
capped. Abortions may be carried out in National Health Service hospitals
or in premises approved for the purpose by the Secretary of State concerned.
The National Blood Transfusion Service in England and Wales has been
administered by the regional hospital boards under the National Health
Service but from April 1974 it is to be administered by the new Regional
Health Authorities. Donors give their blood voluntarily without payment.
There are two central laboratories administered by the Medical Research
Council on behalf of the Department of Health and Social Security: the Blood
Group Reference Laboratory, which prepares grouping serum and investi¬
gates blood grouping problems referred to it, and the Blood Products Labora¬
tory, which prepares dried plasma and plasma fractions. In Scotland the
Blood Transfusion Service is under the direction of the Scottish National
Blood Transfusion Association, which is an independent voluntary body but is
supported in the main by a grant from the Scottish Home and Health Depart¬
ment. In Northern Ireland the Blood Transfusion Service is operated by the
Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
A Chest Radiological Service, which is freely available, is provided by chest
clinics and the radiological departments of general hospitals. The success of
144
Bacteriological and
Virological
Laboratory Services
Safety of Medicines
Community
Health
Services
Vaccination
Family
Planning
Midwifery
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mass radiography units has been such that their work is being phased into the
hospital radiography service. Mobile X-ray units are still used among especially
susceptible groups.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological
and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct
research and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic
diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection
of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms.
In Scotland there is no separate public health laboratory service and
bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories. In Northern
Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the bacteriological work with
hospital laboratories.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are respon¬
sible for licensing the marketing, importation and manufacture of medicines
for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission has been estab¬
lished as an advisory body to the ministers on policy regarding medicines and
a statutorv Committee on Safety of Medicines advises the health ministers on
the safety, efficacy and quality of new medicines.
The health departments of the larger local authorities have played a major
part in promoting the health of people in the community by means of services
provided under the National Health Service. As from April 1974 these locally
organised health services will be taken over by the new area health authorities
(health boards in Scotland) which, outside London, will in general cover the
same areas as the new major local authorities which are to come into operation
at the same time in England and Wales and a year later in Scotland (see
p. 67). The services provided include vaccination and immunisation, family
planning, midwifery, the health care of mothers and young children, health
visiting, home nursing and the prevention, care and after-care of illness.
Charges may be made for some local authority health services (for example,
chiropody services) but arrangements are made for free provision to people
w7ith very low incomes.
The area health authorities (health boards in Scotland) will take over from the
local authority health departments their planned programmes of vaccination
and immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (girls only), polio¬
myelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and wdiooping cough. Such protection is usually
given by the family doctor or at child health clinics.
From April 1974 the area health authorities will take over the local health
authorities’ family planning services, including vasectomy, which they are
empowered to provide under the NHS (Family Planning) Act 1967 and the
NHS Family Planning (Amendment) Act 1972. Family planning will thus
become a normal part of health care and advice and treatment will be available
free on a national basis through family planning clinics, hospitals, fami y
practitioners and domiciliary services.
The expectant mother may arrange to have her baby in hospital or at home
according to the advice given by the doctor or midwife. Over 90 per cent
of confinements in England and Wales and 96 per cent in Scotland take place
in hospital. For a home confinement the services of either a general practitioner
SOCIAL WELFARE
H5
Mothers and
Young Children
Health
Visiting
Home Nursing
Prevention of
Illness, Care
and Aftercare
Health Centres
obstetrician or her own family doctor besides those of a trained midwife are
available to every mother. The midwife cares for mothers and babies (whether
born at home or in hospital) in their own homes, generally for up to 14 days
after the birth. After this health visitors visit the home to give advice to
parents on the care and development of young children and on health educa¬
tion in general. Most premature babies are cared for in hospital but special
arrangements for those who are fit to remain in their own homes are made by
many health authorities who lend equipment and appoint experienced nursing
staff to supervise their care.
Special preventive health services, including free dental care, are available for
expectant and nursing mothers and young children. There are maternity and
child health centres in almost all areas. Special sessions are held for vaccination
and inoculation and for early testing of babies for deafness and other defects.
A feature of the service is the education of mothers before and after the birth
by means of talks, discussion groups, demonstrations and classes. Some 70
per cent of babies born in England and Wales and some 70 per cent of those
born in Scotland are taken to the centres. Family planning clinics, often run by
the Family Planning Association on behalf of local authorities, are in operation
at many maternity and child health centres.
Health authorities must provide, or arrange for voluntary organisations to
provide, the services of health visitors to visit persons in their homes or else¬
where. Health visitors (see p. 147) are concerned with the health of the house¬
hold as a whole, and have an important part to play in health education and
preventive measures. Particular emphasis is placed upon early detection of
abnormalities in children, problems of behaviour, assistance to families with
difficulties, the early assessment of physical and mental deterioration of elderly
people in the community and their needs in relation to the maintenance of
health. They work in close co-operation with general medical practitioners, the
pediatric, geriatric and chronic wards of hospitals and social workers.
It will also be the duty of the new health authorities to provide or arrange
home nursing for people needing nursing in their homes or elsewhere outside
hospital. In many areas home nurses (see p. 147) work as a team assisted by
ancillaries and in close professional association with the general medical
services and the hospital services.
The new health authorities will take over from the local authorities their power
to make arrangements for the prevention of illnesses or the care and aftercare
of people who are or have been ill. Services provided by almost all authorities
include chiropody (especially for the elderly); and the supply or loan of nursing
equipment. Other services include testing to help in the early detection of
cervical cancer, the adaptation of patients’ homes to accommodate kidney
machines provided by hospital authorities and the fluoridation of water supplies
to prevent dental decay.
There has been a marked increase of interest in health centres at which
facilities can be made available for the provision of medical, dental and
pharmaceutical services and, in some cases, consultant and other hospital out¬
patient services in association with community health services. At the end of
July 1973, 459 were in operation in England and Wales, 203 were under con¬
struction and many more planned. In Scotland, where the provision of health
centres is primarily the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland,
there were 47 centres in operation, 19 under construction with more planned.
146
Health Education
Ambulance Services
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
TREATMENT
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
THE MEDICAL,
DENTAL,
NURSING AND
ALLIED
PROFESSIONS
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Health education in England, Wales and Northern Ireland is the responsi¬
bility of the Health Education Council which assists in the development of
programmes of health education with the health authorities, professional
organisations, voluntary bodies and industry. There are separate arrangements
in Scotland. Expenditure is met from both central and local government funds.
Free conveyance by ambulance in England and Wales between home and
hospital is provided, where necessary, by the health authorities either directly
or by arrangement with voluntary organisations. The Hospital Car Service
(organised by the St. John Ambulance Association and Brigade, the British Red
Cross Society, and the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service) augments the
ambulance service in many areas by the conveyance of sitting patients. In
Scotland ambulances are run by the St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Service on behalf of the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland
they are run by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
Though practically all residents in Britain use the National Health Service, a
number of people sometimes prefer to pay for private consultations and treat¬
ment. Among the major users are the families of the million or so subscribers
to the provident schemes which make provision for private health care in
return for annual subscriptions (now about ^24 million or 2 per cent of the
expenditure on NHS hospital and specialist services).
Government funds for medical research in Britain are channelled through
the University Grants Committee whose general grants to universities cover
research as well as teaching 5 the Medical Research Council which administers
two research institutes and numerous research units as well as providing
grants for research teams and individuals; and the Health Departments which
support research in aid of the National Health Service in universities, hospitals,
other government departments and industry. Further support is provided
by a large number of charitable foundations and organisations, such as the
Cancer Research Campaign and the Nuffield Foundation; and there is sub¬
stantial investment in medical research and development by the pharma¬
ceutical and medical equipment industries (see also p. 402).
The health departments also promote research through external agencies
and to a lesser extent through their own establishments into the operation
and development of the National Health Service and local authority personal
social services and also into social security matters, building and engineering
techniques and processes and the development and assessment of scientific
equipment and hospital supplies.
Only people whose names are on the medical and dental registers respectively
may practise as doctors and dentists under the National Health Service. Dental
auxiliaries (who have undergone a two-year training course) may carry out
some kinds of simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The minimum qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven
years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year s
experience as a resident assistant doctor in a hospital; for a dentist, four or
more years at a dental school are required. The governing body of the medical
profession is the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858, that of the
dentists is the General Dental Council which succeeded the Dental Board in
1956. The British Medical Association is the doctors’ main professional
association; that of the dentists is the British Dental Association.
SOCIAL WELFARE
H7
PERSONAL
SOCIAL SERVICES
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registra¬
tion as a nurse is normally three years. Training may be in general, sick
children’s, mental or mentally sub-normal nursing. An enrolled nurse takes a
two-year course. The examining bodies of the nursing profession in England
and Wales and in Scotland are the General Nursing Councils, and in Northern
Ireland the Joint Nursing and Midwives Council. Midwives in England and
Wales and in Scotland must have the certificate of the appropriate Central
Midwives Board, and in Northern Ireland of the Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council. Most pupil midwives are already registered general nurses or sick
children’s nurses; for them the two-year midwifery training period is reduced
to one year and, for other registered and enrolled nurses, to 18 months. The
Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Midwives are the pro¬
fessional bodies for nurses and midwives. Health visitors are registered general
nurses who have undergone at least the first part of the midwifery course or
obstetric nursing before taking a year’s course in health visiting, promoted by
the Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors. Home nurses
are state registered or state enrolled nurses the majority of whom have under¬
taken additional training.
To practise as a retail or hospital pharmacist, a pharmaceutical chemist
must have his or her name entered in the register maintained by the Pharma¬
ceutical Society of Great Britain, the governing body of the profession, or by
the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland. Four or five years’ academic
study and practical training are necessary for registration. The dispensing of
all medicines and the sale of certain specified medicines can be carried out
only by, or under the supervision of, a registered pharmaceutical chemist.
Under the Opticians Act 1958 the General Optical Council regulates the
professions of ophthalmic optician and dispensing optician; only registered
ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practitioners) may test sight.
Training of ophthalmic opticians takes four years including a year of practical
experience under supervision. Dispensing opticians may take a two-year
full-time course with a year’s practical experience or a part-time day-release
course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory technicians, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiotherapists,
radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies are eight boards
(called, for example, the Chiropodists’ Board or the Dietitians’ Board) under
the general supervision of the Council for Professions Supplementary to
Medicine. A professional training lasting two to four years is needed to qualify
for registration. Only members of these professions who are state registered
may be employed in the National Health Service and some other public
services.
Whereas all health responsibilities are to be transferred on 1st April 1974 to
the new health authorities which then become operational, responsibility for
personal social services will remain with the social services departments of the
major local authorities (see p. 67). Many of the services which they provide
are directed towards the same groups of people who also have a great need for
health services, for example, the elderly, the physically handicapped or
chronically sick, the mentally ill or handicapped, mothers and young children,
and the temporarily ill and convalescent. The poor, the homeless and children
in need of care, protection or control—other overlapping groups to whom social
services are directed—are also often in need of medical and psychiatric services.
There has therefore been close co-operation between the social service and
148
The
Handicapped
The Elderly
The Mentally
111 and the
Mentally
Handicapped
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
health departments of local authorities and with the practitioner and hospital
branches of the health service. The same close co-operation is to be maintained
with the new integrated health authorities.
Local authorities in England and Wales have a duty under the National
Assistance Act 1948 and under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act
1970 to provide social services for people who are blind, partially sighted,
deaf, hard of hearing, or otherwise substantially and permanently handi¬
capped, physically or mentally. They are required to secure full information on
the number of handicapped people in their area and on their needs. A wide
range of facilities with which voluntary organisations give important help is
available, including advice on occupational, social and personal problems aris¬
ing from disability; assistance in overcoming the effects of disability; help in
carrying out adaptations in the home—for example, by fitting ramps, wide
doorways, ground floor toilets, guide rails, and the provision of various aids
to living to meet individual needs, including, in certain circumstances, a
telephone; social and occupational centres and clubs; teaching of handicrafts
and other occupations either at home or in centres; the provision of recrea¬
tional facilities, outings and holidays including recuperative holidays. They
also provide residential homes for the severely handicapped.
Help available from other sources includes financial aid, preventive and
medical treatment, special education, training for employment and placement
in suitable occupations, specially designed housing and specially designed
means of access to public buildings.
(For the provision of special educational treatment for handicapped children
see p. 159, and the child health clinics and the school health service, which
keep a watch for abnormalities, pp. 145 and 157O
A number of services for elderly people in their own homes are provided by
statutory and voluntary bodies to help them to live there for as long as possible.
The services of local authorities include the advice and help of social workers,
domestic help, a chiropody service, sitters-in, night attendants and laundry
services as well as day centres, clubs, recreational workshops and meals services.
In many areas 'good neighbour* and friendly visiting services are also arranged
by the local authority or a voluntary organisation.
Local authorities also provide residential accommodation for the elderly and
infirm and have powers to register homes run by voluntary organisations or
privately. The newer homes provided by local authorities for elderly and
other infirm people usually have accommodation for 30 to 50 residents. About
2,400 homes for elderly people are provided by local authorities in England
and Wales which house about 2 per cent of the population over 65.
For many years local authorities have, under the Housing Acts, provided an
increasing number of smaller dwellings for old people, and flatlets for frail or
infirm old people who can lead independent lives with some help. Local
authorities may contribute towards the cost of employing a warden to under¬
take welfare duties in such specially designed housing.
Local authorities have a duty to make arrangements for helping the mentally
ill or handicapped in the community, and for prevention and after-care services.
Recent developments in the treatment of mental illness, which enable patients
either to be treated at home or to be discharged from hospital more quickly
provided support is available in the community, are adding to the demands for
SOCIAL WELFARE
I49
Help to Families
Child Care
these services. Arrangements include training centres for the mentally handi¬
capped, day care and occupation centres for the mentally ill, as well as social
centres and a variety of residential care for the mentally ill and handicapped
of all ages. If necessary, the local authority can place a mentally disordered
person under guardianship within the community. Local authority social
workers help patients and their families to deal with social problems arising
from mental illness or mental handicap.
Local authorities, through their own social workers or through a voluntary
organisation, make available help and advice to families facing special problems.
Domestic help (commonly called ‘home help’) is provided by local authori¬
ties. By far the most numerous category getting this help are the elderly, but
others include the chronically sick and severely physically handicapped, the
mentally ill or handicapped and maternity cases.
Some local authorities make direct provision for the special needs of un¬
married mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work done
by voluntary organisations and other bodies (see p. 127).
For the homeless, local authorities provide or arrange temporary accommoda¬
tion. There were at the end of 1972 about 20,700 people in such accommoda¬
tion in England.
Local authorities also arrange day care for children under five and not
attending maintained schools, who are in a priority category of need, for
example with only one parent who has to go out to work. Full-day care is not
usually provided by local authority day nurseries, but local authorities may
place priority children in private or voluntary day nurseries or with registered
child minders.
Local authorities in Britain have a duty of care and protection towards children
who have no parent or guardian willing and able to provide for them and
control them adequately. Local authorities in England and Wales are em¬
powered under the Children and Young Persons Act 1963 to make available
such advice, guidance and assistance as may promote the welfare of children
by diminishing the need to receive or keep them in the authority’s care or to
bring them before a juvenile court. The Children and Young Persons Act
1969 (for England and Wales) provides for children to be brought before a
court if they are neglected, exposed to moral danger, beyond the control of
parents or truanting from school and for the care and treatment of juvenile
offenders and others in need of care and control; and gives local authorities
wider responsibilities for undertaking, through social workers, enquiries and
consultations with parents, schools and the police, and for the supervision of a
child or young person alleged to be an offender and in need of care or control.
Juveniles charged with offences or brought before the court as being in need
of care or control are dealt with in a juvenile court unless they are charged
with homicide or certain grave crimes or are jointly charged with an adult.
Every juvenile court must be constituted of not more than three justices and
must, except in certain special circumstances, include a man and a woman.
Juveniles of 12 years and over are still liable to criminal prosecution. A child
below the minimum age may be subject to care proceedings in a juvenile
court but criminal proceedings cannot be brought against him. Care proceed¬
ings may also be brought when a child has been ill-treated or neglected, or is
of compulsory school age and is not attending school regularly.
The principal orders available to the juvenile courts in England and Wales
in both care and criminal proceedings are: (a) a care order, which commits
15°
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the child to the care of the local authority, (b) a supervision order (usually
valid for three years or less) under which a child will normally remain at home
under the supervision of the local authority or a probation officer, (c) an order
requiring a parent or guardian to enter into a recognisance to take proper care
of the child or young person and to exercise proper control over him, and
(d) a hospital or guardianship order in accordance with the Mental Health
Act 1959. In criminal proceedings the courts may also impose fines up to £50
on persons over 14 years of age and up to £10 on children under that age,
order payment of compensation, grant a conditional or absolute discharge or
make attendance centre or detention centre orders (see pp. 109-10).
In England and Wales a child may be committed to the care of a local author¬
ity under a care order if the juvenile court, having considered all the child’s
circumstances, is satisfied that he is in need of care or control which he
would be unlikely to receive unless the court made an order. A care order
remains in force until a child’s eighteenth birthday (or nineteenth if made after
he is 16) unless prematurely discharged by the court. In England and Wales
local authorities have a further duty, under the Children Act 1948, to receive
into their care any child under the age of 17 who has no parent or guardian,
or who has been abandoned or whose parents are unable to provide for him
temporarily or permanently. A child so received remains in the care of the
local authority until he is 18 years old unless the authority finds it to his
advantage to return him sooner to his parents or guardian or to entrust him to
friends. Both categories of children are treated so as to further their best
interests and afford them opportunity for their proper development. Similar
provisions for assistance and care apply in Scotland under separate legislation.
Under the provisions of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, the juvenile
courts were replaced by a system of children’s hearings which have powers to
impose compulsory measures of care on a child by means of a supervision
requirement which can remain in force until he is 18 years old.
When practicable, children in care are boarded out with foster parents,
who receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home
cannot be found for a child, or he is not suitable for boarding out, he may be
placed in a community home, a voluntary home or other suitable residential
accommodation. Community homes for children in the care of local authorities
are now provided under plans formulated by regional planning committees in
accordance with the Children and Young Persons Act 1969. These homes
comprise local authority children’s homes and the voluntary homes which
have become ‘assisted’ or ‘controlled’ together with former approved schools
and remand homes which have ceased to function under these names. In
Scotland local authorities are responsible for providing appropriate accom¬
modation for children in their care and informal arrangements exist for the
development of services on a regional basis.
In England and Wales local authority child care functions are the responsi¬
bility of the social services committees appointed under the Local Authority
Social Services Act 1970. In Scotland child care work is undertaken by local
authority social work departments set up under the Social Work (Scotland)
Act 1968. Regulations for England and Wales for children in care of local
authorities and voluntary organisations and the conduct of children s homes
are made by the Secretary of State for Social Services and the Secretary of
State for Wales and, for Scotland, by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the welfare authorities of each county and county
borough (under the general direction of the Ministry of Home Affairs) are
responsible for caring for homeless and neglected children under the Children
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
Social Workers
HEALTH
AND WELFARE
SERVICES IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SOCIAL WELFARE 151
and Young Persons Act (Northern Ireland) 1968. Arrangements for young
offenders follow the same general principles as in Great Britain.
Voluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care, continue
to play a valuable part in this work. Children’s homes run by voluntary
organisations (with some 12,000 places in Great Britain) are required to be
registered under the Children Act 1948 in England and Wales, in Scotland
under the Social Work (Scotland) Act and in Northern Ireland under the
Children and Young Persons Act. Arrangements for the care of children and
their accommodation are subject to inspection by social work service officers of
the Department of Health and Social Security, the Welsh Office, the Scottish
Education Department and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Home Affairs.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own
homes include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units.
The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and its Scottish
counterpart maintain inspectors and visitors to investigate reported cruelty or
neglect.
Provision for legal adoption was first made in England and Wales in 1926, in
Northern Ireland in 1929 and in Scotland in 1930. About 25,000 adoption
orders are made annually by the courts in Great Britain and some 400 in
Northern Ireland. Adoption is now regulated by the Adoption Act 1958 in
Great Britain and by the Adoption Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 in Northern
Ireland. The Registrars General keep registers of adopted children; adoption
societies (over 70 societies arrange adoptions) must be registered with the
local authority (in Northern Ireland with the Ministry of Home Affairs).
Local authorities have had the power since 1959 to act as adoption agencies
and increasingly do so. Adoption law in Great Britain is being reviewed.
Social services of all kinds require for their effective operation professional
social workers, that is, full-time salaried workers trained in the methods of social
work. Most professional social workers are employed in local authority social
services departments, in hospitals, in voluntary organisations or in the pro¬
bation service (see p. 108). From April 1974, in England and Wales social
workers working in the health services will be employed by local authority
social services departments and made available by them to hospitals and other
health service establishments. Responsibility for professional training in social
work in Britain rests with the Central Council for Education and Training in
Social Work. Professional training normally takes two years, or one year for
certain students who have previously obtained relevant degrees or diplomas.
Advice in social work training is given by the Social Work Advisory Service.
The health services established under the Health Services Acts (Northern
Ireland) correspond fairly closely to the system under the National Health
Service in Great Britain and are financed in the same way as in the rest of the
United Kingdom. Personal social services are provided under the Welfare
Services Act (Northern Ireland) 1971 by separate statutory welfare authorities.
The hospital and specialist services, which include mental health services,
are administered on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Social Services by
the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority through hospital management com¬
mittees. The Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority has under its control 98
hospitals containing in all about 18,000 beds. The administration of the
general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and general eye services is in the
Welfare of
Immigrants
Community
Relations
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
hands of the Northern Ireland General Health Services Board, which takes
the place of the executive councils in Great Britain. There are some 750
general practitioners (with an average of 2,045 patients each), 335 dentists,
12 ophthalmic medical practitioners and 120 ophthalmic and 9 dispensing
opticians. The provision of health centres is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Health and Social Services. The range of local authority services are similar
to those already described for the rest of the United Kingdom.
The Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) Order 1972
replaced the existing tripartite arrangement for the provision of health and
personal social services by a unified structure in which these services will be
provided by four Health and Social Services Boards acting as agents of the
Ministry of Health and Social Services. The services to be integrated include
hospital and specialist services, local authority health and welfare services, and
general health services. The transition to the new structure will be synchro¬
nised with the reorganisation of local government (see p. 69) and it is intended
that the area boards will assume their functions on 1st October I973-
IMMIGRATION AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS
After the 1950s considerable numbers of people entered Britain from Com¬
monwealth countries in the West Indies, Asia and Africa to take up employ¬
ment, many with the intention of settling permanently (see pp. 12 and 376). It
was estimated that coloured Commonwealth immigrants and their families
numbered some 1-5 million in 1971, about 2^ per cent of the total population
of Britain.
Commonwealth immigrants are making an important contribution to the
economy and public services; but their concentration in areas where opportu¬
nities for employment are greatest—60 per cent have settled in Greater London
and the West Midlands, including Birmingham—led to an increased demand
for housing and additional pressures on some of the social services. The
problems of these inner urban areas are being met by continuous social service
programmes in housing, education, hospitals and health and welfare, which
benefit the whole community, and by the urban programme (see p. 129) which
is directed at areas of special need. Additional teachers have been appointed
to schools in immigrant areas and government grants are available to local
authorities with substantial immigrant populations towards the salaries of
extra staff, such as interpreters, health visitors and helpers in schools and
community homes. The welfare of immigrants and good relations between
immigrant groups and the local community are promoted by voluntary
community relations councils and other voluntary bodies.
The co-ordination of government action to promote the welfare of immigrants
is the responsibility of the Home Office. Voluntary efforts to achieve the
integration of immigrants as part of a wider aim of promoting harmonious
community relations are co-ordinated nationally by the Community Relations
Commission, a statutory body set up under the Race Relations Act 1968.
The Commission co-ordinates the activities of local community relations
councils, of which there are about 80 operating in areas where there is an
immigrant population. It makes grants towards the salaries of full-time com¬
munity relations officers and assistants and towards special projects which
help improve community relations and advises and makes recommendations
to the Home Secretary on matters affecting community relations. The Com-
SOCIAL WELFARE
Race Relations
Acts
153
mission gives specialist advice to those working in social services, including
education, employment and youth services, in the context of a multi-cultural
society.
Discrimination on grounds of colour, race, or ethnic or national origin in places
of public resort was first made unlawful in Great Britain by the Race Relations
Act 1965} which established a Race Relations Board to secure compliance with
the Act. The Race Relations Act 1968 replaced the 1965 Act and is much
wider in scope, making discrimination unlawful in the provision of goods,
facilities and services, in employment and housing and in advertising. The
Race Relations Board has a statutory duty to receive and investigate complaints
and seeks to resolve them by conciliation. The Board constitutes regional
conciliation committees which between them cover all areas of Great Britain.
If conciliation fails the Board can seek remedies in the courts. Employment
complaints are dealt with in the first instance by the Department of Employ¬
ment whose function it is to see whether voluntary machinery exists within
industry to deal with them. Where no such machinery exists the complaints
are investigated by the Board.
7 Education
There are over 11 million children and young people in full-time attendance
at schools, universities, colleges of education and technical colleges in Britain.
The great majority of schools, attended by some 95 per cent of school children,
and most further education establishments are publicly maintained or assisted.
Universities are autonomous self-governing institutions but are also aided
from public funds. . f ,
The bulk of expenditure on education in Britain comes from public tunas
although some older-established schools and colleges continue to benefit from
private endowments. In 1972-73 estimated total public expenditure on educa¬
tion, including school meals, milk, local libraries and museums, amounted to
over £3,250 million (about three times the expenditure in 1962-63), which was
14 per cent of all public expenditure.
In England and Wales the main development of publicly provided primary
education started over a hundred years ago. In 1833 the Government had
begun to make annual grants to the voluntary societies which were providing
schools, but the Elementary Education Act of 1870 first established the
principle of compulsory education. By the end of the nineteenth century
elementary education had become virtually both compulsory and free of
charge. Public provision of secondary education (already begun in Wales)
started in England under the Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now
governs public education in England and Wales. The Scottish and Northern
Ireland educational systems both have long and separate histones, but the
same general policy is implemented throughout Britain, with some national
variations. Education is governed by the Education (Scotland) Act 1962 and
the Education Act (Northern Ireland) 1947* ,
A ten-year education programme for England and Wales was announced by
the Government in December 1972. The proposals involve substantially in¬
creased expenditure in five sectors: a new programme of nursery education
(see p. 157); a larger building programme for the renewal of secondary and
special, as well as primary, schools; a larger teaching force to improve further
the staffing standards in schools; new measures to improve the pre-service and
in-service training of teachers; and the development in higher education of a
wider range of opportunities for both students and institutions. Similar pro¬
posals have been made for Scotland.
Educational
Administration
Educational responsibilities are devolved in varying degrees to ministers of the
four countries of Britain: the Secretary of State for Education and Science is
responsible for all aspects of education in England, for further education in
Wales, and for universities, civil science and the arts (see p. 51) throughout
Great’Britain; the Secretary of State for Wales is responsible for nursery,
primary and secondary education in Wales; the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland have full educational res¬
ponsibilities in their countries except that the Secretary of State for Scotland
is consulted about Scottish universities but is not responsible for them.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is divide
between the central government departments (the Department of Education
EDUCATION
155
SCHOOLS
Management
and Science, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Education Department, and the
Northern Ireland Ministry of Education), local education authorities,1 and
various voluntary organisations. The relation between these three groups is
based on consultation and co-operation.
The local education authorities are responsible for the provision of school
education and further education. They also provide grants to students pro¬
ceeding to higher education; in Scotland grants are paid by the Scottish
Education Department.
In England and Wales colleges of education (for teacher training) are under
the financial and administrative control of local education authorities or
voluntary organisations. The organisation of courses is based on university
institutes of education. The Scottish colleges of education are financed directly
by the Scottish Education Department and administered by independent
governing bodies; in Northern Ireland they are controlled by the Ministry
of Education or voluntary agencies.
The universities are administratively independent of the central govern¬
ment departments. The Government exercises its responsibilities in relation
to the universities through the University Grants Committee (see p. 165).
Their governing bodies are appointed according to the terms of their individual
charters or statutory provisions.
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive efficient
full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16.
At present there are about 10-5 million school children at 37,490 schools.
In England and Wales there were 8-6 million children in publicly maintained
schools in 1972 besides 128,730 others at schools receiving direct grants
from the Department of Education and Science or the Welsh Office; there
were also 422,310 children of all ages at 2,600 independent schools. In Scotland
1,007,740 children were attending education authority or grant-aided schools
and over 17,080 were at independent schools. In Northern Ireland 356,990
children were attending publicly maintained or assisted schools.
In Britain boys and girls are generally taught together in primary schools.
Some two-thirds of pupils in maintained secondary schools in England and
Wales and nearly one-half in Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In
Scotland nearly all secondary schools are mixed. In the independent sector
most of the schools for younger children are co-educational; but of those
providing secondary education the majority are either for boys or for girls.
Schools supported from public funds are of three kinds in England and
Wales: county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained
by local education authorities wholly out of public funds; voluntary schools
(mostly ‘aided’ or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been provided by a
voluntary body, usually of a religious denomination2; and direct-grant schools
which are completely independent of local education authorities but receive a
grant from the Department of Education and Science or the Welsh Office.
1 In Northern Ireland five new education and library boards are to be set up to assume
responsibility for education when the reorganisation of local government takes place in
October 1973 (see p. 67).
2 The local education authority is responsible for the running costs of all voluntary
schools and for the cost of all building work at controlled schools. Aided schools have
more independence than controlled schools and are responsible for part of the cost of
external repairs and any building work (see p. 160). Over a third of the 28,350 schools
maintained by local education authorities in England and Wales are voluntary schools
and the majority of these are Church of England schools. There are 2,580 Roman
Catholic voluntary schools and smaller numbers belonging to other religious bodies.
156
Fees
Curricula
Religion in
Schools
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
These last (the smallest group) are mainly grammar schools; they include some
schools of ancient foundation. In Scotland most of the schools supported from
public funds are provided by education authorities and are known as public
schools (in England this term is used for a type of independent school, see
p. 159). There are also 27 grant-aided secondary schools comparable to the
English direct-grant schools. In Northern Ireland schools managed by educa¬
tion authorities and voluntary schools managed by maintained school com¬
mittees, boards of governors and individual (usually clerical) managers, are
both grant-aided from public funds.
In England and Wales no fees are charged to parents of children attending
maintained schools (that is, over 90 per cent of the school population) and
books and equipment are supplied free. In Scotland, education authorities
have power to charge fees where this can be done without prejudice to the
adequate provision of free school education.
The direct-grant grammar schools in England and Wales and a few of the
grant-aided secondary schools in Scotland take pupils paid for by local educa¬
tion authorities as well as those whose fees are paid wholly or partly by parents.
(For independent schools, see p. 159-) In Northern Ireland no fees are charged
to parents of children attending grant-aided schools, with the exception of
grammar schools, where qualified pupils receive from the education authorities
scholarships which cover the whole or most of the fees charged by the school.
In England and Wales curricula in maintained schools are under the control of
local education authorities, though there is in practice a high degree of devolu¬
tion to the schools themselves. Teachers may seek help and advice from Her
Majesty’s Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of all schools
including independent schools; they review and report on the content and
value of the education provided and are available as advisers. Local education
authorities also employ inspectors to advise on maintained schools. Further
advice and encouragement for school-based research and development is
available to teachers through the Schools Council for Curriculum and
Examinations. The council, an independent body representative of all educa¬
tional interests, acts as an advisory body and carries out research and develop¬
ment work on curricula, teaching methods and examinations in primary an
secondary schools. In Scotland the function of Her Majesty’s Inspectors is in
general the same as that of the Inspectorate in England and Wales. The content
and balance of the curriculum is kept under continuous review by the Consulta¬
tive Committee on the Curriculum. Northern Ireland has a Schools Curricu¬
lum Committee which works in close liaison with the Schools Council. The
Inspectorate of the Ministry of Education provides help and advice to teachers
and is responsible for the inspection and evaluation of the work of all schools.
The schools’ freedom to frame their own curricula has facilitated a rapid
increase in study and experiment, partly stimulated by the Schools Council
and other organisations and partly prompted by the raising of the school¬
leaving age from 15 to 16 in September 1972. The general purpose is to adapt
the curriculum to the everyday life and needs of children and young people.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools
receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of worship
unless their parents do not wish them to participate. In county schools, and in
certain circumstances in voluntary schools, religious instruction of an un“
denominational Christian character is given. In all kinds of voluntary school
EDUCATION
157
Health and
Welfare of
School Children
Priority Areas
Primary
Schools
there is opportunity for denominational instruction. In Scotland, subject to
safeguards for the individual conscience, religious instruction must be given,
but the content is determined by education authorities or, more commonly,
by the schools themselves. Roman Catholic children generally have their own
schools. In education authority schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a right
of access which may be used for denominational purposes. In voluntary
schools corporate worship and religious education are controlled by the
management authorities.
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum
of all schools. Those receiving financial assistance from public funds must
have the use of a playing field and most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
Organised games include tennis, cricket, football, hockey, lacrosse and netball.
The School Health Service provides medical inspection and arranges,
usually in co-operation with the National Health Service, for free medical and
dental treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local
education authorities. Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child
guidance centres. From April 1974 responsibility for the medical and dental
inspection and treatment functions of the School Health Service will be trans¬
ferred to the reorganised National Health Service.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to children of 7 years
or under, to children aged between 7 and 12 if they have a medical require¬
ment, and to pupils in special schools. The School Meals Service provides a
mid-day meal at a subsidised charge (remitted where there is need). The price
is gradually being raised to cover the economic cost. About 64 per cent of
pupils in England and Wales and about 42 per cent of pupils in Scotland in
education authority schools have school mid-day meals. Education authorities
have a duty, under certain conditions, to assist financially in the provision of
transport for pupils between home and school.
The Government has allocated resources under several schemes for the im¬
provement of educational facilities in ‘priority areas’. Special problems in these
areas are poverty, overcrowding and old school buildings. The recommenda¬
tions of the Plowden report (see Bibliography p. 473) on aid to educational
priority areas led to the introduction of a special annual increment for
teachers employed in schools of exceptional difficulty and to the allocation of
additional funds for school building. Most of the educational resources made
available since 1968 under the Urban Programme (see p. 129) are being used to
provide over 24,000 new nursery places in areas of acute social need in Great
Britain. The Community Development Project and the Educational Priority
Area project have fostered such innovations as community schools, pre-school
experiments and new approaches to adult education. The priority areas will
also benefit from the Government’s proposals on education (see p. 154)
which include an increase in expenditure on school building improvement
programmes.
Nursery schools and classes provide informal educational and play facilities.
Only a small proportion of children between two and five years old attend
these schools but a major expansion of nursery education announced in
December 1972 (see p. 154) is planned to provide, within ten years, nursery
education without charge to those children of three and four whose parents
wish them to have it. Compulsory education begins at five when children in
England and Wales go to infant schools or departments; at seven they go on to
i58
Secondary
Schools
England and Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
junior schools or departments. At present the usual age of transfer from pri¬
mary to secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland but
an increasing number of local authorities in England are establishing ‘first’
schools for pupils aged 5-8 or 10, and ‘middle’ schools for pupils aged 8 or 9
to 12 or 13 and 10 to 13. In Scotland, the primary schools take children from
5 to 12, normally having infant classes for children under 7, although in some
areas there are separate infant schools.
The content of curricula is very largely a matter for the schools themselves.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland there are no compulsory secular
subjects but generally a curriculum includes the teaching of reading, writing,
mathematics, English, music, art and handiwork, science and nature study,
history and geography. French is taught in an increasing number of schools.
Additionally, in Wales, the Welsh language is taught. Where it is the home
language of the pupils, Welsh is used as either the main or a secondary medium
of teaching in many schools especially in the early years of primary school.
In Scotland the scope of the curriculum is similar and provision is made,
where appropriate, for the teaching of Gaelic and its use for the purposes of
instruction.
The public or state system of education aims to give all children an education
suited to their particular abilities. The majority of school children in England
and Wales receive their secondary education in schools to which they are
allocated after selection procedures at the age of 11. Schools receiving pupils on
this basis are: about 1,070 grammar schools providing academic education
(including 176 direct-grant grammar schools); some 2,220 secondary modern
schools giving a general education with a practical bias; a few secondary
technical schools offering a general education related to industry, commerce
and agriculture; and schools providing all three, or any two, types of educa¬
tion, in separately organised streams and known as multilateral or bilateral
A third of the maintained secondary school population, however, attend
some 1,590 comprehensive schools which take pupils without reference to
ability or aptitude and provide a wide range of secondary education for all or
most of the children of a district. They can be organised in a number of ways
including schools that take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18;
the middle schools whose pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools at
12 or 13, leaving at 16 or 18; and the comprehensive school with an age-range
of 11 or’12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form college for pupils over 16.
Secondary education in Scotland is largely organised on comprehensive
lines and in 1972 265,090 pupils (about 80 per cent of all pupils in education
authority secondary schools) were in schools with a comprehensive intake.
There are also a decreasing number of selective secondary schools which tal
mainly into one of three categories or are a combination of all three: (1)
schools providing non-certificate courses for pupils likely to leave school at the
statutory leaving age of 16; (2) schools which, in addition to non-certificate
courses, provide courses leading to the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certifi¬
cate of Education; and (3) secondary schools which provide Certificate courses
of four, five and six years.
In Northern Ireland there are grammar schools and secondary (intermediate)
schools, the latter being the equivalent of the secondary modern schools in
England and Wales. Some comprehensive type schools exist, and arrangements
for transfer between the other types of schools are flexible.
EDUCATION
159
Special
Education
Independent
Schools
School Leaving
and Secondary
School
Examinations
Special education is provided for children who require it because of physical
or mental disability, including maladjustment, either in ordinary schools or
special schools (including hospital schools). There are over 1,690 special
schools in Britain, including hospital schools, day and boarding schools. There
are also boarding homes for handicapped children attending ordinary schools.
There are ten categories of handicapped pupils in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland and nine in Scotland for whom local education authorities
must provide special educational treatment: blind, partially sighted, deaf,
partially hearing, delicate, educationally subnormal, epileptic, maladjusted,
physically handicapped and children suffering from speech defects. There is no
separate category for the delicate in Scotland.
Independent schools in England and Wales receive no grants from public
funds but all are open to inspection and must register with the Department of
Education and Science or the Welsh Office which has power to require them to
remedy any objectionable features in their premises, accommodation or in¬
struction and to exclude any person regarded as unsuitable to teach in or to be
the proprietor of a school. In default, the appropriate Secretary of State can,
in effect, close a school, but schools have a right of appeal to an Independent
Schools Tribunal against any of the requirements. The schools whose stan¬
dards are regarded by the Department or the Welsh Office as broadly com¬
parable with those of well-run maintained schools are, on application, granted
the status of ‘recognised as efficient’. Such schools (1,414 of 2,604 independent
schools registered) contain 74-6 per cent of the pupils in independent schools.
In Scotland where there are 105 registered schools, the position is generally the
same except that there is no ‘recognised as efficient’ status.
Independent schools cater for pupils of all ages and abilities. They include
the preparatory schools and the public schools.1 The preparatory schools
cater mainly for boys from about 8 to 13 years of age who are intending to
enter public schools, the largest and most important of the ‘recognised as
efficient’ independent schools. Combined tuition and boarding fees in public
schools generally range between £500 and £1,000 a year. There are some 270
public schools about half of which are for girls. The boys’ schools in particular
include a high proportion of boarding schools and it is among these that some
of the most famous schools are numbered.
The minimum school-leaving age is 16 (raised from 15 in 1972), but the
numbers staying on beyond the minimum school-leaving age have shown a
steady increase over the past decade.
There is no national school-leaving examination in England and Wales, but
secondary school pupils may attempt examinations, in various subjects, leading
to the Certificate of Secondary Education (CSE) or the General Certificate of
Education (GCE). The CSE is designed for pupils completing five years’
secondary education and is normally taken at the age of 16. It is controlled by
14 Regional Examining Boards, consisting mainly of teachers serving in the
schools which provide the candidates. The highest grade in the CSE is widely
accepted as being of the same standard as a pass at GCE ‘Ordinary’ level.
Control over the scope and standards of the examinations is exercised by the
Schools Council (see p. 156) to ensure national comparability. The GCE is
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Head¬
masters’ Conference, the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of
Girls’ Schools Association. Some other schools, mainly direct grant, which are not
independent schools, are also represented on these bodies. They should not be confused
with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
conducted at ‘Ordinary’ (O) and ‘Advanced’ (A) levels. Normally candidates
taking ‘O’ level are about 16 years of age, although some take it earlier, at the
discretion of their head teacher. Most pupils in grammar, direct grants and
independent schools take the ‘O’ level examination, and so do a number of
pupils in comprehensive and other secondary schools.
Passes in various subjects at GCE ‘O’ level and the equivalent CSE grade
are usually considered to be qualifications for entry to courses of further educa¬
tion and training. Since the inception of the CSE the number of passes at the
highest grade has increased steadily as the popularity of the examination has
grown while the annual number of GCE ‘O’ level subject passes has increased
by nearly half between 1961 and 1972. The ‘A’ level examination is at the
standard for entrance to university and to entry to many forms of professional
training. Since 1955 the number of school-leavers obtaining two or more A
levels (often regarded as the minimum qualification for university entrance)
has more than trebled. Entries for CSE and both levels of the GCE are
accepted from candidates at further education establishments and from candi¬
dates entering privately. . , _ c
In Scotland examinations are conducted by the Scottish Certificate ot
Education Examination Board. School pupils in the fourth year of secondary
courses sit an examination at 16 years for the award of passes on the Ordinary
grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education, and pupils in the fifth or sixth
year are presented for the Higher grade. Passes at the Higher grade are the
basis for entry to university or professional training. For those who have
completed their main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue their
studies in particular subjects there is a Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the Northern Ireland General
Certificate of Education or the Northern Ireland Certificate of Secondary
Education.
School Building
Local education authorities and voluntary bodies are responsible, under the
general supervision of the central departments, for providing the schools and
other buildings needed for public education in their areas. The centra
departments decide on the size and nature of the authorities individual
programmes in the light of national priorities; they also offer guidance to
authorities by means of building bulletins and in other ways.
An extensive school building programme has been carried out resulting in
the completion of nearly 14,275 new schools in Britain since 1945; together
with extensions, alterations and remodelling of existing state schools, over
7-7 million new places have been provided.
Grants of up to 80 per cent of the approved cost are normally available from
the Department of Education and Science or the Welsh Office for the building
of new voluntary aided schools and for alterations and external repairs to
existing aided schools. r ,
In Northern Ireland capital grants of 80 per cent are available for voluntary
schools managed by maintained school committees and voluntary grammar
schools which have entered into an agreement under the relevant statutory
^Theschool building programme has provided for new ideas and methods m
design and construction. Industrialised building techniques have been widely
adopted. The new schools are light, airy and colourful, with a high standard
of finish and generous provision of teaching area and outdoor games sPa<;e-^
primary schools especially, traditional classroom designs are being modified
to allow more flexible use of space.
FURTHER
EDUCATION
Institutions
Finance
Students
Courses
Technical Courses
EDUCATION 161
Further education is a broad term used to cover education beyond the second¬
ary stage; it includes much vocational education (full-time, part-time day or
evening courses), non-vocational and recreational evening classes, and adult
education. Further education advanced courses constitute one of the three
sectors of higher education (see p. 167 and below).
In England and Wales there are about 630 major establishments of further
education including polytechnics (see p. 167), technical colleges, colleges of
commerce, colleges of art, and a number of agricultural establishments. They
provide both full-time and part-time courses up to the levels of first and higher
degrees. There are also over 6,500 evening institutes (see p. 162).
In Scotland there are about 82 local further education colleges offering
full- and part-time day courses and a number of evening courses and 13 central
institutions for further education doing mainly advanced work.
In Northern Ireland there are 28 institutions of further education.
Since most further education establishments in Britain are either maintained
or aided from public funds, tuition fees are moderate, and nearly always
remitted for young people under 18 years of age. Where industrial training is
provided by the colleges, charges (the responsibility of the employer) broadly
reflect the economic cost of provision. Many full-time students are helped by
awards from local education authorities. The awards, generally based on the
results of the General Certificate of Education or a corresponding examination,
are assessed to cover tuition fees and a maintenance grant, but parents who
can afford to contribute towards the cost are required to do so. There are also
some scholarships available from endowments, and from particular industries
or companies for the most promising of their young workers.
In autumn 1972 there were 344,939 full-time and sandwich-course students
(307,000 in England and Wales, 26,077 in Scotland and 11,862 in Northern
Ireland) and 1,638,424 part-time students in vocational further education
(1-5 million in England and Wales, 115,285 in Scotland and 23,139 in Northern
Ireland). The total number of students on advanced courses in England and
Wales was about 208,700, in Scotland 19,043, and in Northern Ireland 2,692.
The courses provided are full-time, sandwich (up to five years in length,
generally consisting of alternate periods of about six months of full-time study
in a technical college and supervised experience in industry), block release (on
similar principles, but with shorter periods in college), day release (generally
attendance at a technical college for one day a week during working hours),
and evening classes.
Sandwich courses in higher education are becoming increasingly popular.
At the lower levels the numbers of day release and block release courses are
expanding, and to a large extent replacing evening classes in certain vocational
subjects. Many students attend courses in which further education and
industrial training are combined.
There is a wide variety of courses for young people in various trades and occu¬
pations, leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course of up to five
years. Other, more academic, courses lead to the National Certificates and
Diplomas approved by joint committees consisting of representatives of edu¬
cation departments, teacher organisations and the appropriate professional
162
Business and
Secretarial Courses
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
bodies.1 These courses are normally at two levels, ordinary and higher. The
Ordinary National Certificate (ONC) courses normally last two years part-
time and students usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19^ the level
of the certificate is generally considered to approach that of GCE ‘A level.
The Ordinary National Diploma (OND) courses are the full-time or sandwich
counterparts of the ONC but involve study to a greater depth. In 1972 some
6,266 ONDs were granted, over nine times the number for 1962. The Higher
National Diploma (HND), which requires a further two years’ full-time or
three years’ sandwich study, is recognised, within its more restricted field, as
approaching the standard of a pass degree; the Higher National Certificate
(HNC), after two further years’ part-time study, is lower in standard because
it is more narrowly based.
Many technical colleges, evening institutes and independent colleges offer
courses in shorthand, typing and book-keeping. Most local technical colleges
offer some lower-level work in business and commerce; higher-level work is
generally concentrated in colleges with a department of business studies or in
specialised colleges of commerce. There are a number of part-time and full¬
time courses leading to the Certificate or Higher Certificate in Office Studies.
Some business education is related to the specialised examination require¬
ments of various professional bodies; large numbers of the candidates taking
such courses do so through correspondence courses. In England, Wales ^d
Northern Ireland there are part-time courses leading to the ONC and HJNU
in Business Studies. There are also full-time and sandwich courses leading to
the OND and HND in Business Studies. In Scotland, similar courses lead to
the Scottish National Certificate, the Scottish Higher National Certificate and
the Scottish National Diploma in Business Studies, awarded by the Scottish
Business Education Council.
Adult Education
Adult education is generally taken to mean courses of non-vocational education
for people over 18.2 In 1972 some 2 million people registered for these courses
which were provided by local education authorities, various voluntary bodies,
of which the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA) is the most notable,
certain residential colleges, and the adult education (‘extra-mural) depart¬
ments of universities.
The residential colleges, the university departments and the voluntary
bodies, such as the WEA, recognised as competent to provide adult education,
receive government grants. So do various national bodies which promote
educational activities of a non-political kind, such as the National Federation o
Women’s Institutes and the National Council of Young Men s Christian
Associations. Many of these bodies also receive grants from local education
authorities for services rendered locally. , , , . v
A major part of adult education is provided by local education authorities.
Most of it is on a part-time basis, mainly in evening institutes (day schoo s
used by adults in the evening) and also in colleges of further education, schoo s
of art, adult education centres, community centres, literary institutes and
1 A Technician Education Council and a Business Education Council, proposed in the
ifessssessssss
in 1974-
TEACHERS
EDUCATION 163
youth clubs. About i-8 million students attended local authority adult educa¬
tion classes in 1972. There are about 30 short-term residential colleges or
centres in England and Wales maintained or aided by local education authorities,
providing courses varying in length between a weekend and a fortnight. Many
of the courses are practical, but there are widespread opportunities for
academic study.
The village colleges pioneered in Cambridgeshire and variously adapted in
Cumberland, Monmouthshire, Leicestershire, Peterborough and Somerset
are secondary schools planned also as cultural community centres, providing
educational, social and cultural opportunities for adults in mainly rural areas.
Community centres in general have a more social character and, though aided
by the local education authorities, are usually managed by voluntary com¬
munity associations many of which are affiliated to the National Federation of
Community Associations. The training of community centre wardens is linked
with that of youth workers (see p. 173).
Residential colleges (six in England and Wales, one in Scotland) provide
courses of one or two years, some of which lead to a diploma. The colleges aim
at providing a liberal education and do not apply academic entry tests.
In general, courses at the highest levels in liberal studies are provided by the
extra-mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time staff
appointed for this purpose and can also call on the services of other members
of the university staff; and by the Workers’ Educational Association, which also
employs organising tutors and works closely with the university extra-mural
departments. In 1971-72 over 302,280 students in Britain attended such
courses. Similar work is promoted in some education authority centres.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of
information, research and publication for adult education, as well as a channel
of co-operation and consultation for the many organisations in England and
Wales which are interested in this subject. It is mainly financed by contribu¬
tions from local education authorities and assisted by a grant from the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science. The Scottish Institute of Adult Education is
the corresponding body in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland extra-mural departments of the Queen’s University of
Belfast and the New University of Ulster organise and staff adult education
classes which are supplemented by classes organised by various non-official
bodies. The Workers’ Educational Association is responsible for classes at
other than university level and receives grants from the Ministry of Education.
Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing
bodies or managers. In 1972 there were about 431,390 full-time and 52,180
part-time (equivalent to 24,770 full-time) teachers in publicly maintained
schools in Britain, an average of one teacher to 21*8 pupils. The supply of
teachers is increasing rapidly and the pupil-teacher ratio is improving each
year. Increasing numbers of university graduates are turning to teaching.
In 1972 there were 65,260 full-time teachers in grant-aided establishments
of further education in Britain, and many more part-time teachers. There is
also an increased use of teachers’ aides (helpers) particularly in primary schools,
while the rapid growth in the number of teachers’ centres (over 600) has
helped the spread of new ideas in teaching practice. Most teachers in technical
colleges have had industrial and professional experience.
There are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
institutions maintained from public funds in England and Wales, in Scotland,
and in Northern Ireland.
164
Teaching Aids
and Educational
Techniques
HIGHER
EDUCATION
Universities
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1972-73 the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) broadcast 82 radio
series for schools including nine regional series for Wales, eight for Scotland,
and four for Northern Ireland. These programmes were used by about 32,000
schools. Television reached some 27,000 schools and the BBC and the Inde¬
pendent Broadcasting Authority between them transmitted 82 series of educa¬
tional programmes, most of which were repeated.
Radio provides a great variety of educational programmes for adults, both
vocational and non-vocational; most of them are grouped in an hourly study
programme on five nights a week. Television programmes for similar audiences
are mostly shown on Saturday and Sunday mornings and in the evening during
the week. There have also been a number of experimental projects sponsored
between the BBC, some of the independent television companies, universities
and local education authorities. (For the Open University, see p. 165.)
A number of other audio-visual aids are in use throughout the educational
system. Most universities and a high proportion of colleges of education use
closed-circuit television; it is also used increasingly in further education
colleges and schools—the Inner London Education Authority’s system links
about 1,400 educational establishments and is one of the world’s biggest net¬
works. There are about 1,700 language laboratories in use in schools in England
and Wales.
Schools and colleges co-ordinate different methods of audio-visual presenta¬
tion, including radio, television, films, colour slides, wall charts, maps, models
and tape recordings. For example, the BBC’s ‘Radiovision’ programmes for
schools use coloured film strips in conjunction with a tape recording of the
broadcast. The Council for Educational Technology for the United Kingdom
(formerly the National Council for Educational Technology) and the Educa¬
tional Foundation for Visual Aids advise all bodies connected with education
and with training in industry and in the Services on the use of audio-visual aids.
The system of higher education includes universities, polytechnics, colleges of
education and advanced courses at various colleges in the further education
system. There has been a rapid expansion in higher education in the last
decade; the numbers in full-time higher education in Britain have increased
from 198,200 in 1961 to 472,900 in 1971.
There are 44 universities (not counting the Open University) in Britain, com¬
pared with 17 in 1945. Although the Government is responsible for providing
about 90 per cent of universities’ income it does not control their work or
teaching nor does it have direct dealings with the universities. The grants are
distributed by the University Grants Committee, a body appointed by the
Secretary of State for Education and Science to advise her on state aid to the
universities; its members are drawn from the academic and business worlds.
The English universities are: Aston1 (Birmingham), Bath,1 Birmingham,
Bradford,1 Bristol, Brunei1 (London), Cambridge, City1 (London), Durham,
East Anglia,1 Essex,1 Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury,1 Lancaster,1
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough,1 Manchester, Newcastle
upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Salford,1 Sheffield, Southampton,
Surrey,1 Sussex,1 Warwick1 and York.1 The federated University of Wales
includes five university colleges, the Welsh National School of Medicine, and
the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology. The Scottish
universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee,1 Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt1
1 Has received its charter since i960.
EDUCATION
University Finance
Studies and
Degrees
i65
(Edinburgh), St. Andrews, Stirling,1 and Strathclyde1 (Glasgow). In Northern
Ireland there is Queen’s University, Belfast, and the New University of
Ulster1 in Coleraine (see p. 167).
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
There are five other institutions where the work is of university standard:
the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology; the two
postgraduate business schools which are supported jointly by industry and the
Government—the Manchester Business School and the London Graduate
School of Business Studies; Cranfield Institute of Technology for mainly post¬
graduate work in aeronautics and other subjects; and the Royal College of Art.
The Government has established the Open University to provide part-time
degree and other courses, using a combination of television and radio broad¬
casts, correspondence courses and summer schools, together with a network
of viewing and listening centres. No formal academic qualifications are re¬
quired to register for these courses, but the standards of its degrees (which are
awarded on a system of credits for each course completed) are the same as
those of other universities. The university is financed by fees and a direct
grant from the Department of Education and Science. The first courses began
in January 1971 and in July 1973 some 38,000 students were following courses.
In spite of the large sums of public money spent on universities they have
remained autonomous institutions, due largely to the existence of the Univer¬
sity Grants Committee. The Committee acts as a link between the Government
from which it receives a block grant and the universities to which it allocates
this grant. In this way the Government contributes about 90 per cent towards
both the current income of universities and towards their capital programmes
for building work, purchasing sites and properties, professional fees and
furniture and equipment. Further sums are raised by the universities.
In Great Britain the recurrent grants for the academic year 1973-74 are
estimated to be about £317 million. Capital grants are expected to be about
£47 million. Total public expenditure on universities rose from £4 million
in 1945 to £400 million in 1972-73. The Comptroller and Auditor General
(see p. 210) has access to the books and records of the University Grants
Committee and the universities to check that the funds entrusted to the
universities are efficiently administered. He cannot question policy decisions
or those reached on academic grounds.
Courses in arts and science are offered by most universities. Imperial College,
London, the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology
and some of the newer universities concentrate on technology although they
also offer a number of courses in social studies, modern languages and other
non-technological subjects. About 45 per cent of full-time university students
in Great Britain are taking arts or social studies courses and 41 per cent science
and technology: about 10 per cent are studying medicine, dentistry and health,
and the remainder agriculture, forestry, veterinary science, architecture and
town and country planning.
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though
in medicine, dentistry and veterinary science five or six years are required.
The first degree of Bachelor (Master in the arts faculties of the older Scottish
1 Has received its charter since i960.
i66
Students
Staff
Teacher
Training
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
universities) is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending on
satisfactory examination results. Further study or research is required at the
modern universities for the degree of Master and by all universities for that of
Doctor. Actual degree titles vary according to the practice of each university.
A uniform standard of degree throughout the country is ensured by having
external examiners on all examining boards. In the last decade there has been
a tendency for degree courses to become more broadly based in subject matter,
particularly in the new universities.
University teaching combines lectures, practical classes (in scientific sub¬
jects) and small group teaching in either seminars or tutorials.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all
universities there are postgraduate students engaged in research.
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no
religious test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with
men but at Cambridge their numbers may be limited by ordinance. The general
proportion of men to women students is about three to one; at Oxford it is
over four to one, and at Cambridge seven to one. Over a third of all full-time
university students in Britain are living in colleges and halls of residence,
slightly under a half are in lodgings, and the remainder live at home.
Despite recent expansion programmes, applications for places at universities
for arts studies still exceed the number available. Prospective candidates for
nearly all the universities apply for places through the Universities Central
Council on Admissions. The only students to apply directly are applicants to
the Open University and British candidates who apply only to the universi¬
ties of Glasgow, Aberdeen and Strathclyde.
In 1972-73 there were about 241,000 full-time university students in Great
Britain including 45,000 postgraduates. In 1971-72 there were some 26,000
part-time students. Some 22,000 home and overseas candidates were also
registered in 1973 for London University’s external first degree examinations.
In 1971-72 there were about 29,000 full-time university teachers in Great
Britain; about 12 per cent of them were professors. The ratio of staff to
students was about one to eight, one of the most favourable in the world.
Teachers in maintained schools must hold qualifications approved by the
education departments. In England and Wales the majority qualify by under¬
taking a three-year course at a college of education.1 Some college students
obtain a degree—Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)—and a professional quali¬
fication by means of a four-year course. An additional year’s compulsory
professional training for people with degrees and certain other specialist
qualifications, hitherto entitled to teach without further training, is gradually
being introduced. In Scotland all teachers in secondary schools must be
graduates (or have equivalent qualifications) and must have taken a course of
teacher training but primary school teachers may qualify by taking a three-
year course at a college of education. The General Teaching Council has
almost complete powers over the profession excluding salary matters but
including the function of maintaining a register of qualified teachers.
In England and Wales there are 152 colleges of education, 14 of which are for
day students only, 7 departments of education in polytechnics, 30 university
departments of education, 4 colleges for training teachers for technical institu-
1 The Government has announced proposals for changes in the system of teacher
training (see p. 154) based on the recommendations made by the James committee of
inquiry (see Bibliography p. 473).
EDUCATION
Advanced
Courses in
Further
Education
Awards
Northern
Ireland
167
tions and 13 art teacher training centres. In October 1972 there were about
114,000 students in colleges and departments of education outside universities
(including over 7,000 in day colleges), some 7,500 in university departments of
education, and 3,000 in colleges of education (technical) and art teacher train¬
ing centres. In Scotland there are 10 colleges of education; the number of
students in training in 1972-73 was over 14,800.
The education departments, universities, local authorities and other bodies
provide a variety of short in-service training courses for practising teachers.
In 1972-73 over 227,740 students in Great Britain were taking advanced
courses other than in universities and colleges of education in a wide variety
of subjects including architecture, art and design (see p. 423), catering, engin¬
eering, natural sciences and business studies. An increasing proportion of the
students were taking courses leading to the awards of the Council for National
Academic Awards. The council has power to award degrees and other aca¬
demic qualifications, comparable in standard with those granted by universities,
to students who successfully complete approved courses of study in establish¬
ments which do not have the power to award their own degrees. In 1972-73
there were 498 courses being followed by about 34,870 students. These courses
were mainly in science and technology but included the arts, social studies,
business studies and law.
In England and Wales higher education provision outside universities and
colleges of education is being concentrated within 30 major national institutions
named ‘polytechnics’. They are comprehensive institutions providing all types
of courses (full-time, sandwich, and part-time) at all levels of higher educa¬
tion. By 1973, all 30 polytechnics had been formally designated. In Scotland
similar provision is made in 10 central institutions and a few further education
colleges managed by education authorities.
Management studies are provided by universities, polytechnics and other
further education colleges, by individual companies and by trade and industrial
federations. (For the two postgraduate business schools, see p. 165.) Certain
independent colleges specialise in management training. Many universities
have introduced management studies into the curriculum and courses for the
postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies are run by about 40 further
education colleges. In Scotland courses leading to the Certificate of Business
Administration are provided for students in junior supervisory positions.
Awards to enable students to undertake higher education are made under one
of the most generous grant systems in the world. It is national policy that no
boy or girl should be prevented by lack of means from taking an advanced
course at a university or elsewhere. As a result, over 90 per cent of students in
higher education in Great Britain are aided from private or public funds.
In England, Wales and Scotland most adequately qualified British students
can obtain awards from public funds in order to attend full-time at a university,
college of education or major further education establishment. In England and
Wales local education authorities provide awards. In Scotland students’
allowances for advanced courses are granted by the Scottish Education De¬
partment. The amount of these awards depends upon the income of the student
and his parents. Grants for postgraduate study are offered annually by the
Department of Education and Science, the Research Councils and the Scottish
Education Department.
Two institutions provide university education in Northern Ireland—Queen’s
University of Belfast and the New University of Ulster, Coleraine. The New
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS
Britain and the
European
Community
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University consists of four schools (biological studies, social and economic
studies, physical sciences and humanities) and an education centre with the
status of a school. Technological studies are provided at Queen’s University,
Belfast, in addition to a wide range of courses in other faculties. In October
1972 there were 5,830 students at Queen’s University and 1,640 at the New
University. Government grants to the universities are made by the Ministry of
Education which first seeks the advice of the University Grants Committee.
Higher education outside the universities is mainly centred in a new poly¬
technic called Ulster College which has 1,505 full-time and 1,791 part-time
students.
Teacher training takes place in the two university education departments,
three colleges of education, the Ulster College and one technical college. In
1972-73 there were about 3,191 students in training. The principal courses are
three-year (certificate) and four-year (Bachelor of Education) but there are also
one-year courses for graduates or holders of other appropriate qualifications.
University and further education scholarships are awarded by local education
authorities and postgraduate awards and teacher training scholarships by the
Ministry of Education, the conditions of award being the same as those for
Great Britain.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of edu¬
cational services is supported financially by the education departments, local
education authorities, philanthropic organisations, universities and teachers’
associations. The Schools Council and the Social Science Research Council are
additional channels for government support.
The major institute undertaking research in education, outside the uni¬
versities, is the National Foundation for Educational Research, an autonomous
body which derives its income mainly from corporate members, including local
education authorities, teachers’ organisations and universities and from an
annual grant from the Department of Education and Science. There are also
the Scottish Council for Research in Education and the Northern Ireland
Council for Educational Research.
Some research is undertaken at colleges of education and polytechnics and
by a few independent research organisations.
Among philanthropic organisations that provide generously for research are
the Nuffield Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Gulbenkian Trust, the
Leverhulme Trust, the Bernard van Leer Foundation, the Rockefeller Foun¬
dation, the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, the Wolfson Foundation and the
Foundation for Management Education.
There are many opportunities for overseas students to study in Britain and for
British students to study abroad and some British teachers serve overseas for
a period.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer educa¬
tional ties with other member countries. Both at school level and in the
colleges and universities there has been an expansion of interest in European
studies and languages. Post-to-post exchanges of teachers have been encouraged
by Government sponsored schemes and ultimately 1,000 teacher exchanges a
year are planned. Opportunities for students from the Community to study at
higher education institutions in Britain have increased under a new Euro¬
pean Fellowship Scheme, initiated by Britain, for the provision of European
Fellowships for postgraduate study. Britain has also adhered to the Statute
EDUCATION
169
of the European Schools (six of which have been established throughout the
Community) to provide school education for children of people employed in
the European Community institutions. Negotiations are in progress to establish
common standards of professional qualification which will enable qualified
people to practise anywhere in the Community.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In
the academic year 1971-72 there were about 70,000 overseas students in
Britain, of whom about 19,680 were at universities, another 19,100 at technical
colleges and the remainder learning English or training as teachers, doctors
and nurses, for the law, banking and accountancy, or in industry. About 60 per
cent of all overseas students were from the Commonwealth.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers from
other countries. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan,
the governments of certain Commonwealth countries have made awards
available at their own institutions of higher education to men and women from
other Commonwealth countries. At the beginning of the academic year 1972-
73, 622 scholarships and fellowships (including medical awards) were held in
Britain under the plan. Also the Commonwealth Education Fellowship
Scheme achieved a total of 592 teachers and others training in Britain.
About 500 British Council1 scholarships tenable usually for one year in
Britain, and 24 British Council Fellowships tenable for two to three years,
are offered annually to graduates of overseas universities. Thirty Marshall
Scholarships for two years’ study at any university in Britain are offered
annually by the British Government to graduates from the United States of
America and over 60 Rhodes Scholarships are awarded annually to Common¬
wealth and United States graduates for two years of study at the University of
Oxford. A further two Rhodes Scholarships are awarded to graduates from the
Federal Republic of Germany. Other universities and colleges themselves offer
many scholarships for which graduate students of any nationality are eligible.2
Fellowships and training awards for study in British institutions are avail¬
able under the Central Treaty Organisation, the Colombo Plan, the Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Plan and British technical assistance pro¬
grammes for many countries. Over 1,400 awards for study or training in
1 The purpose of the British Council (founded in 1934) is defined in its Royal Charter as
the promotion of a wider knowledge of the United Kingdom and the English language
abroad and the development of closer cultural relations between Britain and other
countries. The council is governed by an executive committee of 30 members, broadly
representative of many elements of the life of Britain, and including eight members
nominated by ministers. It is financed almost entirely from public funds. The activities
of the council, which has staff in 76 overseas countries, are advising and assisting in
English teaching and other educational work including science; fostering personal
contacts between British and overseas people, especially in the educational, professional
and scientific fields; running, or helping to maintain, libraries of British books and
periodicals overseas; and presenting overseas the best in the arts in Britain. Its work in
Britain is concerned mainly with professional visitors and with the welfare of overseas
students.
2 The Association of Commonwealth Universities publishes two handbooks. Awards
for Commonwealth University Staff (see Bibliography, p. 472) and Scholarships Guide
for Commonwealth Postgraduate Students, which list sources of financial aid
available for use in Britain. The Association promotes co-operation between Common¬
wealth universities. It provides publication and information services, and also makes
available secretariats for various bodies affecting its member institutions, such as the
Commonwealth Scholarship Commission and the Marshall Aid Commemoration
Commission.
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain are also made under the United Nations Programmes of Technical
Assistance and by the United Nations specialised agencies such as UNESCO,
FAO, and WHO.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth, and
regular Commonwealth education conferences are held.
The national representatives in London (Office of the High Commissioner or
Embassy) of a number of countries accept certain special responsibilities for
their students in Britain. The British Council acts as an agent for the British
Government in matters affecting the welfare of overseas students, and provides
certain services, such as meeting on arrival, introduction courses, an accom¬
modation bureau and a student centre in London which organises a varied
programme of lectures, discussions and social and other activities and arranges
introductions of students to people who wish to invite them to their homes. In
the vacations there are courses in many parts of the country which offer oppor¬
tunities for getting to know more about British life in town and country. In
term time there are visits to various places of interest, and theatre and concert
parties are arranged.
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas
students are Rotary, Round Table, the Victoria League, the Royal Over-Seas
League, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the National Union of Students,
the English-Speaking Union and Churches of all denominations. The United
Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs, established in 1968, is an inde¬
pendent central body serving overseas students and organisations and indivi¬
duals concerned in overseas students affairs; it provides both a forum for the
exchange of ideas and machinery for consultation with government and other
authorities. In many London boroughs and in other large cities there are
committees which help students to make contact with local residents and
organisations. These organisations also help by entertaining overseas students
and many of them have established hostels with the financial help of the Over¬
seas Students Welfare Expansion Programme which is administered by the
British Council. By the beginning of 1973 grants had been approved for 155
projects, providing places for about 6,500 students.
British Students Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, a number of
Overseas scholarships are made available annually to British students by the govern¬
ments of other Commonwealth countries for study in their universities,
colleges and other institutions of higher learning. In 1972-73, 24 awards were
accepted by British students in eight Commonwealth countries. In addition
the Study and Serve Scheme, administered by the Inter-University Council
for Higher Education Overseas, enables British students to spend two years in
a developing country, the time being devoted equally to study, which may or
may not lead to a postgraduate qualification, and service, usually in the form
of university employment in the country concerned.
The United States-United Kingdom Educational Commission (still some¬
times called the Fulbright Commission) offers travel grants for postgraduate
study in the United States. Notable among more recently established scholar¬
ships are the Kennedy scholarships, to enable British students to study at three
American universities, and the Churchill travel scholarships, for men and
women in all walks of life. British students are also offered scholarships at
institutions of higher education in 22 European and 10 non-European countries
outside the Commonwealth.
Arrangements
for Overseas
Students
EDUCATION
Teachers
Serving
Overseas
Academic
Interchange
Other
Educational
Aid
171
About 1,000 teachers were recruited in Britain during 1972 for posts in schools,
colleges of education, technical colleges and universities in developing coun¬
tries, including about 900 for posts in the developing countries of the Common¬
wealth; almost all of them are supported by public funds. Recruitment is
carried out by the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the British Council and the voluntary
teacher recruiting agencies, such as the Overseas Appointments Bureau and
Catholic Overseas Appointments. Some developing countries carry out their
own recruitment of British teachers through their offices in London.
During 1972 about 1,600 British teachers served in universities in developing
countries, most of them recruited through the Inter-University Council for
Higher Education Overseas and the Association of Commonwealth Universities
and the British Council. Government encouragement also includes support for
a number of schemes of assistance for overseas universities which are adminis¬
tered by the Inter-University Council, including the scheme for Special
Commonwealth Awards, which are made to leading scholars from British
universities who are willing to work for a minimum of two years in important
posts in the universities of developing Commonwealth countries.
Outside these schemes, four voluntary organisations, co-ordinated under the
British Volunteer Programme (BVP), recruit graduate and qualified volunteers
and cadet volunteers for service overseas. Of the 2,800 overseas in 1972, 1,900
were teachers. The BVP receives financial assistance from the Government.
Schemes, under which teachers in Britain exchange posts for a year with
teachers overseas, include one with the United States and another with
Commonwealth countries involving each year about 120 British teachers.
Official exchange schemes also operate between Britain and several Euro¬
pean countries both for teachers and for temporary assistants’ posts for
language specialists (see p. 168).
Several schemes designed to assist interchange between institutions of higher
education in Britain and overseas countries through staff visits are adminis¬
tered by the British Council. Study and research visits by British and overseas
scholars are supported through programmes of the British Academy, the
Royal Society, the Science Research Council, and other British and inter¬
national bodies.
Britain provides, on request, assistance to the developing countries in several
other ways, including the loan of educational experts for technical and con¬
sultant services and specialist missions, through various educational organisa¬
tions and the ODA. The Centre for Educational Development Overseas
(CEDO) is the British centre to which those concerned with the modernisation
of education in developing countries may apply for information and advice.
THE YOUTH SERVICE
The aim of the youth service is to help young people to broaden their interests,
to enjoy recreational pursuits, and to mix socially in their leisure time.
The service (which in Scotland forms part of the Youth and Community
Service) is provided by local education authorities and voluntary organisations,
in co-operation with the government education departments. Membership of
youth groups is voluntary and groups vary greatly in their activities, there
being no attempt to impose uniformity or to create anything in the nature of a
national youth movement.
172
Organisation
and Finance
Membership
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Organised activities for young people were first promoted by voluntary bodies,
often of a religious nature, during the nineteenth century, and the number of
such organisations and the range of their activities have continued to grow
over the past 100 years. The involvement of local authorities and the education
departments in the youth service dates back principally to the 1940s when the
service first became recognised as part of the education system.
The education departments formulate broad policy objectives for the service
and encourage their achievement through financial assistance and advice.
They make known the Government’s attitude by means of circulars to local
education authorities and through contacts between departmental officials and
representatives of the authorities and the voluntary organisations. Ministers in
Scotland and Northern Ireland are advised on the finance and development of
the service by councils representing all those concerned in youth work.
Financially the education departments assist voluntary organisations through
grants towards their costs for central administration and building projects.
Almost all local education authorities assist local voluntary groups by lend¬
ing premises and equipment and some contribute to their capital and running
costs. To supplement the work of voluntary groups, many authorities now
construct and run youth centres and clubs; in Great Britain there are several
thousand youth centres fully run by local education authorities. Most authori¬
ties have appointed youth committees on which official and voluntary bodies
are represented, and employ youth organisers to promote youth work.
Although the number of local education authority youth clubs and centres
is growing, national voluntary organisations still promote the largest share of
youth activities through local groups, which raise most of their day-to-day
running expenses by their own efforts; these have an estimated membership
in Britain of 5-5 million. Some 45 national youth organisations and 34 local
co-ordinating bodies are full members of the National Council for Voluntary
Youth Services (NCVYS), a consultative body which takes action only in the
name and with the consent of its member bodies; a further 15 organisations
are observers. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland there are similar
representative bodies.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations belonging to
NCVYS are the Scouts and Girl Guides Associations (with 492,319 and
772,092 members), the National Association of Youth Clubs (357>I5°)> ^
National Association of Boys’ Clubs (174,410), the Youth Hostels Association
(234,000) and the Methodist Association of Youth Clubs (130,000).
Certain pre-Service organisations for boys, which provide facilities for
social, educational and physical development along with training for possible
entry to the armed forces, are also members of NCVYS; they are assisted
financially by the Ministry of Defence.
Local education authority youth groups in England and Wales normally cater
for young people of both sexes mainly in the 14-20 age-range. Voluntary
organisations frequently cater for young people on a single-sex basis and their
membership often covers a wider age-range. An official survey published in
1972 on the Youth Service and similar provision (see Bibliography p. 473)
showed that some two-thirds of young people aged 14-20 were members of a
club or association (including associations attached to schools, colleges and
universities, and places of work). The survey also indicated that 68 per cent or
more were or had been members of a youth club. A smaller proportion of girls
than boys take part in youth club activities and the main involvement is between
the ages of 14 and 16.
EDUCATION
173
Training of
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
Community
Service by
Young People
Most youth workers operate part-time and many of them are unpaid. Part-
time workers usually have no professional qualification in youth work but
many have allied qualifications, for instance as teachers, and a large number
attend short courses and conferences on youth work.
In England and Wales, for full-time youth workers there is a basic two-
year training undertaken in conjunction with the training of community centre
wardens. Provided at colleges of education and further education, the course
leads to a professional qualification. In addition a number of colleges of educa¬
tion provide a study of youth work as a principal or subsidiary subject within a
teacher training course. In Scotland one- and three-year courses are provided
at certain colleges of education.
There are in Britain a number of organisations, which, although primarily
concerned with the welfare and out-of-school pursuits of young people, operate
in a context broader than that of any individual youth movement. Among the
most important are the Sports Councils for England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland (see p. 446), which provide practical and advisory services
for many youth organisations; the National Playing Fields Association, which
advises local authorities and sports organisations on the acquisition, layout,
construction and use of sports grounds; and the Outward Bound Trust, which
maintains six sea and mountain schools in Britain offering full-time residential
courses designed to encourage a sense of adventure, responsibility, confidence
and achievement.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies
such as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, is
designed as a challenge to young people to reach certain standards in leisure¬
time activities with the voluntary assistance of adults. Some 180,000 young
people between the ages of 14 and 21 from Britain and other Commonwealth
countries took part in the scheme in 1972. There are three awards—Bronze,
Silver and Gold—for each of which young people must attempt activities in
four out of five sections: service; interests; expeditions; and either physical
activity or design for living.
The King George’s Jubilee Trust is a charitable body which, since its
creation in 1935, has distributed more than ^2-6 million in grants to voluntary
youth organisations and towards experimental youth projects.
There has been considerable growth in voluntary service by young people to
those in need in the community, for example, the elderly, the sick, the mentally
ill and the handicapped. Organisations such as International Voluntary
Service, Task Force and Community Service Volunteers receive grants from
the Department of Education and Science, and through them thousands of
young people are doing full- or part-time voluntary work for the community.
Many schools organise community service activities as part of the curriculum.
The Government established the Young Volunteer Force Foundation in
1968 as an independent body to advise interested organisations in England and
Wales on methods of involving young people in providing service to the com¬
munity. The Foundation is grant-aided by the Government and employs
teams of young people who are available on request to assist such bodies as
local authorities, voluntary organisations and hospital boards in encouraging
and promoting voluntary service. In Scotland, a similar organisation, Enter¬
prise Youth’, has been established to co-ordinate and promote voluntary
service to the community.
8 Environmental
Planning
Development
Plans
Over many years successive British Governments have taken action to manage
and protect the environment, and have established a legal and administrative
framework, particularly of planning law, to control development, to reduce
pollution and to emphasise positive planning to ensure the wise use of land.
The basis of the modern system of land use planning—derived from legis¬
lation passed in 1947—is contained in the Town and Country Planning Acts of
1971 (for England and Wales) and 1972 (for Scotland). There is a centralised
planning structure under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Scot¬
land and Wales, and compulsory planning duties are imposed on all local
planning authorities—the councils of counties and county boroughs, the
London authorities and, in some cases, joint planning boards. After 1st April
1974 strategic planning in England and Wales will be the responsibility of the
new county councils (see p. 67) while district councils will be responsible for
most local plans and development control, the main housing functions, and
many other environmental health matters. The two types of authority will
exercise concurrent powers over, for example, the acquisition and disposal of
land for planning purposes, development and redevelopment, parks, playing
fields, open spaces and coast protection.
All local planning authorities must prepare plans setting out their proposals
and objectives for the development of their areas, and submit them for
ministerial approval. A development plan system introduced in the late 1960s is
designed to reduce administrative delays, to emphasise positive planning for the
creation of a pleasant environment rather than the negative control of unde¬
sirable development, and to enable the public to play a greater part in the
planning process. ‘Structure’ plans are drawn up by local planning authorities,
setting out broad policies for the future use and development of land (includ¬
ing traffic management) and showing ‘action areas’ where comprehensive
development or improvement is expected to start within a specific period.
Once the plans have received ministerial approval, local plans containing more
detailed proposals, including plans for the action areas, are prepared (normally
without the need for ministerial approval). All the plans are under continuous
review and may be amended periodically.
The local authorities have wide powers for undertaking development, in¬
cluding the compulsory purchase of land. With a few exceptions, all other
development (which includes most forms of construction, mineral extraction
and any material change made in the use of land or existing buildings) can be
carried out only after the local planning authority has given its permission.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity
to express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative
stages of the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must
ensure adequate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans;
representations may be made about them to the authorities. Where specific
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
175
Amenity
Societies
Regional
Planning
proposals for development differ substantially from the intentions of a develop¬
ment plan, they must be publicised locally. Other schemes affecting a large
number of people are usually advertised by the local planning authority and
applications seeking permission for certain types of development must also
be advertised. There is a right of appeal to the appropriate Secretary of State
if planning permission is refused or granted subject to conditions; in England
and Wales some 60 per cent of appeals are transferred to inspectors for decision.
An appellant always has the right to put his case before an inspector appointed
by the Secretary of State. In the case of development schemes of national or
regional importance or of a very technical or scientific nature, the ministers
responsible may decide to set up planning inquiry commissions to carry out
investigations and hold inquiries locally. Where highway development is pro¬
posed, the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Scotland and Wales can
hold such inquiries as they consider appropriate.
Voluntary organisations are particularly active in ensuring that proposed
changes in the use of land take full account of the interests of the public and
considerations of amenity. The National Trust for England, Wales and Nor¬
thern Ireland, founded in 1895, is the largest private landowner in Britain and
has over 350,000 members. For the benefit of the public it owns and protects
from harmful development 420,000 acres (169,964 hectares) of land, 200
historic buildings and large stretches of coastline (see p. 180). Properties in
Scotland covering some 80,000 acres (32,375 hectares) are protected by the
National Trust for Scotland, an independent body founded in 1931, which
has about 50,000 members.
The Town and Country Planning Association, founded in 1899, seeks to
improve the qualities of land use and planning in Britain, and helped to pro¬
mote, for example, the first new towns legislation. The Civic Trust, esta¬
blished in 1957, encourages interest in architecture and planning and makes
annual awards for good developments of all kinds. It supports and advises over
1,000 amenity societies and, at the request of the Government, is providing the
United Kingdom secretariat for European Architectural Heritage Year in
Other voluntary societies concerned with amenity in town and country
include: the Council for the Protection of Rural England, the Council for the
Protection of Rural Wales, the Association for the Preservation of Rural
Scotland and the Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside; the
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the Ramblers’
Association; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Georgian
Group and the Scottish Georgian Society; the Ulster Architectural Heritage
Society; the Victorian Society; the Pilgrim Trust; and the Historic Churches
Preservation Trust. The Committee for Environmental Conservation, com¬
prising many of the main voluntary organisations, acts as a liaison body and is
concerned with broader questions of amenity than those covered by individual
societies.
Advisory machinery for planning on a regional basis has been set up by the
Government. Local planning authorities and the regional economic planning
councils (see p. 199) have consultations before structure plans are drawn up
within the framework of the economic planning and development of each
region as a whole (outside London many local planning authorities in England
and Wales are combining in the preparatory work for their plans and, in some
cases, they are to submit a joint plan for ministerial approval). Studies showing
176
The Location
of Industry
New Towns
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the economic and social resources in all the regions have been made and certain
areas, where land, communications and facilities are favourable, have been
proposed as places where development should be concentrated.
Special provisions, in addition to the general town and country planning
measures, control the location of industry and offices (see p. 268). General
problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a number of
government departments, but each development scheme, as a rule, requires
the local planning authority’s consent. Financial incentives to encourage the
location of industry in particular areas have been made available by the
Government (see p. 266).
In Great Britain the New Towns Act 1946 and subsequent legislation (now
consolidated in Acts of 1965 and 1968) give the Secretaries of State for the
Environment, Scotland and Wales power to designate as the site of a new town
any area of land (which may include an existing centre of population). In
Northern Ireland there are similar powers under the New Towns Act
(Northern Ireland) 1965.
The appropriate minister must consult the local authorities concerned and
allow the public an opportunity to comment on the proposed designation. A
development corporation is appointed by the Government to create and plan
the growth of the town. It is responsible for the master plan, which is pre¬
pared in consultation with the appropriate minister, government departments,
and the local authorities in the area. Residents are given an opportunity to state
their views and, if necessary, a public inquiry is held. When the plan has been
agreed, the development corporation draws up detailed proposals for parti¬
cular areas and submits them to the responsible minister for approval which
(given after consultation with the local planning authorities) constitutes
planning permission. A development corporation has general powers to acquire
by agreement or compulsory purchase any land or property within the desig¬
nated area necessary for its purposes, and is empowered to provide houses,
offices, factories and other essential buildings, estate roads and, in certain
circumstances, the main services essential to the development of the town.
The capital cost of developing the new towns is advanced from public funds
and is repayable over 60 years. Under the New Towns Act 1946 Parliament
approved a fund of £50 million to provide for advances to the development
corporations for work on the new towns. This fund was increased by subse¬
quent Acts and now stands at ^1,500 million; a total of over £1,400 million
had been advanced by March 1973. The corporations submit annual reports
(which include copies of their audited accounts) to Parliament.
Of the 33 new towns designated in Britain between 1946 and July i973> 23
are in England and Wales, six in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland.
Eleven of the new towns in England and Wales (Basildon, Bracknell, Crawley,
Harlow, Hatfield, Kernel Hempstead, Milton Keynes, Northampton, Peter¬
borough, Stevenage and Welwyn) are designed to help to relieve housing
problems in the Greater London area. Of the others, Aycliffe, Corby,
Cwmbran, Peterlee and Washington are serving the special needs of their
areas; Newtown is being developed to stem rural depopulation in mid-Wales
and create conditions for growth in the area; Runcorn and Skelmersdale are
helping to meet the overspill needs of Liverpool and north Merseyside;
Telford and Redditch are taking population from Birmingham; and Warring¬
ton is being expanded for economic growth and to take people from Manchester.
The central Lancashire new town has been designated to ease further the
NEWTOWIMS
National Boundaries
(as from 1st April 1974)
?0 KILOMETRES
178
Town
Development
Schemes
Urban
Renewal
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
housing problems of Liverpool and Manchester and to provide a growth
point for the region’s economy. At Llantrisant in Glamorgan a new town has
been proposed in order to provide a planned growth centre to reduce emigra¬
tion from south Wales and create a centre for economic expansion.
The six Scottish new towns (Cumbernauld, East Kilbride, Glenrothes,
Irvine, Livingston and Stonehouse) are helping to house people from Glasgow
and are major growth areas in the central belt of Scotland; the Stonehouse new
town is to be managed by the development corporation of East Kilbride new
town. In Northern Ireland, Craigavon is being developed as a new city and is
rapidly becoming an area of major industrial growth; Antrim and Ballymena
are also becoming centres of economic growth; and Londonderry and the
surrounding district have been designated as an area of special development.
Four new towns (Crawley, Hatfield, Hemel Hempstead and Welwyn) have
been substantially completed and are now the responsibility of the Com¬
mission for the New Towns, a government-appointed agency.
The new towns represent a notable achievement in positive land use. They
are generally recognised as one of the most successful post-war experiments,
both socially and industrially, and as a profitable long-term investment.
The population of the new towns in Great Britain is about 1-7 million;
more than half a million people have moved into them during the past 25
years. Young people form a higher proportion of new town populations than
of the country as a whole. An extensive building and civil engineering pro¬
gramme has provided houses, flats, factories, schools, shops, churches, health
centres and libraries as well as public buildings including town halls and law
courts. Roads, water supplies, sewerage, gas and electricity, police, fire and bus
stations, postal, telegraph and telephone facilities have also been provided;
most of the towns are well-equipped with parks and playing fields of various
kinds. All the new towns have become concerned with the increasingly high
level of car ownership of their inhabitants and are making more adequate
provision for parking and the segregation of pedestrians from motorists.
A number of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and,
as the populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices,
hotels and department stores, as well as arts centres and full entertainment and
recreational facilities (skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, swimming
pools, sports stadia, golf courses and youth centres) are gradually being pro¬
vided. The expansion of large existing towns such as Northampton, Peter¬
borough and Warrington has the advantage, among others, that many of these
facilities are already available.
The Town Development Act 1952 makes provision for the relief of congestion
in large industrial towns in England and Wales (such as London and Birming¬
ham) by encouraging the transfer of population to areas suitable for expansion
where employment is provided. Schemes have been approved, providing some
163,000 dwellings in this way, of which about half have been completed or are
under construction. Some of the expanding towns (for example, Aylesbury,
Basingstoke, Swindon and Thetford) are already well established, providing
new opportunities for people from large cities. In some places, like Cramling-
ton and Killingworth, relatively undeveloped areas are being expanded.
The Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act 1957 makes similar
provision for Scotland, where the only congested town so far involved is
Glasgow.
Existing towns and cities are being renewed and re-shaped to improve the
environment and to meet the growth in population and traffic. Local authori-
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
179
Historic
Buildings
and
Monuments
Green Belts
ties have extensive powers (often aided by government grants) to clear slum
dwellings, to improve individual houses or whole residential areas, to reclaim
derelict land, to secure clean air and to manage traffic. The Government
believes that greater integration of land use and transport planning is of basic
importance, and the creation of the Department of the Environment (see
p. 52) has brought a total strategic approach to environmental planning and
protection. Studies of six urban areas in England have been undertaken by
the Department of the Environment and local authorities to emphasise this
type of approach to urban problems. Three of the studies are concerned with
the problems of industrial towns and the other three studies with those of
‘inner city’ areas.
Research into urban planning problems is also undertaken by a number of
institutes and university departments and by the Centre for Environmental
Studies, established in 1966 and financed jointly by the Government and other
sources, including the Ford Foundation. The School of Advanced Urban
Studies at Bristol University provides some 80 places for people concerned
with all aspects of urban planning.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment
and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; 166,000 buildings are
already listed. It is an offence to demolish or alter the character of any listed
building without special consent from the local planning authority or the
appropriate Secretary of State; where consent is given to demolish a building,
the Royal Commissions on Historical Monuments have an opportunity to
make a photographic record of the building. Emergency ‘building preservation
notices’ can be served by the local planning authority to protect buildings not
yet listed. The respective Secretaries of State (on the recommendation of the
appropriate Historic Buildings Council) can make grants and loans for the
repair or maintenance of buildings (or groups of buildings) of outstanding
interest, and local authorities can make grants and loans for any building of
architectural or historic interest even if it is not listed. Over 2,000 buildings
in Great Britain have received grants and loans totalling nearly £10 million
under the Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act 1953* Local
planning authorities have designated for special protection some 2,000 ‘con¬
servation areas’ of special architectural or historic interest. Special studies have
been made in Bath, Chester, Chichester and York of the difficulties of preserv¬
ing features of historic interest in ancient towns in the face of commercial
development and increasing motor traffic. The Secretaries of State for the
Environment, Scotland and Wales are responsible for the maintenance of
royal parks and palaces and for the protection of ancient monuments of which
over 700 are in their care. Over 15 million people visited them in 1972. The
Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (for England), and similar
bodies for Scotland and Wales, survey monuments and specify those worthy
of preservation. In Northern Ireland some 80 historic monuments are main¬
tained and protected by the state.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
adjacent towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
special character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, ‘green belts’
(areas where it is intended that the land should be left permanently open and
free from building development and where townspeople can seek recreation)
have been established around all or part of certain urban areas and cover 1,909
igo BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
square miles (4,944 sq. km.) in England and Wales. About three-quarters of
London’s green belt is agricultural land or woodland, some of which can be
used for recreation. There are also country parks, public open spaces, playing
fields and golf courses specifically for recreational use. In Scotland there are
green belt areas around the main cities.
The Coast The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use
at the coast. Since 1963 the authorities have made special surveys of their
areas, and their development plans include policies to safeguard the coast’s
natural attractions, to provide facilities for holiday-makers and for other
developments, to create or improve amenities, and to take into account coastal
areas of scientific interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales was under¬
taken by the Countryside Commission in 1966-70. Its report showed that
although a quarter of the coast was developed or committed for development,
almost two-thirds were covered by specific local planning authority policies
restricting new development. Of the total, some 15 per cent was under the
protective ownership of local authorities, the National Trust, the Forestry
Commission, national and local nature reserves, and other bodies; some 40
per cent was covered by nationally defined areas—national parks and areas of
outstanding natural beauty—which imply some degree of protection, and
nearly 5 per cent was held by government departments for defence and other
purposes. Special studies have been made of coastal recreation and holidays
and coastal nature conservation.
With government financial help the National Trust (see p. 175) engaged
on a £2 million campaign, Enterprise Neptune, to focus public attention on the
dangers affecting the coast and to protect stretches of coastline of great beauty
and recreational value.
The protection of the coastline against erosion, for which the Department
of the Environment and the Welsh Office are centrally responsible in England
and Wales, presents difficult engineering problems and heavy costs for the
maritime local authorities. All sizeable coast protection schemes drawn up by
the authorities under the Coast Protection Act 1949 are investigated by
government engineering staff. Substantial grants from central funds (up to a
maximum of 80 per cent) are made to authorities with small resources.
Protection against sea flooding where there is no question of erosion is the
responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (see p. 327).
To help to prevent the pollution of the coastline by oil washed to shore by the
sea, special regulations restrict the discharge of oil into British territorial
waters (see p. 344).
Countryside Two (one for England and Wales, the other for Scotland) Countryside Corn-
Commissions missions encourage the provision and development of facilities for open-air
recreation in the countryside. These include the provision by local authorities
(sometimes in association with other bodies) and private individuals of country
parks within easy reach of towns; the establishment of camping sites and picnic
areas; and the increased use of reservoirs, canals and other waterways for
bathing, sailing and other activities. By August i973> 93 country parks and
in picnic sites had been approved in England and Wales by the Government.
In Scotland a large number of local authority schemes for the provision of a
variety of countryside facilities have been approved for grant aid. The Country¬
side Commission for Scotland has approved three country parks. The com¬
missions are also responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to
National Parks
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING l8l
conserve and enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and
may undertake research projects and experimental schemes, working in consul¬
tation with local authorities and such bodies as the Nature Conservancy (see
p. 182) and the Sports Council (see p. 446). Grants to local authorities are
available from the Government for certain approved schemes and the com¬
missions have powers to make grants or loans to people carrying out similar
projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) replaced and assumed
the functions of the National Parks Commission set up under the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 to select national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty* and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished: Northumberland, the Lake District, the Yorkshire Dales, the North
York Moors and the Peak District in northern England; Snowdonia, the
Pembrokeshire Coast and the Brecon Beacons in Wales; Exmoor and Dart¬
moor in south-west England. They cover 5,258 square miles (13,618 sq. km.),
or 9 per cent of the area of England and Wales. Administration is based on
local authority representation, with some members appointed by the Govern¬
ment. The establishment of a new national park has been proposed for mid-
Wales. By August 1973, 32 areas of outstanding natural beauty had been
designated, covering some 5,588 square miles (14,473 SCL- km.).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural
beauty by high standards of development control, and by positive measures,
for which government grants are available, such as tree planting and preserva¬
tion, and the removal of eyesores. In the national parks, other measures for the
benefit of the public include the provision of car parks, camping and caravan
areas, and information centres. All national parks and some other designated
areas have warden services. Some 1,500 miles (2,414 km.) of long-distance
footpaths and bridleways had been approved by August 1973. Large stretches
of these paths are already public rights of way; the 250 miles (402 km.) of the
Pennine Way form Britain’s first long-distance footpath and the South Downs
Way, stretching for some 80 miles (129 km.) is the first long-distance bridleway.
Further routes are being established.
Under the Amenity Lands Act (Northern Ireland) 1965 the Ulster Country¬
side Committee advises on the establishment of national parks and the
designation of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Seven areas have been
designated. Four amenity areas, acquired by the Ministry of Development, are
being managed as country parks. Although there are no national parks as such
in Scotland, five large national park direction areas are subject to special
planning control under ministerial supervision. The areas are: Loch Lomond-
Trossachs; Glen Affric-Glen Cannich-Strath Farrar; Ben Nevis-Glen Coe-
Black Mount; the Cairngorms; and Loch Torridon-Loch Maree-Little Loch
Broom. Over 98 per cent of the land in Scotland has been designated as
countryside within the jurisdiction of the Countryside Commission for Scot¬
land.
The Forestry Commission (see p. 337) has formed, and opened to the public,
seven forest parks in some of the finest country in Great Britain: Argyll, Glen
Trool, Glen More and the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park in Scotland; the
Forest of Dean and the Wye valley woods on the borders of England and
Forest Parks
i8z
Local
Footpaths and
Open Country
Nature
Conservation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wales; Snowdonia in Wales; and the Border Forest Park on the borders of
England and Scotland. The parks cover some 600,000 acres (243,000 hectares).
Camping and other recreational facilities provided in all the parks are used by
several million holidaymakers each year. The historic New Forest, in Hamp¬
shire, although not a forest park, is also open to the public. In Northern
Ireland, the Ministry of Agriculture has established five forest parks—Tolly-
more Park, Castlewellan, Gortin Glen, Drum Manor and Gosford Castle—
and there are also five forest scenic drives; in some 40 forests recreational
facilities have been provided.
Under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 county
councils in most areas of England and Wales have prepared maps showing all
public rights of way, which must be kept free of vehicles and obstructions and
must not be permanently disturbed. If a path is not shown on the map, a
private citizen can show that it is a public right of way if it has been used and
regarded as such without interruption for at least 20 years. Public footpaths are
maintained by local highway authorities who must also provide signposts and
supervise the duty of landowners to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in
Great Britain can create paths and ways, close existing paths which are no
longer in public use, and divert paths to secure a more efficient use of the land
or simply a shorter route. Local planning authorities can convert minor roads
into footpaths or bridleways and provide recreational facilities.
The 1949 Act is also concerned with access to open country, which now
includes mountains, moors, heaths, downs, cliffs and foreshores, woodlands,
rivers and canals and their banks, but not farmland unless it is simply used for
grazing. There is no automatic right of public access to open country, but
local planning authorities can secure access by means of agreements with land-
owners; if agreements cannot be obtained, authorities may acquire land or
make orders for public access. These powers were extended in 1967 to cover
Scotland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 1-5 million acres (607,030 hectares) in England and Wales. (There is
no common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually
privately owned, but people other than the owner have various rights on or
over it, for example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are protected by
law and cannot be built on or enclosed without the consent of the Secretaries
of State for the Environment or Wales. The Commons Registration Act
1965 provided for the registration of all commons and village greens, and by
the close of the registration period in 197° over 16,000 areas had been regis¬
tered. Under the Countryside Act 1968 local authorities can provide facilities
for enjoyment on any common land to which the public has access.
The Nature Conservancy is the official body responsible for nature conserva¬
tion in Great Britain. At the end of March 1973 there were 135 national nature
reserves, covering 278,537 acres (112,720 hectares). Some 30 nature reserves
are run by local authorities; in woodland areas there are 10 forest nature
reserves; and some 600 reserves set up by voluntary bodies (see below) protect
a further 75,000 acres (30,000 hectares). There are also over 3>200 s^es
special scientific interest in Great Britain, designated because of their flora,
fauna or geological or physiological features: local planning authorities must
consult the Nature Conservancy before granting planning permission for
development affecting them. In Northern Ireland 30 sites have been scheduled
by the Ministry of Development and are subject to special planning control*
Further
Environmental
Policies
Land Reclamation
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING 183
Some 13 nature reserves have been established by the ministry on the advice
of the Nature Reserves Committee.
Throughout Britain voluntary organisations co-operate in the conservation
of nature (and in many cases establish their own reserves or other specially
protected areas); these include: the National Trust, the Royal Society for
the Protection of Birds, the Society for the Promotion of Nature Reserves, the
County Naturalists Trusts and the Council for Nature (which consists of some
350 natural history and conservation societies).
While specific measures have been adopted to ensure that the use of land in
towns and in the countryside is properly supervised, a growing concern for the
wider aspects of planning has meant that the restricted notion of protective
planning has evolved into a positive concept for the enhancement of the land
and of the enjoyment of the people who live and work on it.
In 1970 Britain became the first major country to establish a Department for
the Environment (see p. 52); all government departments in Great Britain
have a legal duty when exercising functions relating to land to keep in mind
the desirability of conserving the countryside’s natural beauty and amenity;
and major planning inquiry commissions consider environmental factors when
discussing, for example, the siting of a new airport.
Many of the detailed aspects of planning for the environment are under¬
taken by local authorities. The local planning authorities have power to
preserve trees and woodlands in the interests of amenity by means of tree
preservation orders; when granting planning permission for development, a
local planning authority must impose conditions to secure the preservation or
planting of trees; and landowners are generally required to replace ‘preserved’
trees which die or are removed or destroyed. Outdoor display of advertise¬
ments is controlled by planning legislation; local planning authorities must
give their consent for most forms of outdoor advertising, and in rural and
other localities requiring special protection on grounds of amenity special
controls may be applied. In addition to the general town and country planning
controls over development, land may not generally be used as a caravan site
unless a site licence has been issued by the local authority. The Litter Act 1958
made it an offence to leave litter on land to which the public has free access;
under the Civic Amenities Act 1967 local authorities are empowered to
remove abandoned cars and other bulky rubbish; the Countryside Act 1968
allows the Secretaries of State for the Environment and Wales to make grants
to the authorities for the removal of objects disfiguring the countryside; the
Dangerous Litter Act 1971 improved provision for the prevention of dangerous
litter; and the Deposit of Poisonous Waste Act 1972 introduced more stringent
controls to prevent illegal dumping of poisonous waste materials.
Local authorities are responsible for reclaiming land so damaged by in¬
dustrial or other development that it is not capable of being used fully without
special treatment. Local planning authorities have powers for reclaiming land
in pursuit of the general well-being of their districts—for example, in the
course of providing open spaces and schools; they can acquire and develop
land and carry out restoration and improvement; and they can require an
owner of land which is damaging and offensive to the surrounding area to
improve its condition. Exchequer grants cover half the cost of local authority
clearance schemes, and higher grants are available for clearance in the less
prosperous areas and in the national parks and areas of outstanding natural
beauty (see p. 181). Planning controls to prevent the spread of dereliction
184
Clean Air
Noise
Other Meastires
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
require that, when permission is granted for mineral working, conditions are
attached ensuring various measures to minimise the disturbance caused by the
work and to secure whatever restoration is practicable when working ceases.
The use of land for tipping is also subject to conditions restricting height or
requiring treatment on completion. Specialist derelict land units within the
Department of the Environment, the Scottish Office and the Welsh Office
provide central information and advice and make a continuous assessment of
land reclamation problems.
Responsibility for clean air in towns and cities rests with local authorities,
who may declare ‘smoke control areas’ within which the emission of smoke
from chimneys constitutes an offence: some 4,000 smoke control orders had
been confirmed by April 1973 and 5-6 million dwellings and commercial
premises are subject to smoke control. Central government is responsible
through the clean air and alkali inspectorate for enforcing control of emissions
to the air of noxious and offensive substances including smoke, grit and dust
from certain industrial processes. The emission of smoke from motor vehicles
is also controlled. The Clean Air Council (set up in 195^) an(^ a sim^ar council
for Scotland review the progress made in abating air pollution in Great Britain.
Partly as a result of air pollution control, London no longer experiences dense
(‘pea-souper’) fogs or serious smogs and in central London winter sunshine has
increased by 70 per cent since 1962.
Local authorities are also responsible for the enforcement of the Noise
Abatement Act i960 which requires them to inspect their areas for noise
nuisances and to take action (which can be enforced by the courts) to secure
abatement. Some 12,000 complaints about noise were received by local
authorities in 1971, and in 80 per cent of these cases the authorities considered
that nuisance existed and took appropriate action. The Advisory Council on
Noise is studying the working of the Act.
Other special measures have been introduced to help to combat water
pollution (see p. 287), to reduce the level of fumes from motor vehicles and to
ensure that the use of agricultural chemicals is properly supervised (see p. 331).
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution (see p. 397) gives
advice on matters concerning the pollution of the environment.
9 Housing
Administration
There are about 19-6 million dwellings in Britain: over 17-3 million in
England and Wales, i-8 million in Scotland and 460,000 in Northern Ireland.
Nationally the numbers of households and dwellings are about equal, but they
are unevenly distributed, and housing shortages persist in the more prosperous
commercial and industrial centres such as London and Birmingham.
The large majority of people in Great Britain—85 per cent in the 1966
sample census—live in houses or bungalows, mostly with gardens; the remain¬
der live in flats or maisonettes, normally in blocks of from two to 20 storeys.
About a half of all dwellings in Britain are owned by their occupiers, some
30 per cent are rented from public housing authorities, and most of the
remainder are rented from private landlords (see diagram, p. 186). There are
variations, however, in the distribution of tenure between the different
countries of Britain—in Scotland more than half the dwellings are rented
from public authorities—and in different regions and areas of those countries.
Private rented accommodation is generally more common in the central
districts of large towns, while owner-occupation is more frequent in their outer
suburbs and in country areas.
New house construction in Britain is undertaken by both public and private
sectors. Of the 330,747 dwellings completed in 1972 some 6o-6 per cent was
provided by private interests, over 37 per cent by public authorities, and
nearly 2-4 per cent by voluntary housing associations and societies. Public
housing authorities provide dwellings mainly for renting while private interests
build mainly for sale to owner-occupiers. The construction of private dwellings
to rent has dwindled to a very low level.
Over 8 million new dwellings have been built in Britain since 1945, and
two families in every five now live in a post-war dwelling (see diagram, p. 186).
There remain a large number of older dwellings, some of which have been
kept in good repair and modernised, while many others—particularly in the
centres of cities—are unsatisfactory by modern standards. A survey carried
out in 1971 established that out of a total stock of 17-1 million dwellings in
England and Wales, some 1*2 million (7 per cent) were unfit, while a further
1-9 million (11 per cent) lacked basic amenities. The demolition of slum dwel¬
lings and more advanced standards for new house-building (particularly in
the public sector) have, however, led to significant improvements in the general
quality of British housing.
Responsibility for formulating housing policy and supervising the housing
programme is borne by the Secretary of State for the Environment in England,
by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and by the Minister
responsible for development in Northern Ireland.
In Great Britain most of the public housing is provided by 1,600 local
housing authorities, which are responsible for ensuring that the supply of
housing in their areas is adequate. These are: in England and Wales—before
local government is reorganised (see p. 67)—the councils of county boroughs,
boroughs, urban and rural districts, and—after the reorganisation on 1st April
1974—the new district councils; in London, the Greater London Council, the
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
186
Policy
HOUSING STOCK
(Percentages of Totals)
BYTENURE-BRITAIN
Othertenures 5
BY DATE OF CONSTRUCTION—GREAT
BRITAIN
London borough councils and the Common Council of the City of London,
and in Scotland, the town and county councils. Local government reorganisa¬
tion will greatly reduce the number of housing authorities. Other public
housing authorities in Great Britain are the new town authorities (see p. 176)
and the Scottish Special Housing Association (SSHA), which was established
in 1937 to supplement building by local authorities in Scotland.
The central government departments specify certain standards for the con¬
struction and equipment of all new dwellings; these are enforced by the local
authorities. In the public sector, local housing authorities have been freed from
government control over the number and costs of new house building. Subsi¬
dies are made available to the authorities to assist them with housing costs,
and guidance is given on design and layout.
Besides providing public housing, local authorities are involved in many
other aspects of housing policy, including paying house improvement grants to
the private sector, granting mortgages (see p. 188) to owner-occupiers, and
carrying out slum-clearance and redevelopment programmes. A growing
number are establishing housing advisory centres to provide the public with
information on local housing opportunities in both public and private sectors.
In Northern Ireland, the Northern Ireland Housing Executive, a public
body established in 1971, has assumed the housing responsibilities previously
exercised by local authorities and the Northern Ireland Housing Trust. It has
taken over the housing functions of the new town development commissions
and is the only public housing authority. The executive is aided by a housing
council representing each local authority area.
The main obiectives of government housing policy are to secure a decent home
for every family at a price within its means, to offer families a fairer choice
between owning or renting a house, and to ensure fairness between one citizen
and another in giving and receiving help towards housing costs. As this pohcy
is implemented, government subsidies are available for local authorities which
incur financial deficits in clearing slums and providing adequate public sector
housing in areas of housing shortage. Another major objective is to enable
people with moderate means to become owner-occupiers. The Government is
concerned to ensure that best use is made of the existing housing stock.
HOUSING
Research and
Development
Public Sector
Housing
Finance
187
A national system of rent rebate and allowance schemes has been introduced
to assist poorer tenants in both the public and private sectors. Operated by
local authorities, the schemes are financed mainly by central government
where their cost results in a deficit for the authorities.
Research into building materials and techniques, as well as into the needs of
families, is undertaken by the Directorate-General of Research within the
Department of the Environment, the Research and Development Group of the
Scottish Development Department, the Building Research Establishment, the
architects’ departments of major local authorities and the research groups in
big constructional firms. The Government is advised on the need for, and
application of, research and development by the Construction and Housing
Research Advisory Council. Advice on ways of increasing productivity in
house-building is also provided by the National Building Agency.
Public housing authorities in Britain own some 6 million houses and flats
and in 1972 completed over 122,000 new dwellings—roughly 37 per cent of
the total house construction in the country. The number of houses owned by
each authority varies; some have fewer than 100, while, for example, the
Birmingham City Council has nearly 150,000. Authorities plan their own
building programmes within the framework of government policy.
Local authorities in Great Britain meet the capital costs of new house con¬
struction by raising loans on the open market or by borrowing from the Public
Works Loan Board (see p. 75). Current expenditure, including maintenance
costs and loan interest and repayments, is met from rents, supplemented by
subsidies from the Exchequer and sometimes (particularly in Scotland) from
the rates. Subsidies for public housing in 1972-73 totalled some £280 million in
England and Wales and about £60 million in Scotland.
Under the Housing Finance Act 1972 and Housing (Financial Provisions)
(Scotland) Act 1972, government subsidies concentrate financial assistance
on those authorities and tenants in greatest need. All local authorities in
England and Wales are required to base their rents upon the ‘fair rent’ principle
which already applies to much rented accommodation in the private sector
(see p. 189), while those in Scotland must ensure that rents go up by stages to
such a level that (taking new subsidies into account) they can balance their
housing expenditure without any deficit falling on the rates. In England and
Wales the level of council house rents is intended to enable an increasing
number of local authorities—especially those with a high proportion of older
council housing—to meet their housing expenditure without further subsidies.
Other authorities—those with substantial building programmes and a large
proportion of newer council housing—are assisted by subsidies designed to
help them balance expenditure. Subsidies assist those authorities in Scotland
which have rising expenditure resulting from a heavy building programme.
Supplementary subsidies have been made available under the Acts to assist
local authorities throughout Great Britain with slum clearance. In addition,
there is a national system of rent rebates and allowances covering all tenants,
and financed largely by government subsidy where they cause a deficit in
housing revenue accounts. The scheme assists poorer tenants in meeting rents
of accommodation suited to their needs.
In Northern Ireland, the capital expenditure of the Northern Ireland
Housing Executive is financed by loans raised on the open market or borrowed
from the National Loans Fund. New dwellings completed by the executive
i88
Tenants
Construction
and Design
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
Financial
Assistance
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
qualify for government subsidy at a rate which varies according to the number
of persons for whom each dwelling is designed.
In selecting tenants for new or vacant dwellings, local authorities normally
give preference to large families and to those living in overcrowded or un¬
satisfactory conditions, but they are free to allocate houses according to their
own schemes. Authorities normally establish waiting lists and treat applicants
(outside priority categories) in order of application; some require applicants to
fulfil residence requirements before they are accepted on waiting lists.
Although a number of authorities employ direct labour to build houses, most
building is undertaken by private firms under contract. Some authorities work
in consortia to make the best use of industrialised systems in their house¬
building programmes.
Dwellings are constructed to meet the needs of different sizes of household.
More than a quarter are of the single bedroom type suitable for smaller house¬
holds including the elderly, but the majority are designed for families and
have two or three bedrooms, two living rooms and a kitchen, bathroom and
lavatory. The standard of new local authority housing has improved consider¬
ably in recent years, particularly in the floor space provided and heating
systems installed. In England and Wales in 1971 some 92-4 per cent of new
dwellings had central heating, and houses built for families of four or five
people had an average floor space of 961 square feet (89 square metres) and
cost an average of about £3,864 to build.
In 1972 over 200,000 private sector dwellings were completed in Britain,
almost all of which were intended for owner-occupation. The number of
people owning their own houses has more than doubled in the last 20 years,
and the 10 million owner-occupied dwellings in Britain now account for half
of the total housing stock. Although most owner-occupied houses were budt
for that purpose, many private rented dwellings have also been sold for owner-
occupation. Local and new town authorities are encouraged by the Govern¬
ment to offer houses for sale to sitting tenants and sales are increasing. The
Government also encourages voluntary housing societies which provide co-
ownership housing (a form of tenure similar to owner-occupation).
Loans to enable people to buy their own houses by a system of instalment
purchase are available from various sources, including building societies,
insurance companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities.
Building societies (see also p. 226) are the most important of these agencies.
They do not build houses themselves but provide long-term loans on the
security of property bought for owner-occupation. They usually advance 80
per cent of their valuation of a house but it is possible to borrow up to 95 Pei
cent, or in rare cases, 100 per cent. Loans are normally repayable over periods
of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in exceptional circumstances) by equal
monthly instalments to cover capital and interest. 1 he average price of new
houses mortgaged to building societies in 1972 was £7,398; houses in London
and the south-east of England cost some 40 per cent more than the national
average. In 1972 the societies advanced some £3,650 million.
Local authorities are encouraged to concentrate their mortgage resources on
helping people with housing needs who are unable to obtain loans elsewhere.
Their mortgage lending in 1972 amounted to £190 million.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on their mortgage interest payments,
and in 1972-73 this amounted to £390 million. An alternative form of assist-
HOUSING
Building
Standards
Privately
Rented
Housing
Unfurnished
Accommodation
189
ance—the option mortgage scheme—designed to help those with smaller
incomes was introduced in 1968. Under the scheme, borrowers receive, through
the lending agency, a subsidy (instead of tax relief) which reduces the rate of
mortgage interest which they pay by up to 3 per cent. Subsidy payments under
the option mortgage scheme amounted in 1972-73 to £28 million. Associated
with the scheme is the option mortgage guarantee scheme, whereby mortgage
loans of up to 100 per cent of the valuation of a house (not exceeding £7,500)
may be made to those participating.
In Northern Ireland, the Government pays subsidies to private people who
build dwellings for owner-occupation or letting.
For building in the private sector the National House Builders’ Registration
Council (NHBRC) sets standards and enforces them by inspection and
certification. Almost all new private houses carry a ten-year guarantee against
any major structural defect. A two-year guarantee is also given against faulty
workmanship. Most building societies do not grant mortgages on a new house
unless it is covered by a NHBRC certificate.
During the last 20 years there has been a steady decline in the number of
rented dwellings available from private landlords—from nearly 45 per cent
of the housing stock in 1951 to about 13 per cent in 1972. Major factors in
this decline have been the increased demand for owner-occupation, the greater
availability of public rented housing, and the operation of rent restriction.
Privately rented dwellings form a high proportion of Britain’s older housing
and many have been demolished under slum clearance programmes. Of the
nearly 3 million dwellings which remain, about three-quarters are 50 years
old or more. While most landlords in Britain are private individuals with
limited holdings, a proportion of all privately rented housing is provided by
the small number of larger property owners, including property companies.
Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction under legisla¬
tion which provides separate machinery for dealing with unfurnished and
furnished accommodation. Tenants have a wide degree of security of tenure,
and eviction from any dwelling (without a court order) and harassment of
occupiers are criminal offences with severe penalties.
An estimated five-sixths of all private rented accommodation in Great Britain
is let unfurnished. Most unfurnished accommodation is subject to either ‘rent
control’ or ‘rent regulation’. Rent control applies to some half of the un¬
furnished dwellings—those with a 1956 rateable value of £30 or less (£40 in
London and Scotland). Tenants of controlled dwellings enjoy security of
tenure during their lifetime and pay fixed rents determined by reference to
1956 rateable values or, in Scotland, to historic rent levels. These are very low
by comparison with other rents. Landlords of controlled dwellings whose
houses are of a satisfactory standard or who improve them to such a standard
are able to transfer them to the alternative system of rent regulation. The
transfer of all remaining controlled tenancies into the rent regulation system
is being speeded up.
Rent regulation was introduced in 1965 and applies to private unfurnished
dwellings (but not while they remain controlled under previous legislation)
which fall within the Rent Act limits of rateable value. Under the Housing
Finance Act 1972, its principle has been extended to cover rented dwellings
(within the rateable limits) owned by public housing authorities in England and
Wales and housing associations and societies.
Under the rent regulation procedure, a ‘fair rent’ may be fixed for a tenancy
[go BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by independent rent officers at the request of the landlord, the tenant, or both.
Factors taken into account by rent officers in determining rents include the
age, character and locality of the house. To eliminate any artificial value
derived from scarcity, the assumption is made that for similar dwellings to let
in the area demand does not exceed supply. If the landlord or tenant objects
to the decision of the rent officer, the case is referred to a rent assessment
committee. Since 1965 some 450,000 fair rents have been registered for the
first time. Once determined, the rent is not normally reviewed for at least three
years. Tenants of controlled and regulated lettings enjoy security of tenure.
The tenants of private unfurnished accommodation are eligible for assistance
with their rent under a national scheme of rent allowances. Operated by local
authorities, the scheme is financed mainly by government subsidies.
In Northern Ireland, houses of a 1939 rateable value of less than £50 are
subject to rent control with rents fixed by reference to their rateable value in
that year. However, prescribed increases were permitted in the rents of certain
controlled dwellings in 1951 and 1956, and dwellings of which landlords are
in, or obtain, possession and dwellings completed since 1956 are freed from
rent control.
Furnished The tenants or landlords of furnished housing under the 1965 rateable value
Accommodation limits may refer tenancy agreements to a local rent tribunal for determination
of a reasonable rent. Tribunals may grant tenants security of tenure for up to
six months with a possibility of further periods if they so decide. Poorer
tenants in furnished accommodation are helped with their rent by a rent
allowance scheme.
Housing
Associations
and Societies
Since the early 1960s the Government has done much to encourage the growth
of non-profit-making housing associations and societies, which between them
own some 200,000 dwellings in Great Britain; 7,780 were completed in 1972.
Housing associations have long existed as voluntary bodies set up for the
purpose of providing low-rent housing for people in need. The associations
have in the past borrowed money to finance house-building, mainly from local
authorities, which may make up to 100 per cent loans. Encouragement to pur¬
chase and convert old houses into new dwellings was offered by the Housing
Acts of 1969 which provided for a 20-year subsidy equivalent to three-eighths
of all charges (capital and interest) on loans raised for the purpose. Under the
1972 legislation housing associations, like housing societies (see below), are
able to borrow from the Housing Corporation for new building. The rents of
housing association houses are based on fair-rent levels, and their tenants are
entitled to rent allowances (see p. 187). Where fair rents produce insufficient
revenue to cover the capital cost of a scheme, associations receive a govern¬
ment subsidy covering the deficit.
Housing societies build dwellings either for co-ownership by a group of
occupants or to let at unsubsidised rents. Following a pilot scheme introduced
by the Housing Act 1961, the Housing Corporation was set up under the
Housing Act 1964 to stimulate the formation of such societies. Half of the
money needed for approved housing society schemes is advanced by building
societies, with the Housing Corporation providing the remainder. Rented
housing society dwellings like those owned by housing associations are within
the fair-rent and rent-allowance schemes.
Improvement
of Houses
Private owners in Great Britain can obtain grants from local authorities to
improve their houses by providing amenities such as baths and for carrying
HOUSING
I9I
out other works to modernise their properties. Grants are also available for
converting large houses or other buildings into flats. The grant normally
amounts to half the approved cost of the works up to a grant limit of £1,000
(£1,200 in Scotland). If a house of three or more storeys is converted into
flats the upper limit of grant is £1,200 for each flat provided. A government
contribution amounting to three-quarters of each grant is paid to the local
authority. Aid on a similar basis is given by the Government to local authorities
and housing associations, but this can include part of the cost of buying
properties for conversion and improvement as well as that of carrying out
works. Under the Housing Act 1971 increased grants up to a maximum of £ 1,500
(£1,800 in Scotland) are available for a limited period to private owners and
local authorities within the development and intermediate areas (see p. 266).
Since improvement grants were first introduced in 1949, some 2 million
dwellings in England and Wales and some 150,000 in Scotland have been
improved with their aid; in 1972 an estimated 368,000 dwellings were improved
with grant aid—a 58 per cent increase over the previous year. Grants for house
improvement are also provided in Northern Ireland.
In order to tackle systematically the improvement of whole areas of older
housing, local authorities in England and Wales have been given powers to
declare ‘general improvement areas’. The aim in these areas is to encourage
householders to improve their dwellings with the aid of grants, while the local
authority uses its comprehensive powers to improve the environment. A
government contribution is available of half the local authority’s expenditure
on environmental improvements on costs of up to £200 a house. There are
similar grants in Scotland for the improvement of residential areas.
The Government is proposing to empower local authorities to declare
‘housing action areas’ for a limited period in places of housing stress. Among the
new measures envisaged are preferential rates of improvement grant and new
grants for repairs alone, powers to compel owners to improve their houses to
a given standard and powers to ensure that housing associations would be given
first refusal of any tenanted property offered for sale within the area.
Slum Clearance Over 2*5 million people have been rehoused in England and Wales since the
mid-1950s as a result of slum clearance programmes and during 1972 nearly
90,000 houses were demolished or closed in Great Britain as a result of slum
clearance and other action. Some housing authorities have eliminated all their
slums and others expect to achieve this within a few years, but in Inner
London and certain of the older industrial towns, clearance will take longer.
Local authorities receive special financial assistance from the Government if
they incur a loss on slum clearance operations.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists, or
can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance. Owners
of land compulsorily acquired during slum clearance programmes receive as
compensation either the full market value or, if the land consists of unfit
houses, a sum based on the value of the cleared site; additional payments are,
however, made to most owner-occupiers of unfit houses to bring their com¬
pensation up to market value.
10 The Churches
The Church of
England
Every person living in Britain has the right of religious freedom and may mani¬
fest his faith in teaching, worship and observance without interference from
the community or the State. Churches and religious societies of all kinds may
own property, conduct schools, and propagate their beliefs in speech and in
writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the holding of public
office, except in the case of the Lord Chancellor, where there is some doubt
whether existing statutory provisions would permit this office to be held by a
Roman Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the
national hospitals and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of
England or the Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and
are paid a salary by the State for this part of their work. Clergy of other de¬
nominations may also be appointed as required. Voluntary schools (see p. 156)
provided by churches of any religious denomination may be wholly or partly
maintained from public funds.
There is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number
of adherents to the various churches in Britain, since no inquiries are made
about religious beliefs in population censuses1 or other official returns, and
each church adopts its own criteria in counting its members. The membership
figures given in this chapter are therefore approximate.
The Church of England’s status as the established church of the land derives
from the Reformation in the sixteenth century. The Church’s relationship with
the State2 is one of mutual obligation—privileges accorded to the Church
balanced by certain duties which it must fulfil. The Sovereign must always
be a member of the Church, and promises on his or her accession to uphold it;
Church of England archbishops, bishops3 and deans are appointed by the
Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an oath of
allegiance to the Crown; the Church must obtain Parliament’s consent to
change its forms of worship (which are contained in the Book of Common
Prayer of 1662), although it has temporary powers to use alternative forms
without the need for parliamentary approval; and the two archbishops (of
Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and
21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan bishops) have
permanent seats in the House of Lords (see p. 33). Clergy of the Church of
England (together with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church of
1 In Northern Ireland, recent full censuses have contained an optional question about
people’s religious professions. 1 u c
2 A church commission set up to consider the relationship between theChurchoi
England and the State has recommended in a report, Church and State {see Biblio¬
graphy p. 474), that, while the establishment of the Church should be maintained, the
Church should be given final authority over its forms of worship and doctrine ^altera¬
tions should be made in the present procedure for the appointment of bishops; ministers
of all churches should be permitted to stand for election to the House of Commons and,
if elected, to take their seats; and leading members of other churches should be invited
to sit alongside Church of England bishops in the House of Lords.
3 The Church of England has decided to review the procedure for the appointment ot
bishops to determine whether it or the State should have responsibility for this function.
THE CHURCHES
193
Church
Organisation
and Government
Church Finance
The Anglican
Communion
Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are legally disqualified from sitting
in the House of Commons (see p. 35).
The Church is organised into 43 dioceses, grouped into two provinces:
Canterbury, comprising 29 dioceses, and York, 14 dioceses. The dioceses are
subdivided into ecclesiastical parishes, of which there are some 14,260. The
Archbishop of Canterbury is styled ‘Primate of All England’, and the Arch¬
bishop of York is ‘Primate of England’. Of the population born and resident in
the two provinces (roughly 46 million), about 60 per cent are baptised into the
Church and some 20 per cent are confirmed members.
The central governing body of the Church, the General Synod, is invested
with both spiritual authority and legislative and administrative powers; and
bishops, clergy and lay members are equally involved in decisions affecting the
whole range of the Church’s concern. In the dioceses, diocesan and deanery
synods are linked both with the General Synod and parish organisations.
Certain important issues must be referred for the approval of the dioceses
before they are finally decided by the General Synod. Lay members of the
Church are associated with church government in the parishes through
parochial church councils on which are members appointed by baptised
members of the Church over the age of 17 who are on the church electoral roll
of their local parish.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with
various aspects of the Church’s work—such as education, recruitment and
training for the ministry, and church work at home and overseas. It is
responsible for the Church of England schools (attended by about 11 per cent
of the 8-6 million pupils in the publicly maintained schools of England and
Wales in 1972); a number of direct grant and independent schools; church
colleges of education in England and Wales; theological colleges; and establish¬
ments for the training of women in pastoral work.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central General Synod Fund which the Central Board of
Finance administers for the maintenance of central services, including capital
expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for training can¬
didates for ordination. (Although the State pays for or contributes towards
some services provided by the Church—see p. 192—it makes no direct financial
contribution to church expenses as such.) The Church’s endowment income
(from its assets amounting to over £434 million in land and investments) is
mainly administered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely respon¬
sible for the payment of clergy stipends and the provision of finance for
pensions. The total net income (^27-5 million in 1971-72) has greatly increased
in recent years—in broad terms this has meant a rise in the stipends of the
poorer clergy and the introduction of schemes for better parsonage houses, for
church buildings in new areas of population, and for better pensions for clergy¬
men and their widows.
The Anglican Communion comprises 21 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and two regional councils overseas with a total membership of over
60 million. In the British Isles, in addition to the established Church of
England, there are other, unestablished, Anglican churches: the Church in
Wales, the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years (most recently in 1968) the Lambeth Conference meets for
i94
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
unofficial consultation between all Anglican bishops; presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but enjoys great
prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other com¬
munions, and attitudes to political and social questions are widely studied.
The Anglican Consultative Council—an assembly of laymen and clergy as well
as bishops which meets every two years—is designed to provide consultations
within the Anglican Communion and to serve as an instrument of common
action.
The Church of Scotland, established by law, has a presbyterian form of
government. It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church which
is established and yet is free’. It derives its status from the Treaty of Union
1707 and the Church of Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete
freedom in all spiritual matters. The Church appoints its own officers and its
decisions on questions of doctrine and discipline are not subject to parliamen¬
tary discussion or modification.
All ministers of the Church of Scotland are of equal status, each of some
2,070 churches being governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the
minister and the elected elders of the church; above the Kirk Session is the
Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General
Assembly, consisting of elected ministers and elders, which meets annually
under the presidency of an elected moderator who serves for one year. The
Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Com¬
missioner.
The training for the ministry (to which women may be admitted) has given
the Church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the
standard of education in Scotland. The adult communicant membership of the
Church of Scotland is estimated at about i-ii million.
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe the ‘nonconformist’
churches of England (which dissent from certain practices of the established
church and, generally speaking, have distinctive convictions regarding organisa¬
tion and worship) and Protestant churches in other parts of Britain (apart from
the established Church of Scotland). Certain other churches and religious
associations have links with the main Free Churches.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with some 601,070
adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the evan¬
gelical revival by John Wesley, and is nowadays based on a 1932 union of most
of the separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not
join the union include the Independent Methodists (some 6,000 members) and
the Wesleyan Reform Union (with some 4,610 members).
The United Reformed Church, with some 200,000 members, was formed in
1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest com¬
munity of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged—the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century.
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of
which belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland (formed in
1813), within which over 2,170 churches have a total membership of about
198,000; in addition there are about 60,000 members of churches in the
separate Baptist Unions of Scotland, Wales and Ireland and other Baptist
churches.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland
THE CHURCHES
195
(with some 139,000 regular communicants in Northern Ireland); the Pres¬
byterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the
revivalist movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris and now numbers some
104,320; the Union of Welsh Independents; the Free Church of Scotland; the
United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland;
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian
Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations in Britain include: the Unitarian and Free
Christian Churches; the Churches of Christ (known also in the United States
of America as Disciples of Christ), which have been an organised community
in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the British Province of the
Moravian Church, which is an international missionary church; and the Free
Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in
1844 as a direct result of the Oxford Movement. The Society of Friends
(Quakers)—with some 20,000 members in Britain—came into being in the
middle of the seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox and
works for peace and the relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 79
other countries. Within Britain it has some 178,020 active members operating
from more than 1,000 centres of worship and a total community strength of
about 350,000. Believing in a very practical expression of Christian concern,
the Salvation Army also has 191 centres providing help for some 10,000 people
in need.
There are also a number of other religious organisations with churches or
assemblies in Britain, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints (the Mormon Church) with about 100,000 members, and the Christian
Scientists with some 302 branch churches and societies in the British Isles.
The Roman The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became tem-
Catholic Church porarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish
hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in
1878. There are now 7 Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each under
an archbishop, 27 episcopal dioceses, and some 3,070 parishes. In Northern
Ireland, there are 7 dioceses, some of which have territory partly in the Irish
Republic. It is estimated that there are some 5*5 million adherents (including
children) to the Roman Catholic faith in the whole of Britain.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
its children in their own faith, and requires that the children of marriages
between its own members and members of any other denomination should be
brought up as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children
in Britain are staffed by members of the religious orders for men and women,
who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and the con¬
duct of homes for old people.
Jewry Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were
expelled at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The
Anglo-Jewish community in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some
410,000 people, including both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal)
and Ashkenazi (from Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the
largest groups of Jews in Europe. The community is divided into two schools
of thought—the Orthodox, to which about 90 per cent of practising Jews
belong; and the Reform, which originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901 by
the Liberal Jewish movement. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group
196
Other Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry, the Haham is the head of the Sephaidi
group. Synagogues in Britain number about 400. There has been an increase
in the number of Jewish denominational schools, which are now attended by
about one in five Jewish children.
Immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth and foreign countries
have established centres of worship, especially in London, for their own com¬
munities. Among the Christian communities represented are Orthodox,
Lutheran and Reformed Churches of various European countries and the
Armenian Church.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews,
are the Hindus, Sikhs, Muslims and Buddhists. Hindu and Sikh temples have
been established in many areas where Asian immigrants have settled. There
are mosques or Islamic centres for Muslims in London, Manchester, Liver¬
pool, Bradford, Cardiff and in many of the other large cities in Britain. The
community’s headquarters are at the London Central Mosque and Islamic
Cultural Centre. The Buddhist Society has its headquarters in London, with
a Shrine Room and a Buddhist library claimed to be one of the finest in
Europe; there are also Shrine Rooms in the three Viharas in London, one of
which is run by Thai monks and supported by the Thai Government. In
Scotland there is a Shrine Room at the Tibetan Centre.
The British Council of Churches, composed of representatives or consultant
observers from all the main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates
common action among the churches and seeks to further Christian unity. It
works with the Conference of Missionary Societies of Great Britain and
Ireland.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches in England and
Wales and aims to promote unity and joint action among the Free Churches
and to provide a channel for communication with central and local govern¬
ment authorities.
The Anglican-Roman Catholic Permanent Joint Commission explores points
of possible unity between the two Churches.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches in the British Isles also partici¬
pate in the World Council of Churches (of which the British Council of
Churches is an associated national council) which links together some 260
churches in over 80 countries for co-operation and the study of common
problems. The Council of Christians and Jews works for better understanding
among members of the two religions and deals with problems in the social
fidd. .
The New English Bible, a translation into modern English completed in
1970, is the result of co-operation among many of the Christian churches in
Britain.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made
by two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
11 The National
Economy
Earlier
Development
of the Economy
Two features of fundamental importance to Britain’s economy are the con¬
tribution of manufacturing industry to national output—accounting for one-
third of the total—and the associated significance of trade. Britain ranks fourth
in world trade (after the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany
and Japan) and accounts for over 6 per cent of the total. It takes 10-4 per cent of
the world’s exports of primary products, and provides io-i per cent of the
world’s exports of manufactured goods.
As a result of a high level of agricultural productivity, Britain provides just
over half the food it needs from its own soil (no other major industrial country
has such a small proportion of its working population engaged in agriculture—
about 2-8 per cent). The remaining agricultural supplies are imported, Britain
being among the world’s largest importers of such products as wheat, meat,
butter, fodder grains, fruit, tea, tobacco and wool. Other imports include raw
materials (such as metallic ores, crude oil and timber) and semi-manufactures
(for example chemicals and textile yarns).
The imports are paid for by exports of (mainly) manufactured goods and by
invisible exports—earnings on overseas investment, travel, civil aviation,
British-owned shipping, financial, banking, insurance and other services.
Britain is one of the world’s largest exporters of aircraft, motor vehicles,
electrical equipment, finished textiles and most types of machinery. The
country’s competitive ability strongly influences the economic growth rate and
the standard of living. The gross national product per head of population rose
in real terms by nearly 24 per cent between 1962 and 1972.
The significant contribution made to export earnings by invisibles is in
large measure a reflection of Britain’s position as a major financial centre.
Its banks, insurance underwriters and brokers and other financial institutions
provide worldwide financial services. The City of London provides perhaps
the most comprehensive and advanced capital market in the world.
During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world
manufacturer, merchant, carrier, banker and investor and its fast growing
economy supported a rapidly increasing population. In the period from 1870 to
1890 British industry had a clear lead over that of other countries. Between
1890 and 1914, industrial competition from Europe and North America grew,
but its effects on Britain’s export industries, particularly cotton textiles and
coal, were offset by a number of factors including the rise in world trade and
the returns on Britain’s large overseas investments.
Following the first world war Britain’s older industries met increasing com¬
petition, for example, in coal and iron and steel from other European countries
and textiles from some eastern countries where labour was cheaper. The result
was heavy unemployment.
After 1932 levels of production and employment improved. The decade saw
a strong expansion in the vehicles, electrical, chemicals and aircraft industries,
iqB
The Second World
War and After
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
while the construction of 3 million houses brought about a large growth in the
building and ancillary industries.
In spite of generous aid from the United States and Canada, the second
world war ran down British domestic capital by about ^3,000 million, through
shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of industrial maintenance and
replacements. Some £1,000 million worth of overseas investments were sold,
nearly half in North America, and new external debts of £3,000 million were
accumulated. By 1944 exports had fallen to less than one-third of their 1938
volume.
After the second world war rationing and other war-time controls were
relaxed gradually as civil production expanded and trade recovered. The
abolition of quantitative restrictions on imports, other than from the dollar
area, was largely completed by 1955. Exchange controls on transactions
between the sterling area and the rest of the world were also for the most part
lifted, and in 1958 convertibility of sterling on current account for all non¬
residents was introduced.
ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT
The objectives of the Government in managing the economy are to extend
and encourage opportunities for profitable enterprise and to promote industrial
and regional development. Its executive policies are carried out by the main
government departments with economic responsibilities on a national scale:
the Treasury with its responsibility for public and national finance; the Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry which is responsible for government policy on
most aspects of industry and trade and for regional policy; the Department
of Employment; the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food; and the
Department of the Environment with its specific responsibilities for transport
and building and its general responsibility for all the relevant factors of en¬
vironment and amenity.
An important advisory body on general economic policy is the National
Economic Development Council, which brings together representatives of
government, management and trade unions under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister. It has an independent but publicly financed secretariat and
has established a number of economic development committees dealing with
different industries and services and different aspects of industry. Other
bodies responsible for advice on specific aspects of policy include the National
Joint Advisory Council (on labour matters), the Monopolies and Merger
Commission (on action to prevent the abuse of monopoly power, see p. 255)
and the Office of Manpower Economics (which provides the secretariat for
bodies advising on certain wages and salaries in the public sector and under¬
takes research on pay questions generally).
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy,
and problems such as inflation and industrial relations, the Government makes
known its purposes, and keeps in touch with developments throughout the
economy, by means of informal and continuous links with the chief industrial,
financial, labour and other interests.
Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests with the
Cabinet (see p. 45) which alone can take into account all the political, social
and economic considerations. Inter-departmental committees help to co¬
ordinate departmental policies in each of the main areas of government concern
and to ensure that final decisions command the agreement of the Cabinet as a
whole. In 1970 a Central Policy Review Staff, a small multi-disciplinary body,
Regional
iconomic
Planning
Machinery
Guidance of the
Economy
Economic Expansion
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY IQ9
was established within the Cabinet Office itself to work under the supervision
of the Prime Minister on the formulation and review of the Government’s
general strategy.
The Secretary of State for the Environment has responsibilities for regional
planning in England, which is carried out with the help of the Regional
Economic Planning Councils and Economic Planning Boards. There is a
council and a board in each of the eight economic planning regions: Northern,
Yorkshire and Humberside, East Midlands, East Anglia, South East, South
West, West Midlands and North West. The councils, which are advisory
bodies, comprise part-time members with wide experience of their regions.
They help in the preparation of broad economic and land-use strategies which
provide a regional framework for national and local planning and investment
decisions. The boards consist of senior officials in the regions of the govern¬
ment departments concerned with aspects of regional planning. They co¬
ordinate the regional work of departments and provide the councils with
information and advice.
Scotland also has an Economic Council and an Economic Planning Board;
there is a Welsh Council and a Welsh Planning Board; and Northern Ireland
has an Economic Council.
The period since 1945 has been one of rising production and, until 1970, a
low level of unemployment (generally 2-5 per cent or lower); but economic
growth, which averaged 2 to 3 per cent up to 1971, was rather slower and more
intermittent than in most other western European countries. There were also
certain persistent economic problems, such as periodic difficulties with the
balance of payments especially during periods of relatively high pressure of
demand. In spite of the contribution from invisibles, there were substantial
deficits on current account in a number of years.
In the 1960s successive governments sought to deal with these problems in
a number of ways, sometimes restraining the growth in home demand and
implementing policies designed to hold down rises in incomes and prices.
During 1967, however, the pound sterling came under increasing pressure and
in November the Government devalued sterling from $2-80 to $2-40 = £1. It
then proceeded to take a number of fiscal, monetary and administrative
measures to bring about a major reorientation of the economy.
In July 1971 the Government embarked on a reflationary policy designed to
raise the economic growth rate and so reduce the unemployment rate, which
had begun to rise rapidly. This was combined with a programme of longer-
term reform of the structure within which the economy operates. Measures
over the following 18 months included an increase in investment incentives
(see p. 265), the introduction of the most comprehensive programme of
regional regeneration ever undertaken in Britain (see p. 266), a reform of the
framework of the taxation system to reduce economically distorting effects
and assist expansion (see p. 213) and the establishment of a new system of
credit control designed to remove impediments to competition (see p. 218).
Consumer demand was strongly stimulated by reductions in taxation and the
bringing forward of certain public spending programmes in order to make use
of under-employed resources.
By the first half of 1973 the economy was growing rapidly. Growth over the
18-month period from the second half of 1971 to the first half of 1973 was
broadly in line with the forecast of 5 per cent a year. Industrial production,
consumers’ expenditure and the volume of exports were all rising rapidly,
200
Counter-Inflation
Policies
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industrial investment had begun to recover and the unemployment rate, which
had reached 3-8 per cent at the beginning of 1972, was down to 2-6 per cent by
May 1973. Living standards (measured in terms of real personal disposable
income) had increased more rapidly in 1972 than at any time since 1945, and
had risen by 10 per cent since mid-1970.
The Government planned to maintain the 5 per cent rate of growth into the
first half of 1974. To ensure that adequate resources would be available for the
continued expansion of industrial investment, exports and consumers’ expendi¬
ture in the period after 1973-74, cuts in public expenditure for 1974-75 were
announced in May 1973. Even before the cuts were announced, the rate of
growth of public expenditure had been expected to fall sharply from over 6 per
cent in 1972-73 to only 1*4 per cent in 1976-77.
In controlling the money supply the Government was concerned to ensure
sufficient liquidity to support the higher rate of output; in 1972-73 the money
supply had risen at a considerably faster rate than in the previous years. The
rate was restrained towards the end of 1972 by two calls for special deposits by
the Bank of England (see p. 217) and by a further call in July 1973. It was
planned that the large public sector borrowing requirement estimated for
I973_74—over j£4>00° Part °f it a once-for-all consequence of the
changes in the taxation system—would be financed, not by borrowing from
the banking system (which would have added to the increase in the money
supply) but by the net sale of Government obligations of different kinds to
the public (apart from the banks). The public sector was expected to have a
surplus of revenue over current expenditure in 1973-74 of more than £3,000
million.
Towards the end of 1972 inflation, which had gathered momentum in Britain
as in most other industrial countries in the 1950s and 1960s, had become one of
the Government’s most intractable problems. A voluntary policy of price
restraint initiated by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI—see p. 384)
in July 1971 helped to restrain price rises until the second half of 1972. A
number of influences including higher world prices for food and raw materials,
the lower international purchasing power of sterling and rising wage rates then
combined to bring about an acceleration in price rises. By October, prices
had risen by 7-9 per cent compared with a year previously, and wages by 18
per cent. The Government held discussions on a voluntary prices and incomes
policy with representatives of the trade unions (the Trades Union Congress
TUC, see p. 386) and of the employers (the CBI), but in the absence of agree¬
ment on effective voluntary measures, introduced a statutory policy.
The objectives of the policy were those agreed upon in the talks—the
continuance of economic growth, steadier prices and help for the lower-paid
and the pensioners. The Counter-Inflation (Temporary Provisions) Act,
passed in November, provided for a 90-day (extendable) standstill on prices
and incomes (with very restricted exceptions including the prices of imported
fresh food and raw materials which were subject to fluctuations beyond the
Government’s control).
Stage Two of the counter-inflation policy came into effect on 1st April 1973
for pay and 29th April for prices (the standstill was extended until these dates,
in the case of prices in order to provide special safeguards following the intro¬
duction of value added tax on 1st April). The Counter-Inflation Act passed in
March provided for the establishment of a Pay Board and a Price Commission
to control the movements of pay and prices over a three-year period in the first
instance. A Price and Pay Code gave details of how increases would be regu-
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
201
European
Community
Membership
The External
Position
Exchange Rates
lated. Stage Two was expected to last until about October 1973, when Stage
Three would come into effect. During Stage Two the Government held
consultations with representatives of the trade unions and employers on the
policies for Stage Three.
The Government continued with its search for an agreed, voluntary method
of dealing with pay and prices problems.
Britain’s economy is being adapted to take account of Community membership
over a transitional period which will end in 1977. The main economic adjust¬
ments required include: the elimination of tariffs on industrial products traded
between Britain and the eight other member countries by means of five
successive 20 per cent reductions which started in April 1973, and the pro¬
gressive alignment by Britain to the common external tariff in trade with non¬
member countries which do not have special association or trading arrange¬
ments with the Community; the movement, from February 1973, towards the
Community’s common price levels for agricultural products as part of
Britain’s implementation of the common agricultural policy; a contribution to
the Community budget, limited to about 8-75 per cent of the budget in 1973,
but rising annually to about 19 per cent by 1977; participation in the European
Monetary Co-operation Fund established in 1973, and consultation on
exchange rate fluctuations and short-term economic policies; accession to the
European Investment Bank; and the implementation of measures to allow the
free movement of labour within the member countries of the Community.
In the years following devaluation in 1967 exports of goods and services
increased rapidly in real terms. Helped by a record surplus on current transac¬
tions of over £1,000 million in 1971, and by massive capital inflows, the
reserves stood at the high level of just over ,£2,740 million by the end of May
1972. This was after the repayment of all official short- and medium-term debt
which had amounted to ,£3,363 million at the end of 1968.
In 1972 the trade balance began to deteriorate; imports were swollen by the
rapid growth of domestic demand, and exports were affected by various factors
including the slower growth of world trade. This deterioration, together with
growing fears about inflation, led to a large outflow of short-term speculative
capital in June 1972, and the Government decided to allow the pound to float
as a temporary measure and applied exchange control to transactions with the
sterling area (see p. 238). The initial impact of the lower sterling exchange rate
was a further worsening in the trade balance, which was also affected by a
sharp rise in world commodity prices. Over the year there was a large adverse
balance on visible trade which was more than offset by net invisible earnings,
leading to a small surplus on current transactions (see p. 238).
In the first half of 1973 the value of imports rose faster than that of exports,
largely because of the continued fall in the sterling exchange rate and rise in
commodity prices. An increase in the adverse balance on visible trade, exceed¬
ing net invisible earnings, resulted in a deficit on current transactions. How¬
ever, exports were running at record levels and, in volume terms, were growing
faster than imports.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
During the early part of 1971 continued uncertainty about rates of exchange
against the United States dollar and lack of confidence in the dollar, due
mainly to a growing payments deficit in the United States, affected foreign
202
Monetary
Reform
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
exchange markets. This uncertainty grew in the months up to August with
heavy selling of the dollar against most currencies, including sterling. On
15th August the United States announced measures to stimulate its economy
and protect the dollar. Following these measures most currencies including
sterling were in effect allowed to float against the dollar.
In December 1971 a general international realignment of exchange rates
was agreed in Washington, in which all the main currencies were in effect
revalued against the US dollar. As part of this, the sterling rate for the dollar
moved up by just over 8^ per cent, the new middle rate being $2-60571
compared with the old par value of $2-40. However, under the settlement
Britain did not change the par value of sterling in terms of gold notified to the
International Monetary Fund—the new middle rate was the direct result of
the US decision to raise the dollar value of monetary gold from $35 to $38 per
fine ounce.
The sudden heavy pressure to which sterling was subjected in June (see p.
201) reflected growing anxiety about the prospects for Britain’s balance of
payments. As a result, sterling was allowed as a temporary measure to
float.
In the early part of February 1973 foreign exchange markets experienced a
further crisis of confidence with the dollar being sold very heavily, particularly
in Europe. The Finance Ministers of the countries most involved agreed on
12 February, after urgent discussions, that the dollar would be devalued by
10 per cent against gold, that most major currencies would not follow (and
would therefore effectively revalue again) and that the yen would be allowed to
float. Sterling continued to float, but its formal gold par value was unchanged.
In spite of this further dollar devaluation, the dollar continued to weaken in
the foreign exchange markets in early March. During the month a further
settlement was announced which resulted in the deutschemark being revalued
by 3 per cent against gold; six Community countries (Belgium, Denmark, the
Federal Republic of Germany, France, Luxembourg and the Netherlands)
maintained their margins scheme (introduced in May 1972, under which
rates between any two of their currencies could not diverge from their cross
parities by more than 2} per cent), but no longer maintained margins for the
US dollar; Sweden and Norway joined the Community scheme; and Britain,
the Irish Republic and Italy continued to float independently.
The events of 1971-72 gave an additional stimulus to international discussions
which had already begun about a possible reform of the international monetary
system. A new international group, the ‘Committee of Twenty (representative
of the major industrial and the developing countries), was set up within the
IMF framework. .
One of the major problems being considered as part of reform is the future
role of the present reserve currencies (the US dollar and the pound sterling).
The official sterling balances began as liabilities incurred by Britain towards
overseas sterling area countries largely during the second world war. In 1968,
Britain negotiated the Sterling Agreements with the main holders of these
balances. The agreements provided for a guarantee in dollar terms at the then
sterling parity for the sterling holdings on condition that certain minimum
proportions of these countries’ reserves were kept in sterling. On the expiry
of the agreements in September 1973 the Government extended the guarantee
for six months (at the market rate of exchange then prevailing of $2-4213—£1)
for holdings which were broadly maintained at existing levels.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
203
OUTPUT
TABLE 8
Gross Domestic
Product by
Industry®
(at current
prices)
THE FRAMEWORK OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of Britain’s national
economy in recent years.
In 1972 Britain’s gross national product at factor cost (the measure of the
value of total goods and services produced at home and net income from
abroad) is estimated to have totalled over £53,900 million. In real terms, that
is, after allowing for price changes, the increase over the 10 years since 1962
was nearly 30 per cent.
About a third of total output can be attributed to manufacturing industry
and this proportion has remained more or less constant for a number of years.
The expanding industry groups in recent years have been transport and com¬
munications and financial, health and educational services. Agriculture,
forestry and fishing account for a small and slowly declining share, and mining
for a small and more rapidly declining share. The relative contribution of the
distributive trades is also declining. Table 8 summarises the contribution of
each industry group to the gross domestic product (at current prices).
1962
£m.
per
cent
1967
per
cent
1972
£m.
per
cent
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing . .
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
Transport . .
Communications . .
Distributive trades
Insurance, banking and
finance ..
Ownership of dwellings
Public administration and
defence . .
Public health and
educational services
Other services
Adjustment for financial
services . .
Residual error
978
744
8.538
1,666
740
1,636
479
2,969
1.539
1,052
1,458
1,082
2,994
-672
76
3- 9
2-9
33-8
6 6
2-9
6-5
1-9
11-7
6 1
4- 2
5- 8
4-3
11-8
-2-7
0-3
1,126
725
11,191
2,393
1,143
2,084
753
3,909
2,154
1,769
2,129
1,686
4,573
-1,005
205
3-2
21
321
6-9
3- 3
60
2-2
11-2
6-2
51
61
4- 8
13-1
-2-9
0-6
1,541
827
16,645
3,432
1,666
3,428
1,320
5,543
4,056
3,125
3,748
3,157
6,587
-1,936
345
2- 9
1- 5
311
6-4
3- 1
6- 4
2- 5
10-4
7- 6
5-8
70
5-9
12-3
-3-6
0-6
Gross domestic product
AT FACTOR COST. .
Net property income
from abroad
Gross national product
AT FACTOR COST . .
25,279
334
25,613
1000
34,835
379
35,214
1000
53,484
456
53,940
1000
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1973
0 Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Discrepancies between totals and their constituent parts are due to rounding.
204
Use of
Resources
TABLE 9
Distribution of
Total Supplies
of Goods and
Services
{at 1970 prices)
Personal
Income and
Consumers’
Expenditure
Sources of
Income
Consumers'
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 9 shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services in
1962, 1967 and 1972 at 1970 market prices, divided between personal con¬
sumption, public expenditure on goods and services, investment and exports.
Consumers’ expenditure
Public authorities’
consumption
Gross domestic capital
formation6
Exports of goods and
services ..
Total final expenditure
1962“
26,269
7,859
6,355
7,345
per
cent
55
17
13
15
1967
29,841
9,097
8,902
8,782
47,772 100 56,622 100
per
cent
53
16
16
15
1972
34,115
9,786
8,970
12,432
65,303 100
per
cent
52
15
14
19
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1973
“ For 1962 the difference between the sum of the £m. items and the total arises from
recalculations based on 1970 prices (previously 1963 prices).
6 Including value of physical change in stocks and work in progress (—£412 million
in 1972).
The main trends since 1962 are a fall in the proportion of total available
resources devoted to personal consumption and to public authorities’ current
expenditure and a significant rise in the proportion devoted to exports.
Personal incomes before tax at current prices rose rapidly and fairly steadily
from under £24,100 million in 1962 to over £53>000 m l972 a
compound rate of about 8 per cent a year. The increase in consumer expen¬
diture at constant prices has, however, been very much lower—3 per cent a
year. The difference is accounted for mainly by rising prices and to a lesser
extent by a higher incidence of direct taxation and increased personal savings.
Income from employment in 1972 totalled £37,H0 million and accounted
for nearly 70 per cent of total personal income (compared with nearly 72 per
cent in 1962). The three other main sources of personal income were self-
employment (9 per cent), income from rent, dividends and interest (10 per
cent), and grants from public authorities (11 per cent). The general pattern
of income distribution is thus dominated by income from employment.
The effects of income from rent, dividends and interest, which tends to add to
the income of the already affluent, are relatively slight and to some extent
counterbalanced by the effect of grants from public authorities to those in need.
British direct taxation falls heavily on the rich and the combined effect of
taxation and transfer payments and benefits in kind is a redistribution of
income on more egalitarian lines. According to studies by the Central Statis¬
tical Office, the effect in 1971 was to raise the highest income among the poorest
fifth of households (that is, the income at the lowest quintile) from 29 to 53
per cent of the median income of all households. There are a number of
theoretical and practical limitations to these studies, but the broad result is
too marked to be in dispute.
The rise in the volume of consumers’ spending has been accompanied, in
Britain as in other advanced industrial countries, by changes in its pattern.
The proportions of expenditure devoted to food and tobacco have been falling
while the proportions spent on housing, and cars and their running costs,
have risen.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
205
TABLE 10
Changes in
Pattern of
Consumers’
Spending {at
current prices)
Public
Authorities’
Current
Consumption
1962
pro¬
per
cent
1972
pro¬
per
cent
Food (household expenditure)
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing (rent, rates, repairs, etc)
Fuel and light
Clothing and footwear
Cars and motorcycles
Other durable goods . .
Running costs of motor vehicles
Other travel expenditure
Catering (meals and accommodation)
Other goods . .
Other services
Other items® . .
4,559
1,162
1,242
1,955
911
1,771
538
881
614
633
1,019
1,773
1,765
100
24
6
7
10
5
9
3
5
3
3
5
9
9
1
7,453
2,948
1,808
5,269
1,791
3,279
1,747
1,869
2,147
1,283
1,881
3,811
3,933
44
19
8
5
13
5
8
4
5
5
3
5
10
10
Total ..
18,923 100 38,263 100
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1973
“ Consumers’ expenditure abroad, less expenditure by foreign tourists in Britain, plus
income in kind not included elsewhere.
Discrepancies between totals and their constituent parts are due to rounding.
PERSONAL INCOME AND EXPENDITURE, 1972
(In £ million at current prices)
National insurance benefits National insurance Savings, etc.£3,720
and grants from public and health
Note: Figures are preliminary estimates and exclude items under £100 million.
Current expenditure on goods and services by the central Government
and local authorities rose by nearly 25 per cent at 1970 market prices over the
period 1962 to 1972 when it amounted to about 18 per cent of the gross
national product. The main cause of this increase was the continuing growth
of the social services, especially education. Defence has recently accounted
for a declining share of public expenditure on goods and services—25 per cent
in 1972 compared with 37 per cent in 1962 and a post-war peak of 48 per cent
in 1953-
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
national insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
206
Investment
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
subsidies (see pp. 133 and 187). The Government also makes grants to local
authorities to finance about 50 per cent of their current expenditure.
Gross domestic fixed capital formation represents about 21 per cent of the
gross domestic product at factor cost. The total value of fixed assets in Britain,
valued at constant replacement cost, is estimated to have increased by 47 per
cent between 1962 and 1972 when their current replacement value, net of
depreciation, was some £155,900 million, of which about two-thirds was
accounted for by buildings and one-third by plant and machinery, and vehicles.
INDUSTRIAL PATTERN OF FIXED INVESTMENT 1967 AND 1972
(Percentages of total values)
1967 1972
Source: Treasury
Within the total of gross domestic fixed capital formation in 1972 (£9,380
million compared with £8,560 million in 1967 at constant prices) private
sector investment accounted for 12-3 per cent of the gross domestic product at
factor cost (io*8 per cent in 1967) and the public sector for 8-9 per cent
(10-5 per cent). The broad components of fixed investment in 1972 analysed
by type of asset as percentages of the gross domestic product were: plant and
machinery, vehicles, ships and aircraft, io-i per cent (10-2 per cent); dwellings
3-8 per cent (4-1 per cent); and other new buildings and works 6-6 per cent
(6-4 per cent). The diagram shows the industrial components of fixed invest¬
ment in the same two years. There is a marked cyclical pattern in the flow of
investment by manufacturing industry; it was at a low point in 1967 an<^
probably in 1972 according to the rising trend shown in the first half of 1973*
Among the trends over recent years have been increases in investment in
agriculture, mining (other than coal mining), shipping and retail distribution.
In the manufacturing sector, the largest investments in 1972 were in the chemical
and allied industries, the metal manufacturing industries, the engineering
industries and the food, drink and tobacco industries.
Saving has made a significant contribution to the rising levels of investment
in all the main sectors of the economy. The extent to which each sector contri¬
buted on balance, by way of lending, to the capital formation of the other
sectors (and to net investment abroad) in 1970-72 or drew on the saving of
the other sectors is shown by the sector’s net acquisition of financial assets
(see Table 11).
The main features of 1972 were the large financial deficit of the public
sector and the return into surplus of the company sector. Although only a
small part of the public sector’s deficit was financed by the sale of debt to the
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
207
£ million
TABLE 11
Net Acquisition
of Financial
Assets
1970
1971
1972
Public sector:
Saving® plus capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic capital formation6
Net acquisition of financial assets
All companies:
Saving® plus capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic capital formation6..
Net acquisition of financial assets
Personal sector:
Saving® plus capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic capital formation6
Net acquisition of financial assets
Overseas sector0
Residual error (in national income accounts)
4,946
-4,201
745
3,815
-5,004
-1,189
2,605
-1,412
1,193
-692
-57
4,360
-4,588
-228
4,398
-4,560
-162
2,834
-2,030
804
-1,061
647
3,147
-4,734
-1,587
5,339
-4,799
540
3,345
-2,560
785
-83
345
Source: National Income and Expenditure 1973
® Before providing for depreciation, stock appreciation and additions to reserves.
6 Comprises gross domestic fixed capital formation and increase in value of stocks and
work in progress.
c Equals, apart from the change in sign, net investment abroad.
personal sector, the remainder was nearly all financed by transactions with
overseas rather than with the banks, and thus did not add to the reserve assets
of the banking sector. Bank lending to industrial and commercial companies
and to persons rose to record levels, however, and, with the banks bidding
harder for deposits, both sectors increased their deposits with the banks.
The public sector’s financial deficit (a negative net acquisition of financial
assets) increased substantially in 1972 to some £1,590 million, almost seven
times that in 1971. While the public sector’s capital formation at current prices
was some £150 million higher, the main cause was the reduced saving by
central government as a result of the rapid increase in current expenditure
overtaking a more modest growth in revenue. Both public corporations and
local authorities had increased surpluses on current account, although in the
case of local authorities this reflected increased central government grants
which contributed to the reduction in central government saving. The company
sector was in substantial financial surplus in 1972 (following three years of
deficit) as company saving rose sharply, whereas capital formation showed
only a small increase. The personal sector’s financial position was little changed,
a considerable increase in saving being offset by a similar increase in capital
formation (mainly associated with the purchase of dwellings). National Savings
reached the record level of £10,076 million at the end of 1972, net savings
during the year totalling some £472 million (see p. 220).
12 Finance
PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
Table 12
Expenditure
Distribution
1972-73
THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Public expenditure comprises the current and capital expenditures of central
Government and local authorities, together with the debt interest and capital
expenditure of the nationalised industries and other public corporations. In
1972 total expenditure for 1972-73 was estimated at £27,884 million, of which
67 per cent was by the central Government, 26 per cent by local authorities,
and 7 per cent on the capital expenditure of the public corporations.
The wide range of function and purpose of this expenditure and its distri¬
bution is shown in Table 12 at 1972-73 outturn prices.
Between i960 and 1972 total public expenditure grew in real terms at about
£ million
Defence and external relations
Defence budget
Other military defence
Overseas aid . .
EEC and other overseas services
3,003
61
275
205
Commerce and industry
Agriculture, fisheries and forestry
Research councils, etc.
Trade, industry and employment
582
141
1,670
Nationalised industries
Nationalised industries’ capital expenditure
1,811
Environmental services
Roads . .
Surface transport
Housing
Miscellaneous local services
Law and order
Arts
1,013
287
1,415
1,257
847
41
Social services
Education and libraries
Health and personal social services . .
Social security. .
3,569
2,917
5,050
Other services
Financial administration
Common services
Miscellaneous services
Northern Ireland
446
326
101
711
Total programmes
Debt interest . .
Contingency reserve
Shortfall
Price adjustments
25,728
2,350
-200
6
Total
27,884
Source: Public Expenditure to 7976-77
FINANCE
209
Public
Expenditure
Surveys
twice the rate of the economy as a whole. The social services programmes now
take 41 per cent of the total, whereas in i960 they represented just over 35
per cent. On the other hand defence budget expenditure has declined from
17 per cent to 11 per cent.
Of the £27,884 million in 1972-73, £16,635 million represented direct
purchases of goods and services. Some 68 per cent of this expenditure was
for current purposes, for example, salaries and wages of the armed forces,
police, teachers, nurses and civil servants, and the running expenses of, for
example, schools, prisons, the health service, and the armed forces. Capital
expenditure, on the hospitals and schools as well as on services such as housing
and roads, accounts for the remaining 32 per cent. Apart from the direct
purchases of goods and services public expenditure includes substantial trans¬
fers of money to individuals, companies and other institutions in the private
sector. The largest item of transfers is retirement pensions (£2,363 million
in 1972-73) but substantial amounts are paid also for supplementary benefits,
sickness benefit, family allowances, unemployment benefits and for a range of
subsidies, the largest being the agricultural subsidies to farmers, and grants
and loans. In total, transfer payments amounted to £10,751 million in 1972-73,
39 per cent of all public expenditure. These transfer payments, unlike public
authorities’ direct purchases of goods and services, do not represent a direct
demand on the nation’s product, but form part of the expenditure incurred by
the recipients; this transferred expenditure is smaller than the amount of the
gross sums transferred, because of the tax incurred on the payments and of
any savings that take place. Thus the public sector’s total payments are
equivalent to half the gross national product, while its expenditure on goods
and services accounts for about one-third of the nation’s output.
Up to i960 discussion of public expenditure centred on the expenditure of the
central Government departments, including grants to local authorities, set
out in the annual Supply Estimates which were presented to and approved by
Parliament for one year ahead. These Estimates did not (and do not) cover
certain major areas of public expenditure, such as the nationalised industries’
capital expenditure, the bulk of the payments from the national insurance fund,
and local authorities’ expenditure financed from the local rates on property.
Following the recommendations of the Plowden Committee on the Control of
Public Expenditure in 1961, surveys were instituted of the whole range of
public expenditure, for the period five years ahead. The surveys take place
each year, rolling forward the period to be covered. They are carried out by
officials in the spending departments and the Treasury, under the direction
of the Public Expenditure Survey Committee.
The primary purpose of the survey is to present to ministers an up-to-date
assessment of the cost of their existing policies as a basis for decisions about
the total and the composition of public expenditure over the whole area over
which the Government has control or influence. The five-year period covered
by the surveys gives the Government the opportunity to plan ahead significant
changes without causing wasteful disruption in existing services.
The initial recosting normally takes place in the first half of the year, to be
followed by ministerial consideration of the survey report. Since 1969 the
public expenditure plans as settled by the Government have been published
towards the end of the year, forming the basis of an annual public expenditure
debate in the House of Commons.1
1 Comparison of these plans with the Supply Estimates will be facilitated by changes to
be made in the form of the Estimates from 1974-75-
210
Estimates
Treasury Control
The
Comptroller
and Auditor
General
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1971 the Expenditure Committee of the House was created, replacing
the Estimates Committee, to consider public expenditure, and its reports
provide further information on which the debates can draw. The Expendi¬
ture Committee has formed sub-committees, one to consider general Govern¬
ment financial control and the presentation of information about public
expenditure, and others considering public expenditure in particular areas:
defence and external relations; education and the arts; employment and social
services; trade and industry, and environment; and the Home Office. These
committees can question departmental ministers as well as their officials, and
can take evidence also from witnesses outside Government.
Each department submits its estimates to the Treasury in the December before
the financial year beginning on the following 1st April.
After they have been approved by the Treasury, the Estimates are pre¬
sented to Parliament shortly before the presentation of the Budget (see p. 211)
and are approved by Parliament, by means of an annual Appropriation Act, in
July (expenditure to this date from 1st April is covered by a Vote on Account
approved by Parliament before the beginning of the financial year). There are
29 allotted days (known as supply days) in each session on which the choice
of subject for debate rests with the Opposition. Although Estimates can be
debated on these days, normally broad issues of policy are discussed.
Certain expenditures are not approved annually, but are covered by Acts
of Parliament allowing payments to continue from one year to another and are
paid direct from the Consolidated Fund. These include the financial provision
for members of the royal family, and salaries and pensions of judges. Further,
Government lending and service of debt are carried out on a continuing basis
by Act of Parliament through the National Loans Fund. Britain’s financial
obligations to the European Community are met either from the Consolidated
Fund or the National Loans Fund.
The Treasury’s authority is required for any new item of expenditure, for any
increase in expenditure beyond that originally authorised, for any change in
policy which means an increase in expenditure, and for extra-statutory pay¬
ments. This requirement is, however, subject to any delegated authority
which may be given to departments to deal with particular types of expendi¬
ture. Treasury control does not imply final sanction by the Treasury—in the
last resort the decision is taken by the Government as a whole, and carried
out subject to Parliamentary consent.
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is
exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor General, a permanent officer of
the Crown. Since 1866 he has had two functions: as Comptroller he controls
receipts and issues of public money to and from the Consolidated Fund and
the National Loans Fund, and as Auditor General he audits departmental
accounts and submits his report on the Appropriation Accounts and other
accounts, as required by statute, to Parliament. His statutory function is to
ensure that all expenditure is properly incurred, for example, that no payments
are made which go beyond any relevant statutory authority, and that Treasury
sanction has been obtained wherever necessary. In addition, however, he has
been encouraged by successive Public Accounts Committees to examine
departmental expenditure for cost-effectiveness with a view to drawing their
attention to any cases of apparent waste or extravagance.
FINANCE
211
he Public
.ccounts
ommittee
THE BUDGET
The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by
the Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a House of Commons
select committee called the Public Accounts Committee. This was first set up
in 1861 for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was properly incurred in
accordance with the purpose for which it was voted and with any relevant Acts
of Parliament. The terms of reference of the committee are simply to examine
the accounts and these terms have been widely interpreted by successive com¬
mittees which have investigated whether full value has been obtained for the
sums spent by departments and have examined cases in which the administra¬
tion appears to have been faulty or negligent. The committee has therefore
become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and inefficiency. It
embodies the findings in reports which may be debated in the House of
Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the Treasury in consulta¬
tion with departments and put into effect, so far as they are accepted, according
to Treasury instructions. A reply to each report is submitted to Parliament by
Treasury Minute and both documents are debated at the beginning of the
following session.
The Budget (an old word which meant a bag containing papers or accounts)
is a set of proposals, made annually, in either March or April, for financing
Government expenditure. They are described by the Chancellor of the Exche¬
quer in the Budget speech, against the background of a statement of the
Government’s past and prospective revenue and expenditure, and the Chan¬
cellor’s assessment of the position and prospects of the economy as a whole.
The Budget speech is followed by the moving of a set of Ways and Means
resolutions, in which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions, when
passed by the House, become the foundation of the Finance Act, which
expresses the proposals in statutory form.
The Budget is principally an instrument of economic management, and the
annual Budget speech is normally the main occasion for a review of general
economic policy. The scale of Government expenditure and taxation has an
important influence on the general level of output and distribution of resources.
The Budget judgment is therefore concerned with the balance between the
total of goods and services which are likely to be available to the nation and
the total claims which are likely to be made on them. Taxation provides the
Government with a means of exerting a considerable influence on the pressure
of demand. Taxation measures can also have a broader influence on the
pattern of demand and the long-term performance of the economy.
The Budget deals with the means of financing expenditure and particularly
with changes in taxation and not primarily with expenditure itself. On occa¬
sions, changes affecting expenditure, such as increases in pensions and family
allowances, have been announced in the Budget speech as have financial and
monetary measures not related to the Finance Act, such as changes in exchange
control policies. Such measures, however, are not reflected in the resolutions
or the Finance Act but are applied by whatever procedure is appropriate to
implement them—separate legislation, statutory instruments or administra¬
tive action.
The scope of the Budget and that of the Finance Act which follows it are
different although they are closely interrelated. The Budget is essentially
concerned with the measures that give effect to the Chancellor’s decision to
increase or reduce to an appropriate extent the predicted level of demand on
economic resources by use of the instruments at the Chancellor’s disposal, and
especially by increasing or reducing the yield of central Government taxes.
212
Public Sector
Accounts
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
The tax changes made necessary by the Budget judgment are enacted in the
Finance Act. But the Finance Act also provides the annual opportunity for
non-Budgetary changes in the tax system and for certain other financial
matters, such as provisions relating to Government borrowing.
The bulk of the taxation proposals in the Budget are concerned with changes
in the rates or coverage of existing taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the
abolition of existing ones, and changes in the administrative machinery relating
to taxation. In two cases however—income tax and corporation tax—annual
Ways and Means resolutions followed by a Finance Act clause are necessary
to maintain the taxes in existence at all, since they are annual taxes. It is this
which makes an annual Budget at or about the beginning of each financial year
a necessity.
New taxes and changes in certain existing taxes, like other changes in statute
laws, do not come into effect until the Finance Act has received Royal Assent
(in the case of the annual Budget, normally at the end of July) or at some other
date laid down in the Bill. Some changes, however, come into effect earlier,
usually from Budget Day or from the start of the tax year, under the Provi¬
sional Collection of Taxes Act. This enables the Government to collect certain
taxes provisionally, income tax for example, either at the rates previously in
operation or at new rates following the passing of the appropriate Ways and
Means resolutions. Tax proposals are not limited to the annual Budget and
may be made at other times in the year to meet changes in economic circum¬
stances.
The economic background to the Budget and the transactions of the central
Government and the public sector as a whole are presented in the Financial
Statement and Budget Report (see Bibliography, p. 476) which is laid before the
House of Commons by the Chancellor of the Exchequer when opening the
Budget. The report is in three parts: the economic context of the Budget;
the accounts of the public sector; and the accounts of the central Government
for the past financial year and the one immediately ahead. The accounts are
designed to assist in assessing the impact of changes in revenue and, where
relevant, public expenditure on the economy.
The accounts of the public sector show the transactions of the central
Government, local authorities, nationalised industries and other public corpora¬
tions combined into a consolidated account covering the whole of the public
sector. The transactions within the public sector cancel out on consolidation
and the net balance on the consolidated account represents therefore the
borrowing required by the public sector from the private and overseas sectors.
The accounts of the central Government show transactions both on the
conventional cash basis of exchequer accounting and in accordance with the
framework of the national income accounts.
Central Government borrowing may be in the form of borrowing from the
public either through the National Savings Movement (see p. 221) or by
borrowing on the market by means of new issues of securities. New issues of
government securities are made from time to time for the purpose of refinanc¬
ing maturing issues (conversion loans) or to raise new money (issues for cash).
The capital requirements of the nationalised industries are met by the central
Government while those of the local authorities are met partly by the central
Government through the Public Works Loan Board (see p. 75) an<^ partly
by borrowing direct from the public, although some nationalised industries
and local authorities have obtained statutory power enabling them to borrow,
with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
FINANCE
213
budget Changes
SOURCES OF
REVENUE 1973-74
Income Tax
After allowing for the Budget changes in 1973 the central Government’s
borrowing requirement for 1973-74 is expected to be £3,996 million, com¬
pared with £2,118 million in 1972-73, and that for the public sector as a whole
£4,423 million compared with £2,855 million in 1972-73.
Table 13 shows total revenue from taxation and other sources in 1972-73
and 1973-74 together with the effects of the Budget changes.
Far-reaching changes in the structure of personal and company taxation and
in taxes on expenditure were introduced in the 1973 Budget. A single gra¬
duated personal tax replaced the old system of income tax and surtax. Company
taxation was reformed on an imputation basis so as to remove the discrimina¬
tion against distributed profits. A 10 per cent value added tax (VAT) became
operative, replacing selective employment tax and purchase tax which were
abolished.
The over-riding aim of the 1973 Budget was to sustain a higher rate of
economic growth in Britain. A key part of that strategy is the control of
inflation.
Full details of Budget proposals are published each year in the Financial
Statement and Budget Report.
The three principal sources of tax revenue are first, taxes on income, which
include income tax and corporation tax; second, taxes on capital, which in¬
clude estate duty and capital gains tax; and third, taxes on expenditure
(including taxes on the ownership or use of certain assets)—these include
protection and revenue duties, VAT, local rates, stamp duties and licence
duties (for example, on motor vehicles). Taxes on individual (but not cor¬
porate) incomes are progressive taxes in that larger incomes and estates bear a
proportionately higher rate of tax. The Board of Inland Revenue collects the
taxes on income and capital and the stamp duties; the Board of Customs and
Excise collects the most important taxes on expenditure, the customs and
excise taxes and VAT while a variety of authorities is responsible for the
collection of the remainder.
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6th April. Under
the unified system of direct personal taxation, which became effective in April
1973, the basic rate of 30 per cent applies to the first £5,000 of taxable income
(that is, total income less deductions and personal allowances). A rate of 40 per
cent is charged on the £5,ooo-£6,ooo band of taxable income, and the rate for
successive bands rises in steps of 5 per cent until a maximum rate of 75 per
cent is reached at a level of £20,000. These rates are charged on both earned
and investment incomes; larger investment incomes are also liable to a sur¬
charge of 15 per cent of the amount by which they exceed £2,000. The tax
imposed on an individual is graduated by means of personal allowances and
reliefs. Married couples receive higher allowances than a single person. Hus¬
band and wife may choose to have the wife’s earnings charged separately for
tax on condition that the former receives the single personal allowance instead
of the married allowance.
A single person earning £2,000 a year pays £421-50 in income tax, while a
married man with the same earned income pays £367-50; if he has two children
under the age of 11 and his earnings plus the family allowance total £2,000,
his tax falls to £265-50; when the children are between the ages of n and 16,
the tax is £244-50; if the children are over 16 and receiving full-time educa¬
tion, £226-50. The range of tax (including the higher rates under the unified
214
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£ million
Table 13
Taxation and
Miscellaneous
Receipts
1972- 73 and
1973- 74
Taxation
Inland Revenue:
Income Tax
Surtax® ..
Corporation Tax
Capital Gains Tax
Death Duties ..
Stamp Duties . .
Other
Total Inland Revenue
Customs and Excise:
Value Added Tax
Purchase Tax ..
Oil
Tobacco
Spirits, Beer and Wine
Betting and Gaming
Car Tax..
Other Revenue Duties
Protective Duties, etc.
Import Levies ..
Total Customs and Excise
Motor Vehicle Duties
Selective Employment Tax
(gross)6 ..
Total Taxation
Miscellaneous Receipts
Broadcast Receiving
Licences
Interest and Dividends
Other
Total
1972-73
Budget
Estimate
6,646
352
1,395
200
409
170
2
9,174
1,315
1,570
1,140
1,065
175
11
300
20
5,596
475
967
16,212
132
100
395
16,839
Provisional
outturn
6,478
350
1,525
210
460
225
2
9,250
1,390
1,545
1,180
1,070
170
11
339
20
5,725
480
994
16,449
137
90
465
17,141
1973-74 Estimate
Before
Budget
changes'1
7,240
360
2,045
225
400
200
10,470
1,260*
350
1,650
1,030
855
190
120*
7
360
40
5,862
500
39
16,871
147
90
460
17,568
After Budget
changes
7,233
360
2,045
225
398
203
10,464
1,150*
350
1,650
1,030
854
190
120*
7
360
40
5,751
500
39
16,754
147
90
460
17,451
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report I973~74
0 Collected a year in arrears. . , . ..
6 Net yield of selective employment tax from the private sector and public corporations
(from left to right) 224, 224, —112, —112 (£ million). , . . ,
c The figures in this column are estimated on the basis that the duties on tobacco
products, spirits, beer, wine and British wine and matches and mechanical lighters are
reduced by the amount broadly necessary on average to offset the application ot value
added tax to these commodities. This amount is estimated to be £49° million in
* The*first year yields of value added tax and car tax are less than the yields in a full year.
The full year yields are estimated to be £2,200 million and £175 million respectively.
system) payable by a single person varies from, for example, ^i2i‘50 on an
earned income of ^1,000 a year to £10,183-50 on an earned income of
£20,000.
The Government is to introduce a tax credit system to replace the present
system of income tax personal allowances and family allowances (see p. i30)-
FINANCE
215
Taxpayers would be entitled to credits related to family responsibilities. If
credit exceeded tax, the difference would be paid to the taxpayer; if tax exceeded
credit, the difference would stand as a tax deduction. Through the introduction
of an automatic form of family support the system would reduce substantially
the numbers of people relying on means-tested benefits.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a PAYE (‘Pay as
You Earn’) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland
Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible
with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in the
United Kingdom and on all income arising abroad of persons resident in the
United Kingdom. The main exceptions are that interest on certain United
Kingdom government securities belonging to persons not ordinarily resident
in the United Kingdom is exempt; and income from certain classes of posses¬
sions abroad is chargeable not on the amount of income arising but on the
amount of income remitted to the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom has
entered into agreements with many countries providing for relief from double
taxation; where such agreements are not in force unilateral relief is allowed.
Company
Taxation
Estate Duty
Capital Gains
Tax
Since April 1973, companies pay corporation tax at a single rate on all their
profits, whether distributed or not. However, a proportion only of any capital
gains is included in total profits, with the result that chargeable gains as a
whole are subject to a lower effective rate of tax. Income tax is no longer
deducted from dividends but a company which distributes profits to its
shareholders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment
of corporation tax. In general, this advance payment is set against a company’s
corporation tax bill and the recipient of the distribution in respect of which
the advance payment was made is entitled to a tax credit. The rate of corpora¬
tion tax is fixed retrospectively in the Budget for the past financial year; for
1972 it is 40 per cent. The tax is assessed on the profits of accounting periods,
the rate of tax being the rate for the financial year in which the accounting
period falls. The basic rule for the calculations of income and capital gains for
corporation tax purposes is that, except for special provisions, these are
computed in accordance with principles of the income and capital gains taxes.
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of all property which passes at death.
The charge to duty is not limited to property owned by the deceased but may
extend to other property, for example, to trust funds from which the deceased
received income in his lifetime and to gifts made by the deceased within seven
years of his death (one year in the case of a gift for public or charitable pur¬
poses). Since the 1972 Budget estates not over £15,000 are exempt from duty.
On estates of a higher value duty is chargeable by reference to rates ranging
from 25 per cent to 75 per cent, applied to successive slices of the estate. In
addition, property going to a surviving spouse up to a sum of £15,000 is left out
of account for estate duty purposes, so that where a man leaves his whole
estate to his widow no duty is payable at all unless the estate exceeds £30,000.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax
or, in the case of companies, to corporation tax. The rate of tax for persons
other than companies is 30 per cent, but in the case of individuals may be less,
depending on their circumstances. Certain assets are exempt from tax includ¬
ing the principal private residence, chattels worth less than £1,000 (and any
chattels, except those used for the purpose of a trade, with a predictable life of
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added Tax
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
less than 50 years), private motor cars, and National Savings Certificates. The
1971 Finance Act also exempted an individual from capital gains tax where the
total proceeds of disposals do not exceed £500 in any year. All gains are now
subject to long-term capital gains tax whatever the length of period of owner¬
ship except for gains on gilt-edged securities which continue to be exempt from
capital gains tax if held for more than 12 months.
The largest group of taxes on expenditure are those administered by the
Customs and Excise Department, namely VAT and the duties on tobacco,
hydrocarbon oil, alcoholic drinks, protective duties, betting and certain mis¬
cellaneous items. In British usage the distinction between customs and
excise depends on whether the goods are imported (customs duties) or pro¬
duced in Britain (excise duties). These taxes are usually referred to as indirect
taxes since they are normally paid by the importer, manufacturer, or whole¬
saler, who adjusts the prices charged to customers accordingly. The Treaty of
Accession to the European Community provides that the revenue duties
should be converted to internal taxes chargeable alike on imported and home-
produced goods. With the introduction of VAT from 1st April 1973 all the
revenue duty goods (other than hydrocarbon oil, which is zero rated under
VAT) became subject to the standard rate of VAT. Simultaneously the rates
of all the revenue duties (other than the duty on hydrocarbon oil) were reduced.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer has power to vary by up to 20 per cent
the rate of VAT, and by 10 per cent any of the other main groups of customs
and excise duties (that is, tobacco, alcoholic drinks, oil and the minor revenue
duties). This power, known as the ‘regulator’, requires annual renewal.
Value added tax (VAT) is collected at each stage in the production and distri¬
bution process (unlike purchase tax which was collected at a single stage).
The final tax is borne by the consumer. A taxable person (generally, a trader
carrying on a business with a turnover of more than £5,000 a year) is charged
by suppliers of goods and services with VAT (‘input’ tax). The trader then
charges the customer with VAT on goods and services supplied ( output
tax) The trader pays to Customs and Excise the difference between output
and input tax. Although VAT falls on imported goods, most exports are zero
rated and, unlike purchase tax, VAT entering directly into export costs can be
VAT, which is chargeable at the standard rate of 10 per cent, is a broadly
based tax falling on final consumers’ expenditure except where there are
strong social or economic reasons for giving relief. There are two basic
methods by which supplies of goods and services may get relief from VA .
zero rating, when a trader does not have to charge tax to a customer but can
reclaim any input tax paid to suppliers, and exemption, when a trader does not
have to charge a customer any output tax but is not entitled to ^duct or
reclaim any input tax included in the price of these goods or services. The most
important supplies to which zero rating applies are food (except in the course
of catering); books, newspapers and periodicals, coal, gas and electricity,
petrol and oil; construction of buildings; exports (goods and most services);
public transport fares; young children’s clothing and footwear; and drugs and
medicines supplied on prescription. Exemption applies to land (including
rents); insurance; postal services; betting, gaming and lotteries; finance,
education; health; and burial and cremation.
New cars, whether British made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at
10 per cent on the wholesale value. VAT falls on the price including car tax.
Car Tax
FINANCE
Betting and
Gaming Duties
Motor Vehicle
Licence Taxes
The National
Debt
PUBLIC FINANCE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
217
The principal betting duties are: the pool betting duty (which applies to
football pools and betting by coupon at fixed odds) charged at a rate of 33^ per
cent of the stake money; and the general betting duty, which is charged at the
rate of 6 per cent of stake money except for on-course betting which is charged
at 4 per cent. Gaming is taxed at different rates mainly by licence fees.
Taxes on motor vehicles are collected for the Department of the Environment
by local offices; the proceeds are paid into the Consolidated Fund. The
licence duty on a private motor car is ^25 a year; motor cycles and three-wheel
vehicles, etc., pay £2*50, £5 or ^10 a year according to engine capacity. Goods
vehicles are taxed by unladen weight, and taxis and buses by seating capacity.
The National Debt increased rapidly during and immediately after the first and
second world wars. It rose from £650 million in 1914 to £7,435 million at the
end of the first world war, and from £7,131 million in 1939 to £23,647 million
in 1946. On 31st March 1973 the total National Debt (provisional) was £36,910
million, of which £1,651 million was repayable in currencies other than
sterling, mainly to the United States and Canadian Governments. Of the
£35>259 million of internal debt, £3,727 million was short-term debt, mainly
in the form of 91-day Treasury bills, while the long-term loans included a
variety of stocks, bonds, loans and certificates carrying fixed rates of interest
(ranging from 2^ to 9^ per cent) and with fixed or indeterminate dates of re¬
payment.
The general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main
features, similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole. The
major sources of revenue are the main national taxes imposed by the United
Kingdom Parliament over the whole country. Revenue also accrues from
locally levied taxes such as rates and some licence fees. Because of the transi¬
tional nature of the situation, the arrangements proposed for the future
administration of finance in Northern Ireland are outlined in the supple¬
ment.
Various funds have been established in Northern Ireland, in addition to
statutory Reserve and Sinking Funds, for specific purposes. In general, these
funds follow the United Kingdom pattern, the principal funds being those
relating to national insurance and government loans. The latter constitutes a
pool of capital money available mainly for local and public authority borrow¬
ings; on 31st March 1973 a sum of approximately £354 million was outstand¬
ing against such borrowers.
THE CENTRAL BANK
The British banking system is long established and well integrated. It com¬
prises a central bank; deposit banks which carry on the usual main banking
services; the United Kingdom offices of banks whose main business is in other
countries; merchant banks and other specialised institutions.
The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and
Royal Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by
the Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. As the central bank,
the Bank acts as banker to the Government, to overseas central banks and to
commercial banks; it is the note-issuing authority and the registrar for some
200 government, nationalised industry, local authority, public board and
Commonwealth government stocks. As agent for the Government the Bank
2l8
BRITAIN 1974* AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
administers exchange control. On behalf of the Treasury it manages the
Exchange Equalisation Account (EEA), which holds Britain s offic.a reserves
of gold and foreign exchange; using the resources of the EEA the Bank designs
its*1 interventions in the foreign exchange market both to prevent undue
fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling and to conserve the means ot
making payments abroad. . . .
As banker to the Government the Bank examines and seeks to anticipate
banking and financial problems and to undertake the appropriate operations
in the money, capital and the foreign exchange markets; consequently the Ban
has a major responsibility for advising the Government on the formulation of
monetary policy and for its subsequent execution. .
In implementing monetary policy the Bank is ready to act daily m the money
market, by buying or selling Treasury and other bills, and similar y in th
market for government stocks. A prime concern is to maintain orderly con 1-
tions and, when necessary, the Bank also exerts influence on interest rates
through market operations; an important indication of its intentions is t
minimum lending rate (known as ‘Bank rate’ until 1972), which ^ the minimum
rate at which the Bank will normally lend to the members of the London
Discount Market and is normally £ per cent above the average rate of discount
for Treasury bills. The Bank can also influence market and money supply
conditions through its power to call for special deposits. , .
The Bank is the recognised channel of communication between the deposit
banks and other financial institutions of the City of London on the one han ,
and the Government on the other. , _T7. . c .
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and \\ ales of issuing
bank notes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed y
gold but by government and other securities. The Scottish clearing and
Northern Ireland banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apar
from an amount specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered
by Bank of England notes. The provision of com for circulation is the respo
sibilitv of the Royal Mint, a government department.
Following discussions by the Bank of England with the banks, the hire pur¬
chase finance houses and the discount houses, new arrangements for e
control of credit came into effect from September 1971. While it is still neces¬
sary for the Government, as an indispensable part of economic management to
regulate the development of credit and the money supply, the new system has
replaced rigid quantitative controls over lending in sterling with policies f
influencing^bank and finance house lending which combine effective control
with greater flexibility and freedom for these institutions. The techniques now
in operation involve more reliance upon changes in interest rates, in Particu
through calls by the Bank for special deposits from other banks superimposed
on a minimum reserve assets ratio of 12$ per cent of eligible liabilities.* Calls
for special deposits also restrict the growth of money supply by reducing
banks’ lending base. The ceiling controls on lending by the banks and finance
houses have been removed and the London and Scottish clearing banks have
abandoned their collective agreements on interest rates. Moreover they now
set their base rates for lending independently of the minimum lending rate
which closely reflects short term market rates. Greater scope for composit
Ind innovation by these institutions has thereby been introduced into the
domestic economy.
1 Basically sterling deposits of two years or less from outside the banking system together
with any foreign currency changed into sterling.
FINANCE
219
The Deposit
Banks
National Giro
THE PRIVATE SECTOR
The primary business of the deposit banks is the receipt, transfer and encash¬
ment of deposits. The principal deposit banks are the six London clearing
banks, three Scottish clearing banks and two Northern Ireland banks. Mergers
have resulted in the formation of six banking groups, four based in London
and two in Scotland. The two Northern Ireland banks are owned by London
clearing banks, but two groups of banks based in the Irish Republic also
operate in Northern Ireland.
At the end of 1972 current and deposit accounts with deposit banks operat¬
ing in Britain totalled some ^18,170 million, and accounted for nearly 36 per
cent of the total deposits (in sterling and foreign currencies) of the banking
sector, which also includes the National Giro, the accepting houses, overseas
banks, other banks and the discount market. The deposit banks provide full
banking services throughout Britain, and operate through over 14,000 branches.
Several of them have interests in British overseas and Commonwealth banks,
and in other banks which have been formed specially to compete in inter¬
national markets. They have also acquired substantial interests in hire-
purchase finance houses, and some have set up their own unit trusts.
Together with the Bank of England the London clearing banks make up the
membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House. In 1972 cheques, drafts,
bills and bankers’ effects passing through the interbank debit clearing system
averaged in value nearly ^89,320 million monthly, while the average monthly
value of the credit transfer clearing wras over ^1,690 million.
Current account balances with the deposit banks are repayable on demand
and no interest is paid on them, but on deposit account balances interest is
paid at a rate generally 1 -75 per cent below individual banks’ base rates. The
deposit banks’ more liquid assets consist of: cash, balances at the Bank of
England, money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), and their holdings
of Treasury and commercial bills. The banks also hold a proportion of their
assets as portfolio (mainly British Government securities) or trade investments.
The banks’ profits are largely earned through their advances to customers
partly in the form of overdrafts and partly in the form of loans (with or with¬
out collateral security). The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total
deposits in 1972 averaged 66 per cent.
The bank giro, originally introduced as the credit transfer scheme, and the
direct debiting system, by which a creditor with the prior approval of the
debtor may claim money due to him direct from the latter’s banking account,
have helped to improve the money transmission services. Another banking
innovation has been the introduction by some banks of automatic cash
dispensing machines. Credit cards are in widespread use for the settlement of
accounts in retail shops; and cheque cards enable the card holder to cash a
cheque up to £30 at any office of the major British and Irish banks, and at
offices of many banks in overseas countries.
The Post Office National Giro, which was introduced in 1968 to provide a
low-cost current account banking and money transfer service, is operated
through most post offices in Britain. All accounts and transactions are main¬
tained by means of a computer complex at the National Giro Centre near
Liverpool. Giro now has more than 450,000 accounts with deposits in excess
of £65 million. The number of weekly transactions had risen from 500,000 in
September 1969 to 1*3 million by September 1972 and the weekly turnover is
nearly £148 million. In addition to its services to individuals its services to
220
Overseas
Banks
The Merchant
Banks
The Discount
Market
The National
Savings
Movement
BRITAIN 1974'. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
commerce, industry and the public utilities include a facility whereby organisa¬
tions with dispersed branches, depots and representatives can rapidly channel
receipts into their central accounting system. Many local authorities use Giro s
rent collection services. Giro’s international services also provide money
transfer facilities in Europe linking over 16 million account holders in the
European Community and other countries in Western Europe.
There are also some 40 British overseas and Commonwealth banks, many of
which have their headquarters in London. They provide a comprehensive
banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing ot
trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between third
countries. There are also in London about 50 United States banks, 60 Euro¬
pean banks, 19 Japanese banks, 73 other foreign banks and 35 consortium
banks.
The merchant banks have an influence on Britain’s financial affairs which is
much greater than their size in relation to other financial institutions mig t
suggest. Traditionally merchant banks have been primarily concerned wit
acceptance credits1 and with the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf of their
customers. Today they have a widely diversified and complex range of activi¬
ties with an important role in: international finance and the short-term capita
markets; the provision of expert advice and financial services to Bntis
industrial companies especially where mergers, takeovers and other forms ot
corporate reorganisation are involved; and the management of investment
holdings, including trusts, pensions and other funds.
The Money or Discount Market is an institution which is unique to the City of
London. Its function in the monetary system is to provide a financial mecha¬
nism designed to promote an orderly flow of short-term funds. The market
consists of 12 discount houses which borrow money ‘at call’ or short notice and
lend for somewhat longer periods. They have recourse to the Bank of England
as lender of last resort and normally the Bank lends to the houses at minimum
lending rate for seven days, although it may charge a higher rate and has also
at times lent overnight, or for short periods, at the rates of interest prevailing
in the market. Most of the market’s borrowed funds come from the banks,
which are thus provided with a flexible means of earning a yield on surplus funds
which they have at any given time. . rrT1 ,  
The assets of the discount houses mainly consist of Treasury and comm
cial bills, government and local authority securities and negotiable certificates
of deposit denominated in both sterling and US dollars. The market accepts as
an informal responsibility that it should cover the Governments need to
borrow on Treasury bills which are offered on tender each week.
The National Savings Movement started in 1916 to help finance the war by
promoting savings. The present movement encourages the widespread invest¬
ment of savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the National Savings Bank
(see p. 222) and in National Savings securities. The movement is led by the
National Savings Committee for England and Wales and similar committees
r-s1 S :
discount house.
FINANCE
221
National Savings
Securities
Contractiui
Savings
NATIONAL SAVINGS
Amounts outstanding at end-year in £ million
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£815
Premium Savings^
Bonds £200
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments)
£345
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£1,277
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments) £1,878
Total £6,439 1958
^Principal and accrued interest
tlncludes investment accounts
J Includes the earlier National Development Bonds and Defence Bonds
^Includes SAVE
for Scotland and Northern Ireland. The committees are comprised of repre¬
sentatives of the voluntary savings movement in the Regions and of various
national institutions connected with finance, industry and education. They
have a staff of civil servants. Voluntary local savings committees, often sup¬
ported by local authorities, co-ordinate the work of voluntary local savings
groups.
The administration of the National Savings Bank and other forms of national
savings is carried out by the Department for National Savings. Five forms
of National Savings securities are currently on sale: National Savings Certifi¬
cates, British Savings Bonds, Premium Savings Bonds, National Savings
Stamps and Gift Tokens. National Savings Certificates, in units of £1, are
encashable at par at any time; interest, which is free of income tax and capital
gains tax is paid only on encashment; the limit on individual holdings is 1,500
units of the current ‘decimal issue’ introduced in 1970. British Savings Bonds,
8-5 per cent, sold in units of £5, are repayable at par on one month’s notice.
If the bonds are held to maturity (five years from the date of purchase) they
are repaid with a bonus of £3 per cent tax free. Maximum holding is £10,000.
Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £1 (minimum purchase is £2) and indi¬
vidual holdings are limited to £2,000. After a qualifying period of three
months the bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes instead of
receiving interest. There is now a weekly draw for a prize of £25,000, and 25
prizes of £1,000 and a monthly draw for prizes ranging from £25 to £50,000.
At the end of April 1973, £990 million was invested in this form of savings. A
selection of British Government securities is held on the National Savings
Stock Register. Trustee Savings Banks also deal in stock on the National
Savings Stock Register.
A contractual savings scheme, known as ‘Save as You Earn’ (SAYE), enables
savings to be made in regular monthly amounts within a minimum of £1 and a
maximum of £20 in deposits with the Department for National Savings or
Trustee Savings Banks by means of deductions from pay or by other regular
222
National Savings
Bank
Trustee Savings
Banks
BRITAIN 1974* OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
payments. At the end of five years, savings will qualify for a bonus equivalent
to one year’s savings free of tax. Completed savings which are not withdrawn
will qualify for a double bonus at the end of seven years, that is, two years
savings. For example, contributions totalling £60 payable over five years at a
rate of /i per month will qualify for a bonus of £12 at the end of that period,
or /24 if left on deposit for a further two years. Savers who wish to stop pay¬
ments will be able to withdraw the total sum saved (but there cannot be partial
withdrawals). Tax-free compound interest will be paid at the rate of 22
cent per annum on amounts withdrawn after the first but before the end of the
fifth year or at per cent where the contributions cease but the savings are
left invested for the remainder of the five years or where the saver dies before
the contributions are completed.
The National Savings Bank provides a countrywide system for depositing and
withdrawing small savings and has over 22 million active accounts. Ordinary
Accounts bear interest at 4 per cent and the first £40 of interest is tax free (a
new tax exemption limit introduced for the 1974-75 Year of assessment). Lp
to /20 can be withdrawn on demand at any savings bank post office, but a ew
days’ notice is required for larger amounts. The money is lodged with the
National Debt Commissioners and is invested in government securities.
Deposits up to a limit of £10,000 bearing a higher rate of interest (at present 8
per cent) may be made in Investment Accounts where investors have a quah-
fving deposit of £50 in an Ordinary Account. All deposits carry a government
guarantee; at the end of April 1973 the sum of the two accounts totalled
£2,065 million.
The Trustee Savings Banks, most of which were founded in the nineteenth
century, operate under their own trustees but are subject to statutory provi¬
sions and National Debt Office surveillance. There are 73 individual banks with
over 1 540 offices and 13 million active accounts. Deposits can be made either
in the Ordinary Department, the Special Investment Department or the
Current Account Department. Savings in the Ordinary Department earn
interest at 4 per cent and the first £40 of interest is tax free. Withdrawals can
usually be made on demand though notice is required for large sums. Deposits
are invested with the National Debt Commissioners and both capital and
interest are guaranteed by the Government. The Special Investment Depart¬
ments offer a higher rate of return, which is taxable. Deposits are limited t(j
£10 000, but are not government guaranteed. At the end of May 1973 total
sums in the Ordinary Departments of the Trustee Savings Banks were £1,280
million and in the Special Investment Departments £1,890 million. Most
Trustee Savings Banks operate cheque services on deposits in the Current
A Atffie end of July 1973 National Savings totalled £10,469 million. The dia¬
gram on p. 221 shows the distribution of National Savings between the di er-
ent outlets in 1958 and 1972.
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many
ecial financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities, whic
e supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are mainly
ovided through the savings banks, finance corporations, hire-purchase
lance companies, the stock exchange, investment trust companies, unit trusts,
hiding societies and the insurance market. The firms engaged in such activi-
*s are in the main highly specialised, for example, discount and other finance
mses, stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers.
FINANCE
Finance
Corporations
Finance
Corporation for
Industry Limited
Industrial and
Commercial Finance
Corporation
Limited
Commonwealth
Development
Finance Company
Limited
The Stock
Exchange
223
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited (FCI) and
the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited (ICFC), were
set up in 1945 to assist in dealing with the problems of post-war reconstruction
and development. The corporations are ordinary limited companies with no
official representation on their boards and no recourse to public funds.
Another corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Company
Limited (CDFC), was established in 1953 to assist development projects in
the Commonwealth.
The FCI was formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of
£200,000 and upwards) for the re-equipment and development of industry.
It has an authorised and issued capital of ^25 million and may borrow up
to four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of £125 million.
The share capital is held by insurance companies, by investment trust com¬
panies and by the Bank of England. At 31st March 1973 the capital called and
paid up was 10 per cent (£2-5 million); the Bank of England paid £5 million in
advance of call in 1958. The liability of the shareholders in respect of the un¬
called capital represents security to the banks providing loans for the corpora¬
tion’s working capital. The value of its loans and investments at 31st March
I973 was £62 million.
The main function of the ICFC is to provide capital, financial advice, and
computer bureau and other services to small- and medium-sized companies in
the British Isles. It has a number of subsidiaries, including Technical Develop¬
ment Capital Ltd. established in 1962 to provide venture capital for the com¬
mercial development of technological innovation. The shareholders of ICFC
are the Bank of England, the English Clearing and the Scottish banks. At 31st
March 1973 the ICFC had more than £185 million invested in 2,250 British
companies.
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company is no longer confined to
the Commonwealth in its activities. It supports business enterprise overseas
by providing finance in the form of share capital and loans on mutually
acceptable terms. Its authorised share capital is £30 million, of which about
14^ million ‘A’ ordinary shares of £1 (j£o-io paid) are held by industrial,
shipping, mining and banking interests in the United Kingdom, and nf
million ‘B’ ordinary shares of £1 (^0*50 paid) are held by the Bank of England
and certain central banks in the Commonwealth. At 31st March 1973 the
CDFC held investments worth £32 million spread over a wide range of
industries placed in more than 35 countries.
The stock exchanges of the United Kingdom and Irish Republic amalgamated
on 25th March 1973. Dealings with the public remain unchanged, but brokers
may open offices nationally and firms wherever situated trade on equal terms.
The main exchange and central administration are in London. Exchanges are
also in Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Dublin
and Belfast.
The number and variety of securities officially listed on the London exchange
is greater than in any other market and its turnover of company securities is
roughly equivalent to that of all the European bourses combined. Some 9,000
securities are quoted on the London exchange; at the end of March 1973 these
had a total market value of £167,290 million. About 7,770 securities of
companies are quoted, including a number of leading overseas companies.
224
Investment
Trust Companies
and Unit Trusts
The Insurance
Market
Insurance
Companies
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Company issues represented more than four-fifths of the securities at market
valuation, the remainder being United Kingdom and overseas government
and corporation stocks.
The stock exchange does not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains
are made between members reflect the interaction of supply and demand for
the securities concerned. The stock exchange operates under strict rules of
conduct which it formulates itself.
There has been substantial growth in demand in the post-war period for
ordinary (equity) shares, partly in expectation that such shares will maintain
or increase their real value in periods of rising prices. There is a growing level
of institutional investment on the London market by insurance companies,
pension funds, and by investment and unit trusts. The percentage of total
market holdings of United Kingdom quoted ordinary shares held by these
four groups of institutions together rose from 25 per cent to 31 per cent over
the six-year period March 1964-70.
Investment trust companies and unit trusts enable investors to spread their
risks and obtain the benefit of skilled management.
The usual type of investment trust company is constituted as a public com¬
pany registered under the Companies Acts with limited liability; its business
is to invest its capital in a range of stocks and shares. Like other companies, it
may issue several types of stocks or shares and may retain part of its profits to
build up reserves. Investment trust companies grew to importance in the latter
half of the nineteenth century and have been prominent in directing capital
towards overseas investment. At the end of 1972 investment trust companies
held assets worth £7,440 million, of which over one-third were in overseas
securities.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers se 1
units to the public and must invest the proceeds in a fairly wide range of stock
exchange securities. The costs of running the trust are defrayed partly by an
initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a semi¬
annual service charge which is usually taken out of the income of the trust.
The level of both charges is controlled by the Department of Trade and
Industry, whose authorisation is required before units can be offered to the
public; this is only granted if the trust deed is satisfactory to them.
The first British unit trust was formed in 1931 and by 1939 there were
98 trusts, with assets estimated at £80 million. This medium of saving has
grown considerably since 1957. At the end of April 1973 there were 2-3
million unit holdings. The value of the funds invested in authorised trusts rose
from £60 million in 1958 to £2,460 million at the end of April 1973 ; it has
nearly trebled since the end of 1967. There is now a wide variety of trusts,
both as to the range of investments covered and the ways in which they cater
for the differing needs of investors.
Although a certain amount of insurance is provided by friendly societies and
trade unions, most insurance services in Britain are in the hands of mutual or
joint stock insurance companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
There are about 590 insurance companies incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Most British insurers write several classes of business although some specialise
in one class, particularly in life assurance, where about 130 companies write
only that type of business. A few specialise in re-insurance.
FINANCE
225
Lloyd's
Insurance Brokers
International
Insurance Services
In addition about 160 overseas companies carry on business (and even more
companies are represented) in the United Kingdom, which illustrates the
international nature of the London market. Some of the large British com¬
panies, however, have their administrative headquarters in the provinces.
At the end of 1972 the total assets of the British insurance companies
amounted to about £19,000 million, the bulk of which is life assurance
companies’ investments.
The Government’s supervisory powers over insurance companies under the
Insurance Companies Acts 1958-67 and the Insurance Companies Amend¬
ments Act 1973 are exercised by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of private insurers in London. The name
‘Lloyd’s’ is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established in the late
seventeenth century, where merchants with maritime and other interests
gathered to transact business. By the middle of the eighteenth century,
Lloyd’s coffee house had become the principal centre of underwriting business
and intelligence of shipping movements. Although in its earlier history the
activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the conduct of marine insurance business,
there has also been built up at Lloyd’s a very considerable world-wide market
for the transaction of other classes of insurance business in its non-marine,
aviation and motor markets.
Lloyd’s is regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament starting in 1871;
the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are administered
by the Committee of Lloyd’s, which does not itself transact insurance business.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance, where business is
transacted by individual underwriters for their own account and risk and in
competition with each other. Insurance may only be placed through Lloyd’s
brokers, who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriters on behalf of the insured.
Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd’s, who must transact insurance
with unlimited liability and who have met the most stringent financial regula¬
tions laid down by the Committee of Lloyd’s, are permitted to transact
business at Lloyd’s; these financial safeguards give security to the Lloyd’s
policy which is second to none. Since 1969 non-Commonwealth underwriters
have been admitted to membership of Lloyd’s, if they satisfy the requirements.
Today there are about 7,100 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped
into some 260 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents
who accept risks on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
In conjunction with its marine insurance business Lloyd’s has built up a
world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping intelli¬
gence.
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalf
of the insured; brokers are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a
valuable part of the company market. Many brokers specialise in re-insurance
business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between
companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as London representa¬
tives of the latter.
About two-thirds of general insurance business (that is non-life) is carried
on overseas, partly by re-insurance on the London market and partly through
branches and agencies established in over 100 countries. The basic principle
of this international business is that resources capable of meeting any potential
loss are instantly available for use in any part of the world.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the very
226
Building
Societies
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
substantial assets of the companies, in addition to substantial reserves of
uncalled capital, and the deposits, underwriting trust funds and other re¬
sources of Lloyd’s underwriters.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome insurance and re-insurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the govern¬
ments of member states. The purpose of the directives is to harmonise the
legislation of the various member countries, thus providing a ‘common
market’, which would avoid distortion of competition. Two directives have
been approved by the Council of Ministers. The first deals with the conditions
of access to non-life insurance business and the second requires member
countries not to discriminate in law or practice between their own subjects
and those of other member states. The Commission is also preparing draft
directives on life insurance, insurance contracts, and the taxation of insurance
policies.
The principal function of building societies is to supply long-term loans on
the security of private dwelling-houses purchased for owner-occupation
though loans are occasionally made on the security of commercial and
industrial premises and farms. The funds of building societies are derived
mainly from the general public who invest in shares or deposits. 1 he amount
of share capital is not fixed; shares which have a fixed value are not dealt
in on the stock exchange but may be withdrawn in cash if notice is given.
The Building Societies Act 1962, which consolidated a number of earlier Acts,
prescribes the general way in which societies must conduct their business.
The Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies has discretionary powers to stop
a society either advertising or accepting money from investors if he considers
that the way in which the society’s business is conducted is jeopardising
investors’ money. The rapid expansion of building society activity m the
twentieth century has been accompanied by a concentration of most of the
business in the hands of a few large societies. At the end of 1972, 456 societies
were in operation, with total assets of ^15,25° million; half of this amount
being accounted for by the five largest societies. The amount advanced on
mortgage in 1972 was nearly £3,650 million, over one-third more than in 1971.
13 Trade and Payments
PATTERN OF
TRADE
Value and
Volume
OVERSEAS TRADE
Although small in area and accounting for less than 2 per cent of the world’s
population, Britain is the fourth largest trading nation in the world—and, as
a member of the European Community, part of the world’s biggest trading
area which accounts for 40 per cent of all trade.
For well over a century international trade has been of vital importance to
the country’s economy. Britain relies upon imports for about half its total con¬
sumption of foodstuffs and most of the raw materials needed for its industries.
Its exports of goods represent over one-sixth of the gross national product.
It is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aircraft, metal manufactures,
electrical apparatus, chemicals and textiles. It is also the world’s largest
importer of foodstuffs, and among the largest for metals and ores, textile raw
materials, petroleum and many other products.
Changes in the value, volume, composition and geographical distribution of
imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
In 1972 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about ,£9,135 million f.o.b.,
that is, excluding the cost of freight and insurance outside the United King¬
dom, and imports at about ,£11,155 million (including the cost of freight and
insurance to the United Kingdom). Valued on the same basis as exports,
imports in 1972 were about £9,827 million. Between 1961 and 1972 the value
of exports rose by 135 per cent while that of imports increased by 143 per cent.
Over the same period the volume index of exports rose by 59 per cent, and of
imports by 77 per cent.
Exports had increased steadily from 1961 to 1966, but in 1967 they declined
slightly in value as well as in volume. Following the devaluation of sterling in
1967 they rose rapidly. In 1972 they increased by 4 per cent in value compared
with 11 per cent in 1971; the small rise in 1972 resulted from the decline in
demand in the sterling area (and import restrictions in some African countries).
In the first half of 1973 the volume of exports resumed rapid growth.
There was a particularly rapid expansion of imports in 1964 (15 per cent in
value and 11 per cent in volume) and again in 1968 (22 per cent in value and
10 per cent in volume). In 1972 the value of imports rose by 16 per cent; this
increase, and a further large increase in the first half of 1973, reflected the
rising demand for imports associated with the growth of domestic output, the
effects of the depreciation of the pound sterling, and the rise in commodity
prices (see p. 201). From 1964 to 1967 there was a steady improvement in
Britain’s terms of trade, that is, export prices rose faster than import prices.
In 1970 the index (1961 = 100) rose to 104 and in 1971 to no, a level which
was maintained in 1972; but by the end of the first quarter of 1973, with the
sharp rise in commodity prices and the lower exchange value of sterling, the
index had fallen to 99.
The value and volume of exports and imports in selected years from i960
to 1972 are shown in Table 14.
228
Commodity
Composition
Imports
TABLE 14
Imports and
Exports :
Annual Figures
BRITAIN 1974’ AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The expansion of domestic agricultural production has reduced Britain’s
dependence on imported food supplies and the ratio of imported foodstuffs
to total imports has fallen from 39 per cent in 1954 to 21 per cent in 1972.
There has been a similar downward trend in the proportion accounted for by
basic materials—from 30 per cent in 1954 to 12 per cent in 1972 though with a
sharp upturn (to 13-1 per cent) in the first quarter of 1973 as restocking and
new investment accelerated. .
Imports of petroleum and petroleum products are by far the biggest single
item by value, amounting to 10 per cent of the total value of imports during
1972 when their value was ^1,169 million.
The most marked change in recent years has been the rise, in Britain as in
other industrial countries, in the proportion of imports of finished manufac¬
tures, particularly capital goods and industrial components. Such imports
rose from about 6 per cent of total imports in 1957 to 28 per cent in 1972,
amounting to £3,130 million in value. Imports of semi-manufactures have also
been increasing steadily and since 1962 have formed a larger part of the total
import bill than basic materials, partly because the countries producing the
basic materials increasingly participate in the subsequent stages of manu¬
facture themselves. Imports of semi-manufactured goods (including chemi¬
cals) totalled £2,972 million in 1972 and accounted for nearly 27 per cent of
total imports.
Value (£ million)
Imports® c.i.f.6 9
Imports f.o.b.c/
Exports of British produce and
manufactures, and re-exports
f.o.b.® d 9  
Exports f.o.b/ . .
Volume Index Nos J = 100)
Imports . .
Exports . .
Unit Value Index Nos.f (1961 = 100)
Imports . .
Exports . .
Terms of Trade”f (\961 =100)
1960 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972
4,655
4,138
3,789
3,732
101
97
102
100
7,752
6,922
6,434
6,274
145
137
120
122
97 101
8,128
7,206
7,339
7,063
146
149
126
127
9,015
7,881
8,061
7,893
155
154
131
136
101 104
9,811
8,479
9,181
8,796
160
160
134
148
110
11,155
9,827
9,746
9,135
177
159
143
157
110
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
“ The import figures are shown exclusive of purchases of United States military
aircraft (including some missiles) which are being financed by a special United States
fSf Jimuontlnffreight', .ha. is, including shipping., insurance and other
expenses incurred in die delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain.
Most of these expenses represent earnings by British hrms. . , .
C ‘free on board’, that is, all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on
hnard the exDorting vessel having been paid by the seller. -
Including, Pfor the years 1967-70, an allowance for under-recording of exports
(details first published in June 1969)- . , . ^ v „
e Export unit value index as a percentage of the import unit value index.
On a balance of payments basis.
9 On an overseas trade statistics basis.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
229
Exports
TABLE 15
Commodity
Composition
of Trade
1956 and 1972
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
About 85 per cent of Britain’s exports consist of manufactured and semi¬
manufactured goods. By far the most important group is engineering pro¬
ducts—in 1972 44 per cent of total exports. Within this group, exports of
many types of machinery, electrical equipment, road vehicles, tractors and
scientific instruments have been increasing rapidly. The share of chemicals
has grown fairly steadily, reaching 10 per cent of total exports in 1972. The
share of metals has fallen from 13-3 per cent in 1956 to 10*4 per cent in 1972.
{per cent)
Textiles’ share fell from 18 per cent of the total in 1948 to 7 per cent in i960
and 4-6 per cent in 1972. The proportion accounted for by food, beverages and
tobacco rose to 6-8 per cent in 1972.
Composition of exports and imports in 1956 and 1972 is shown in Table 15.
Trade between Britain and Western Europe has been increasing in recent
years, and conversely there has been a decline in the proportion of Britain’s
exports going to primary producing countries. In 1958, 27 per cent of exports
went to Western Europe, but in 1962 these exports began to exceed those to
the sterling area and by 1972 they formed 43 per cent of the total, having risen
by 15 per cent during the year; they rose sharply again in early 1973 to 49 per
cent of the total. Exports to the founder members of the European Economic
Community (EEC) showed the largest increase in value during the year,
rising by 16 per cent to account for 23 per cent of Britain’s total exports; and in
early 1973 they rose further to 26 per cent of the total (31 per cent including
BRITAIN 1974'. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AREA PATTERN OF TRADE IN 1972
(Percentages of total values)
Invisible
Transactions
IMPORTS
EXPORTS
23-3
sterling af^-^
24-4
the other new members of the EEC). Exports to the European Free Trade
Area (EFTA) countries increased by 15 per cent in 1972.
Imports from Western Europe rose by 27 per cent in 1972, more than
double the rate as in 1971, and formed 44 per cent of the total imports. They
rose further in early 1973 to 49 per cent of the total.
In relative terms Britain’s trade with other members of the Commonwealth
and with the sterling area as a whole has tended to decline in recent years.
Exports to the sterling area in 1972 (see p. 238) amounted to 24 per cent of
total exports compared with 42 per cent in 1958. Imports have shown a
similar fall in their share of the total. Canada, Australia, South Africa and the
Irish Republic are still among Britain’s leading trading partners but since 1957
the United States has been Britain’s largest single market and source of
imports. The proportion of total exports going to North America in 1972 was
just over 16 per cent. The value of exports to Latin America was unchanged in
1972 but the value of imports rose by 4 per cent after falling by 8 per cent in
1970. After a fall in 1971 Britain’s trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe resumed in 1972 the rapid growth apparent since i960, exports rising
by 9 per cent and imports by 15 per cent. Trade with Japan continued to
grow; exports rose by 10 per cent in 1972 while imports rose by 56 per cent
to a level of over £300 million.
As far back as estimates have been made, that is, for nearly two centuries,
Britain has usually earned a surplus from its invisible transactions: the receipts
and payments arising from services (as distinct from goods) supplied to and
received from overseas residents; the income arising from outward and in¬
ward investment; and transfers between Britain and other countries.
The invisible transactions involved are divided for statistical purposes into
six main groups: government services and transfers; transport (shipping a.nd
civil aviation); travel; other services (which covers a variety of items including
the financial services of the City of London); interest, profits and dividends;
and private transfers (migrants’ funds, legacies and private gifts). Table 17
shows the breakdown of the figures from 1966 to 1972. The total invisible
balance in 1972 was £768 million. Gross earnings of £5,993 nnlhon from total
invisible exports were well over half the total of £9,134 million from visib e
exports. Net private invisible receipts were £1,463 million.
As shown in Table 17, in recent years there has been a considerable and
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
231
£ million
TABLE 16
Principal
British Markets
and Sources of
Supply, 1972
TABLE 17
Britain’s
Invisible
Overseas
Transactions
1966-72
Imports from
United States
Federal Republic of
Germany
Netherlands
Canada
France
Sweden
Irish Republic
Switzerland..
Italy
Denmark
Belgium-Luxembourg
South Africa
Australia
New Zealand
Western Europe
EEC
EFT A ..
Sterling Area
Developed countries
Developing countries
North America
Latin America
Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe
Rest of the world
1,180-7
840-9
615-0
605-2
603-7
512-9
444-8
369-3
353-4
348-1
315-9
295-7
283-4
251-5
4,900-8
2,729-0
1,961-2
2,600-8
1,284-6
1,316-2
1,784-9
329-1
396-2
1,125-8
Exports to
United States
Federal Republic of
Germany . .
France
Irish Republic
Netherlands . .
Sweden
Belgium-Luxembourg
Canada
Switzerland ..
Australia
South Africa..
Italy ..
Denmark
1,218-9
590-0
510-9
469-3
451-3
404-8
393-7
379-9
367-3
317-9
308-4
283-8
238-1
Western Europe
EEC
EFTA
Sterling Area
Developed countries
Developing countries
North America
Latin America
Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe
Rest of the world
4,177-4
2,229-8
1,587-0
2,376-6
1,255-8
1,120-8
1,598-8
338-8
275-6
948-4
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
£ million
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
Invisible
balance
+ 157
+ 241
+ 375
+ 588
+701
+776
+768
Total invisibles
Debits
2,799
3,000
3,431
3,718
4,241
4,733
5,225
Credits
Govern¬
ment
(net)
2,956
3,241
3,806
4,306
4,942
5,509
5,993
-470
-463
-466
-467
-486
-526
-548
Transport
Sea
transport
(net)
+ 5
-17
+35
-31
-75
-59
-54
Civil
aviation
(net)
+ 30
+ 27
+29
+41
+ 37
+45
+64
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
Travel
(net)
-78
-38
+ 11
+ 35
+ 50
+ 52
+ 22
Other
services
(net)
+ 305
+397
+486
+ 560
+ 694
+778
+ 903
Interest,
profits and
dividends
(net)
+387
+ 379
+ 335
+499
+ 515
+ 516
+456
Private
transfers
(net)
-22
-44
-55
-49
-34
-30
-75
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1973
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
rapidly rising net surplus on ‘other services’ and another large surplus on
interest, profits and dividends. There has also been a surplus on civil aviation
services throughout the past decade. Sea transport transactions, which had been
roughly in balance between 1966 and 1968, have been in deficit since 1969.
Travel credits have exceeded debits since 1968. Over half the total debits in
respect of government expenditure relates to military expenditure overseas
and this has fallen in real terms in recent years, though currency changes have
caused the sterling value to rise; other substantial items of expenditure are
grants to developing countries, expenditure on the diplomatic service, and
subscriptions to international organisations.
In 1973 Britain began to contribute to the common budget for the financing
of European Community expenditure; the nominal share of the budget to be
borne by Britain is 19 per cent (broadly corresponding to Britain’s 1972 share
of the total gross national product of the countries in the enlarged Community);
over the five years of the transitional period (1973-77) Britain will pay an
annually increasing proportion of this nominal contribution. Estimates, pub¬
lished in December 1972, of Britain’s gross and net contribution are shown
in Table 18.
£ million
TABLE 18
Britain’s
Estimated
Contributions to
the Community
Budget :
1973-77
Year
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
Gross
contributions
125
165
220
270
325
Receipts
60
75
85
90
90
Net _
contributions
65
90
135
180
235
Source: Public Expenditure to 1976—77
In addition Britain will pay £24 million in three annual instalments into the
European Coal and Steel Community, a capital subscription of £37-5 million
in five instalments over three years to the European Investment Bank and a
contribution of £20 million to the Bank’s reserves over the same period.
Tourist Trade Tourism yields a substantial income from overseas; in the 11 years 1961-72
overseas visitors spent nearly j£3>50° million in Britain. For 1972 these travel
and tourist receipts, excluding fares, are estimated at about £538 million.
United Kingdom residents on holiday, or travelling for business or other
purposes overseas, spent about million (excluding fares) in the same
year. The continuing increase in both the average expenditure per visitor and
in the number of travellers visiting Britain has produced the surpluses on
travel credits mentioned above since 1968. The estimated total number of
visits to the United Kingdom in 1972, including visitors from the Irish
Republic, was a record figure of 7*4 million—more than twice the level of 1956
and an increase of 6 per cent over the 1971 level-
Britain’s national tourist organisation consists of four independent govern¬
ment-financed statutory bodies—the British Tourist Authority, which is
responsible for the overseas promotion of tourism in Britain and for certain
general matters affecting the country as a whole, and the English, Scottish
and Wales Tourist Boards which are responsible for encouraging the develop¬
ment and improvement of facilities and amenities for tourists in their respec¬
tive countries, and for tourist promotional work and publicity within Britain.
There is a separate statutory Tourist Board for Northern Ireland. The
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
General Agree¬
ment on Tariffs
and Trade
Community
Preference
Commonwealth
Countries
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 233
English, Scottish and Wales boards offer financial assistance to selected tourist
projects in development areas.
Britain has long been an advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to trade,
and to this end has taken a leading part in the activities of such organisations
as the International Monetary Fund, the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop¬
ment, and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD). As a member of the European Community, Britain is com¬
mitted to working for the development of world trade by the progressive
reduction through reciprocal measures of both tariff and non-tariff barriers.
Britain’s protective tariffs have been considerably modified in recent years
as a result of negotiations held under the auspices of GATT which also seek to
increase the volume of world trade by reducing tariffs and other barriers to
trade, and by eliminating discrimination in international commerce.
As a result of the ‘Kennedy Round’ (May 1964-June 1967), a series of
GATT tariff negotiations, average reductions of over 30 per cent were made
by the major trading countries in their tariffs on industrial goods. The reduc¬
tions made between 1968 and 1972 in the British tariffs on dutiable industrial
goods imported from the EEC, the United States and Japan amounted to
about 37 per cent, 40 per cent and 34 per cent respectively. This was closely
in line with the reductions made by these countries which affected well over
70 per cent of British exports of dutiable industrial goods to them. Some reduc¬
tions were also made in the tariff on agricultural goods. A new series of negoti¬
ations (the ‘Nixon Round’) began towards the end of 1973.
All tariffs on trade in industrial products between Britain and the other Com¬
munity countries are being eliminated in five equal stages over the transitional
period ending 1st July 1977. By the same date Britain will be applying the
common external tariff to all countries neither belonging to, nor having any
special arrangement with, the Community, subject to special arrangements for
some industrial materials. By the same date also industrial tariff barriers be¬
tween the European Community and the remaining member countries of the
European Free Trade Area (EFTA), to which Britain belonged between i960
and 1972, will have been dismantled.
Reciprocal preferential tariff treatment for trade between Britain and other
independent Commonwealth countries dates from the Ottawa Conference of
1932. Under the terms of the treaty governing Britain’s accession to the
European Community the independent developing Commonwealth countries
in Africa, the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean and the Pacific1 have the oppor¬
tunity of choosing among three options: association under a revised Yaounde
Convention,2 some other form of association such as that provided by the Aru¬
sha Convention,2 or a commercial trade agreement. The present preferential
1 Barbados, Botswana, Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mauritius (with whom an association agreement was negotiated in 1972),
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, Tanzania, Trinidad and Tobago, Tonga, Uganda,
Western Samoa and Zambia. Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania were already associated
with the Community of Six under the Arusha Convention.
2 The main elements of the Yaounde Convention, which represents an integrated
approach to development aid and trade, include trade preferences and the provision
of financial and technical assistance to the Associated States. The Arusha Convention
is more closely restricted to trade and does not provide for financial or technical
assistance.
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tariff arrangements between them and Britain can be maintained until 31st
January 1975. All Britain’s dependent territories (except Gibraltar and Hong
Kong, to which special conditions apply) are being offered association under
the Treaty of Rome. At Gibraltar’s request it is not being included in the Com¬
munity’s generalised preference scheme (see below). Special arrangements
have been made to protect the sugar exports of the Commonwealth and the
dairy products trade of New Zealand. The Community has stated its continu¬
ing objective of expanding and reinforcing existing trade relations with the
Commonwealth countries of Asia, taking into account the scope of the
generalised preference scheme from which they are expected to derive consider¬
able benefit.
Generalised
Preference
Scheme
The establishment of a system of generalised preference for manufactures and
semi-manufactures exported by developing countries was agreed in principle
at the second UNCTAD Conference in New Delhi in 1968. Britain’s scheme
came into effect early in 1972, but, as a member of the European Com¬
munity, it is implementing the Community’s scheme which came into effect
in July 1971, and was renewed in 1972. Over too countries benefit from the
scheme which provides for tariff reductions on manufactured or semi¬
manufactured products and a large number of processed agricultural products.
CONTROLS ON
TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
There are now very few restrictions imposed by Britain on the movement of
goods and services.
Import and
Export Control
Import Licensing
Export Controls
Under the Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act 1939 the
Department of Trade and Industry is empowered to prohibit or regulate the
import or export of goods.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and the
IMF, Britain has progressively removed quantitative restrictions from almost
all its imports from the countries of the free world. There has also been a con¬
tinuing substantial relaxation of quantitative controls on imports from the
Soviet Zone. The short list of goods on which controls remain includes those
recognised internationally on arms, ammunition and radioactive materials.
They require a specific import licence and quotas have been set up for many
of them. Apart from quantitative controls, some further restrictions or pro¬
hibitions are applied for the protection of health or public safety, in the interest
of conservation, and for other non-economic reasons (for example, on
animals, plants, drugs and explosives). There is also a general import restric¬
tion on goods from Rhodesia as part of the Government’s sanctions policy
against the illegal regime.
Except for the control necessary to ensure that exports to destinations outside
the scheduled territories1 are paid for in the proper manner most British
exports are not subject to any government control or direction. The few
controls that are in operation are imposed to supervise exports of military
and strategic importance; to conserve materials which may be in short supply;
to assist exchange control operations (see p. 235) in preventing the export of
capital in the form of valuable goods; to ensure the humane treatment of
cattle, sheep and pigs; and to prevent the export of antiques (including works
1 In September 1973 the scheduled territories were the United Kingdom, the Isle of
Man, the Channel Islands, the Irish Republic and Gibraltar.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
235
Exchange
Control
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
TO OVERSEAS
TRADE
of art) on grounds of national importance. There is a general export restriction
on goods to Rhodesia.
Britain applies exchange control mainly in order to conserve its reserves of
gold and foreign exchange. The powers under the Exchange Control Act 1947
are conferred mainly on the Treasury which has delegated the administration
of most parts of the Act to the Bank of England. The Bank has in turn
authorised most commercial banks in Britain to execute a wide range of
transactions.
The general effect of exchange control regulations is to control transactions
between residents of the scheduled territories and non-residents. Payments
in sterling may in general be made freely between residents, but the acquisition
of other currencies by them is subject to control.
Exchange control policy is not to discourage investment abroad but to
regulate the manner in which investment outside the scheduled territories is
financed. Official exchange is more readily available for projects which directly
promote British exports and for investment in European Community coun¬
tries and in the overseas sterling area (see p. 238) than it is for other investments.
Where the use of official exchange is not permitted investors can finance their
project in other ways, for example, by borrowing foreign currency. Exports of
goods to destinations outside the scheduled territories have, in general, to be
paid for within six months in foreign currency or by sterling from an external
account unless they are covered by an approved export credit arrangement.
Control is also exercised over imports to ensure that currency authorised for
their payment is used for that purpose.
There are certain restrictions on dealings in gold bullion and on the use of
gold for manufacturing and industrial purposes. The buying, selling and
holding of gold coins does not require specific Exchange Control permission,
although their export remains controlled.
Residents are entitled to purchase up to £300 in foreign currency for their
travel expenditure on each journey outside the scheduled territories irres¬
pective of the purpose of the journey. Further travel funds may be obtained
for business, professional or other reasons. Non-residents may hold an external
account in a British bank and are entitled to change their sterling on external
account for other currencies and to make and receive payments in any cur¬
rency to and from non-residents in any other part of the world. Special restric¬
tions apply to transactions with residents of Rhodesia.
People living outside the scheduled territories who visit Britain temporarily
are regarded as non-resident and not subject to the exchange control provi¬
sions. On the other hand, people coming to Britain from outside the scheduled
territories and intending to take up permanent residence in Britain would
normally be regarded as resident, though they might be eligible for certain
exemptions from their obligations under the Exchange Control Act 1947.
Visitors to Britain may import notes in any currency, travellers’ cheques and
letters of credit without limit. On departure, visitors may take with them
sterling or scheduled territory notes up to a value of £25, foreign currency
notes up to a value of £300 and any foreign currency notes which they brought
in with them.
The Government assists exporters by its efforts to create conditions favourable
to the export trade and by providing credit insurance facilities and inform¬
ation and advice about opportunities for trade in other countries. Export pro¬
motion is also assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry),
236
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Development Corporation for Wales and Northern Ireland by the Ministry
of Commerce.
Information
and Advice to
Exporters
Export Credit
Insurance
Investment
Insurance
Trade Fairs
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult DTI offices throughout
Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts of the British Diplo¬
matic Service overseas. There are over 200 posts located in all the principal
cities and trade centres abroad and they supply the DTI with information of
every kind affecting trade with their territories.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial condi¬
tions, pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities, and
generally assist the exporter to overcome any difficulties he encounters in trade
with the country in question, particularly those arising out of governmental
regulations. These officers investigate potential markets for British products,
advise about methods of trading with particular areas, and seek out and pass
on opportunities for export business and enquiries for British goods. Assist¬
ance is also given to British exporters in appointing agents and locating
potential importers. From records kept up to date in London by reports from
its overseas commercial officers, the Export Services and Promotions Division
of the DTI can provide information concerning any country on the prospects
for exports and requirements of particular markets, government regulations
affecting trade (including import restrictions and tariffs and duties on parti¬
cular commodities), methods of trading, local tastes and preferences in design,
and the commercial standing of firms with which an exporter contemplates
business relations.
The Government’s official information services overseas are used exten¬
sively to promote Britain’s export trade.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) provides credit insur¬
ance for more than a third of the country’s export trade and for much of the
external trade of British merchants.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer,
governmental action which stops the British exporter receiving payment, new
import restrictions in the buyer’s country, war, or ‘any other causes of loss
occurring outside Britain and not within the control of the exporter or the
buyer, and not normally insurable with commercial insurers’. Cover may
commence from the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the date of
shipment.
This insurance may be supplemented by unconditional guarantees of re¬
payment given directly to banks financing the exporter. Alternatively, for
contracts over £250,000, the ECGD will guarantee loans direct to overseas
buyers enabling them to pay on cash terms, or ‘lines of credit’ similarly
covering an agreed buying programme of an overseas country, with the mini¬
mum value of the individual contracts often as low as £10,000. The banks
provide finance against these guarantees at a special interest rate fixed by the
Government, the bulk of this being in turn refinanced by the ECGD.
A new form of ECGD cover was introduced in 1972 to provide insurance
against certain political risks on overseas investment. The scheme is designed to
encourage new private investment in developing countries and offers protec¬
tion for British investors against expropriation or nationalisation, war damage
and currency inconvertibility.
Britain stages many exhibitions and trade fairs and British products are shown
at most of the large international trade fairs throughout the world.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
237
British Overseas
Trade Board
FINANCING OF
INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
Commodity
Markets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
Participation in trade fairs, ‘British weeks’ and store promotions overseas is
a form of export promotion for which the Government provides information,
financial assistance and, in certain cases, free facilities. In 1972 the DTI
assisted nearly 5,000 British firms at 291 specialised and general trade fairs in
37 countries; and gave practical help to 6 ‘British Shopping Weeks’, and some
53 overseas store promotions. The amount allocated to the DTI for these
purposes has risen from ^0*5 million in 1962-63 to ^10*7 million in 1972-73*
The British Overseas Trade Board of the DTI directs Britain’s export pro¬
gramme, including export intelligence work, the work on trade fairs and other
promotional activity overseas, the schemes for financial support for firms to
participate in missions overseas and for inward commercial visits to Britain. It
consists of businessmen and DTI and Foreign and Commonwealth Office
representatives and operates under the general authority of the Minister for
Trade who is the President.
In the nineteenth century, the rapid growth of British industry, commerce
and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s development as an international
trading centre. A sound commercial banking system and a wide range of
financial institutions has been established to meet commercial needs for both
short- and long-term finance. The facilities provided by merchant banks and
accepting houses, for example, have long been used to finance shipments of
goods not only to and from Britain, but also between overseas countries.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities although most of the sales negotiated in these markets
relate to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The
need for close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance
services often determined the location of these markets in the City of London.
Among the more important are the Baltic Exchange (shipping and aircraft
charter markets), the London Commodity Exchange (cocoa, coffee, copra,
rubber and sugar), and the London Metal Exchange. In addition to these
formal markets, there is scarcely any product which cannot be traded through
an intermediary in Britain.
The market consists of over 200 authorised banks and several firms of foreign
exchange brokers which act as intermediaries between the banks. It provides
those engaged in international trade with foreign currencies for their trans¬
actions. The foreign exchange banks are in close contact with financial
centres abroad and are able to quote buying and selling rates for both spot and
future delivery. An important function of the market is to engage in arbitrage
transactions which serve to eliminate differentials in exchange rates between
different centres. The forward market enables traders, who at a given date in
the future are due to receive or make a specific foreign currency payment, to
determine in advance the precise sterling equivalent of the foreign currency.
All authorised banks may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely
concentrated in the hands of the five members of the London gold market.
The five members meet twice daily to fix a price for all transactions which
customers ask to have executed at the fixing. Since 1968 monetary authorities
have ceased dealing in gold in the market, and the use of officially held gold
has been restricted to transactions between monetary authorities.
238
The Sterling
System
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, many
countries tended to use sterling as their currency for international transactions.
As trade and payments arrangements have become more diversified in recent
years, the international use of sterling has declined relatively. However, a
number of countries hold sterling balances in Britain (see p. 202). The term
‘sterling area’ includes all the Commonwealth countries (see p. 26) and their
dependencies except Canada and Rhodesia, together with Bahrain, Iceland,
the Irish Republic, Jordan, Kuwait, The Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
South Africa, South West Africa, The United Arab Emirates and the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen. The ‘overseas sterling area’ consists of the
sterling area countries except for the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man, the Irish Republic and Gibraltar.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Over the last few decades Britain has generally had a deficit on visible trade
and a surplus on invisible earnings. Estimates of the balance of payments and
its main constituent items are given in summary since 1965 in Table 19 and in
greater detail since 1970 in Tables 20 and 21. The balance of payments
statistics contain two indicators of particular importance. The first is the
balance on current account, covering both visible (exports and imports of
goods) and invisible (trade in services, investment income and transfers) trans¬
actions. This, together with capital transfers, provides a measure of how far
Britain is paying its way abroad and thus adding to or using up overseas assets.
The second indicator is the total currency flow. This is the net result of all
external flows, that is the current account, capital transfers, investment and
other capital flows (including official long-term capital transactions, investment
flows, trade credit, and changes in Britain’s external banking and money
market liabilities in sterling) and other flows which are unidentified trans¬
actions reflected in the balancing item. The total currency flow shows the
impact of all external flows on the reserves and debt position, that is how much
is available to add to the reserves and to repay any official borrowing in the
case of a net inflow or how much must be financed by drawing on the reserves
or by borrowing if there is a net outflow. Table 21 gives details of the current
account since 1970. Both exports and imports rose strongly after the devalua¬
tion of sterling in 1967. In 1971 exports rose in value faster than imports and
there was, for the first time for many years, a surplus on visible trade which
reached its highest-ever level at £285 million. This, together with a substantial
surplus on invisibles, produced a record current account surplus of £1,061
million.
The total currency flow was outward in each of the years 1963-68 and in¬
ward from 1969-71. In the period 1963-68, there was an outward flow of
£3,778 million (including a gold subscription of £44 million to the IMF)
financed mainly by official borrowing totalling £3,134 million, but also by
transfers to the reserves of the dollar portfolio totalling £52° million, and a
reduction of £124 million in the reserves. In 1969 there was a reversal of the
net currency flow, and a rapidly increasing currency inflow which in 1971
reached £3,353 million. During this period almost all short- and medium-
term official borrowing was repaid, and there was a substantial increase in the
reserves. In 1972 Britain had a small surplus on current account, the surplus
of £768 million on invisibles being offset by a visible trade deficit of £685
million which reflected both the depreciation of sterling from June 1972
rises in world commodity prices. The surplus on invisibles was some £8
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
239
TABLE 19
United Kingdom
Balance of
Payments
1965-72
TABLE 20
Current Account
1970-72
million less than in 1971 and lower surpluses were recorded for interest,
profits and dividends and for travel. There was an increased deficit on the
Government account. However, these changes were largely counter-balanced
by improved earnings from various financial and other services and from an
increased surplus on civil aviation.
There was a net outflow in 1972 on identified investment and other capital
transactions of about £756 million. This outflow was mainly concentrated in
the period of speculative pressure on sterling in the second quarter of the year.
Private investment overseas was £1,479 million, of which over £400 million
of direct investment was reinvested profits. Of the remainder, which included
a marked increase in overseas portfolio investment, over £700 million was
financed by a rise in net foreign currency borrowing by British banks. Inward
investment in the public and private sector taken together was over £830
million, some £350 million below 1971.
The total net currency outflow in 1972 was £1,265 million. The official
£ million
Current
balance
Total
currency
flow
Gold sub¬
scription
to IMF.
SDR al-
locationc
Total
Official
borrowing01
Official
reserves6
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
-49
+ 84
-316
-284
+ 445
+ 692
+ 1,061
+ 83
-353
-547
-671
-1,410
+ 743
+ 1,287
+ 3,228
-1,265
-44
+ 133
+ 125
+ 124
-353
-591
-671
-1,410
+ 743
+ 1,420
+ 3,353
-1,141
+ 599
+ 625
+ 556
+ 1,296
-699
-1,295
-1,817
+449
-246
-34
+ 115
+ 114
-44
-125
-1,536
+ 692
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1973
a Drawings (+)/ repayments ( —).
6 Drawings on (+)/ additions to (—).
c Gold subscription to IMF in 1966 was —£44 million and in 1970 —£38 million.
£ million
Visible trade
Exports (f.o.b.).
Imports (f.o.b.)
Visible balance
Invisibles
Government services and transfers (net)
Other invisibles
Private services and transfers (net) . .
Interest, profits and dividends
Private sector
Public sector
Invisible balance .
Current balance .
1970
7,893
7,902
-9
-486
+ 672
+777
-262
+701
1971
+ 692
8,796
8,511
+285
-526
+ 786
+715
-199
+776
+ 1,061
1972
9,134
9,819
-685
-548
+860
+603
-147
+768
+ 83
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1973
£ million
240
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 21
Analysis of
Total
Currency
Flow and
Official
Financing
1970-72
1970
1971
1972
Current balance
Investment and other capital flows:
Official long-term capital
Overseas investment in UK public
sector..
Overseas investment in UK private
sector..
UK private investment overseas
Overseas currency borrowing (net) by
UK banks to finance UK investment
overseas
Other overseas currency borrowing or
lending (net) by UK banks . .
Exchange reserves in sterling:
British government stocks . .
Banking and money market liabilities
Other external banking and money
market liabilities in sterling. .
Import credit . .
Export credit ..
Other short-term flows
Total investment and other capital flows
Balancing item
Total currency flow
Allocation of Special Drawing Rights ..
Gold subscription to IMF
Total
Official financing
Net transactions with overseas monetary
authorities:
IMF® ..
Other monetary authorities
Drawings on (+)/ addition to (— ) official
reserves “ 6
Total official financing
-204
-10
+ 725
-773
+ 180
+ 292
+ 63
+ 130
+266
+ 17
-261
+ 54
+479
+ 116
+ 1,287
+ 171
-38
+ 1,420
-134
1,161
-125
-1,420
+ 692 +1,061
-273
+ 179
+ 1,008
-875
+280
+ 219
+ 55
+ 658
+ 709
+77
-172
-2
+ 1,863
+ 304
+ 3,228
+ 125
+ 3,353
-554
-1,263
-1,536
-3,353
+ 83
-255
+ 111
+ 721
-1,479
+ 720
-249
+ 104
+220
-89
+ 187
-296
-451
-756
-592
-1,265
+ 124
-1,141
-415
+ 864
+ 692
+ 1,141
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1973
a From July 1972 transactions with the IMF affecting the United Kingdom reserve
position in the IMF are included as changes in official reserves.
6 From 23rd August 1971, valued in sterling at transactions rates of exchange.
financing requirement was reduced to £1,141 million by £124 million of
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs—Britain’s share of the final IMF allocation
in the first basic period) which was taken into the reserves. In addition the
balance of liabilities to the IMF amounting to £415 million was repaid; £864
million was financed by extinguishing outstanding amounts swapped forward
with overseas monetary authorities and the remaining £692 million was taken
from the reserves.
The SDR scheme came into effect in 1970 in order to supplement world
reserves. SDRs are reserve assets created and distributed by decision of the
members of the IMF. Any member of the IMF may join the scheme, and its
share is based on its IMF quota. Participants in the scheme accept an obliga-
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
24I
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES
External
Liabilities
tion to provide convertible currency, when designated by the IMF to do so,
to another participant in exchange for SDRs up to a total amount equal to
twice the net amount of their own allocation of SDRs. Only those countries
with a sufficiently strong balance of payments are so designated by the IMF.
SDRs may also be used in certain direct payments between participants in the
scheme and for payments of various kinds to the IMF.
Britain has also taken part since 1961 in the international network of re¬
ciprocal credit (swap) facilities arranged between central banks. Under these
arrangements each central bank is able to exchange on request its own currency
for the currency of another country up to a maximum agreed for a limited
period. It agrees to reverse the transaction at a specified date at the same rate
of exchange. The currencies so obtained can be retained in the reserves or used
in exchange operations.
The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and
liabilities1 is limited because a variety of claims and obligations are included
that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and in method of valua¬
tion. The inventory for the end of 1972 shows that Britain had a substantial
net creditor position estimated at some £6,035 million.
Identified external liabilities at the end of 1972 totalled some £21,115 million,
against assets of about £27,150 million. All official short- and medium-term
liabilities to the IMF and other monetary authorities were repaid in 1972.
Inter-governmental loans to Britain and other official liabilities, mainly a
consequence of the second world war and its aftermath, totalled £1,802
million of which £1,412 million was owed to the United States and £337
million to Canada. Other public sector liabilities of £3,791 million comprised
overseas holdings of British government and public corporations sterling
securities, holdings of Treasury bills and notes, local authority mortgages and
stocks, and foreign currency borrowing by British public corporations and
local authorities. British banking and commercial liabilities including liabili¬
ties in sterling, and in foreign currencies, totalled £6,015 million.2 Liabilities
in the form of overseas investment in Britain’s private sector totalled £9,505
million.
Liabilities in sterling comprise both public sector and banking and money-
market liabilities within the totals above. Sterling held in Britain by foreigners
in the form of bank deposits, deposits with local authorities and hire purchase
companies, Treasury Bills and British government securities (where these
were held by central monetary institutions and international organisations
other than the IMF) totalled £6,068 million at the end of March 1973. Of this,
£4,255 million was held by residents of overseas sterling countries (excluding
the Irish Republic), £712 million by residents of the European Community,
and £830 million by residents of the rest of the world. The total of these lia¬
bilities (excluding the counterpart of borrowing) remained broadly constant
between the end of 1945 and 1970 but rose sharply during 1971, and further in
1972 and early 1973. They reflect the international trading and reserve role of
sterling and in part the financial services of the City.
1 Figures for the end of 1972, and for earlier years, are published in the 1973 United
Kingdom Balance of Payments, produced by the Central Statistical Office (see Biblio¬
graphy, p. 476). .
2 This sector covers the London banks’ operations in the Eurocurrency markets in which
very large non-sterling currency liabilities are broadly matched by non-sterling assets.
Only net liabilities of £1,677 million are included in the figure above: they represent the
difference between assets of £23,617 million and liabilities of £25,294 million.
242
Inward Private
Investment
Outward
Private
Investment
External Assets
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Overseas liabilities arising from investment in the private sector of the British
economy rose from £3,165 million in 1962 to £9,505 million at the end of 1972.
Overseas investors in Britain are free to repatriate the proceeds of the sale
of their investments, including any capital gains that may have accrued.
Earnings and dividends are transferable irrespective of their size. In 1972
the inflow of direct, portfolio and other private investment, including oil,
amounted to £721 million.
The value of overseas investment in the private sector at the end of 1972
comprised: the book value of direct investment in Britain by companies in¬
corporated abroad—£3,980 million (excluding oil, banking, and insurance);
portfolio holdings of British securities—£3,135 million; the book value of the
net assets in Britain of overseas oil companies—£1,700 million; and the balance
of £690 million which included borrowing by British companies overseas and
identified overseas investment in real estate and in the insurance industry in
Britain.
About three-quarters of the direct investment of £3,980 million came from
North America and about one-fifth from Western Europe. Of the £343
million inflow of direct investment into Britain in 1972 £319 million originated
in the non-sterling area and £24 million from the overseas sterling area.
Foreign investment inflow presents British industry with many opportunities
to match new competitive standards which in turn will strengthen the economy
and its balance of payments position.
Private investment abroad may take several forms: portfolio investment, that
is, investment in overseas securities including the loans raised by overseas
countries on the London capital market; or direct investment by the establish¬
ment of subsidiary companies abroad; or the acquisition of an interest in an
overseas enterprise.
Approval is readily obtained for financing projects by borrowing abroad on
appropriate terms, and for financing from Britain where the project is expected
to yield substantial and continuing benefits to Britain’s balance of payments.
There is also considerable scope for the investment of retained profits of
subsidiary companies overseas and in recent years about 60 per cent of net
direct investment outflow has been financed in this way from unremitted
profits.
Direct investment outflow, excluding oil, was £645 million in 1971, £182
million of this being placed in the overseas sterling area and £463 million in
non-sterling countries. Within the latter figure the flow to the EEC area was
£244 million, to EFTA £4 million and to Latin America £22 million. In the
same year the flow to Western Europe was £258 million compared with a flow
to North America of £152 million. Direct investment outflow (excluding oil)
in 1971 was above the 197° level, amounting to £645 million. With the in¬
clusion of oil, portfolio and other investment aggregate private investment
outflow in 1971 totalled £875 million.
Britain’s assets arising from private investment overseas are estimated to have
been £18,520 million at the end of I972- This compares with a figure of
£8,070 million at the end of 1962. Direct investment, including oil, accounted
for £10,720 million of the total figure, the balance consisting of £7,800 million
of portfolio investment.
United Kingdom banking and commercial claims at the end of 1972 totalled
£4,805 million. Within this total banking claims in sterling and overseas
sterling area currencies were £2,535 million; suppliers export credit to un-
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
243
BRITISH
GOVERNMENT
AID TO
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Bilateral
Financial Aid
related firms was £1,563 million. With the increase in recent years in British
aid to developing countries, inter-governmental loans of £1,029 million form
the largest item among official external assets, which at the end of 1972 were
£1,625 million. The latter figure, together with official reserves of £2,167
million, £4,805 million in banking and commercial claims and private invest¬
ment overseas of £18,520 million, and a few smaller items, resulted in aggregate
identified external assets at the end of 1972 of £27,150 million.
Britain’s aid programme to the developing countries consists of loans and
grants for economic and social development, technical assistance, budget
support and contributions to multilateral agencies providing financial aid and
technical assistance to these countries. To complement the official programme
private investment is encouraged by the provision of government insurance
to private investors by the ECGD (see p. 236). In addition an important
contribution is made to economic development by private voluntary organisa¬
tions engaged in relief, development and educational work.
Since 1945 total official aid disbursements have amounted to nearly £3,616
million. The average gross annual disbursement over the four years 1969-72
was about £256 million (see Table 22). In 1972 the total was over £316
million, of which bilateral aid accounted for £265 million including £61
million technical assistance; assistance provided through multilateral agencies
was £51 million. Repayments of capital and payments of interest during the
year on loans made previously came to £67 million and £33 million respec¬
tively. The strategy for the Second UN Development Decade, adopted in
1970, included a recommendation that each developed country should devote
1 per cent of its gross national product (GNP) at market prices to total net
financial flows to developing countries by 1972, or 1975 at the latest. Britain
has undertaken to do its best to reach this target by 1975. In fact, between 1969
and 1971 British flows to developing countries exceeded 1 per cent of GNP
and in 1972 came very close to this target figure. The Government does not
accept the need for a separate target for official aid within the 1 per cent target,
though it has announced its intention to maintain official aid as a substantial
part of total flows. Private investment is also expected to play a substantial part,
and the Government has introduced measures to stimulate this flow to develop¬
ing countries.
Net British official flows in 1972 amounted to £250 million (0-41 per cent of
gross national product). Plans for public expenditure on economic aid, pub¬
lished in Public Expenditure to 1976-77 (see Bibliography, p. 476) show an
increase from £274-6 million in 1972-73 to £324 million in 1976-77, at 1972
prices, net of amortisation. Under this method of aid determination, introduced
in 1971, totals at constant prices, net of amortisation, are agreed by ministers
for five years ahead. The gross total, which is used for allocating funds to
various aid programmes, is arrived at by adding the estimated amortisation
receipts to the net figure. The volume of private flows, although influenced by
government policies, is not determined by the Government and is difficult to
predict, as also is the future level of the gross national product.
Bilateral financial aid in 1972 totalled £265 million; over 51 per cent was in
grants and the rest in loans. Budgetary aid, £6 million in 1972, is provided in
the form of grants. Development aid is in grants or loans, depending on the
economic and constitutional circumstances of the recipient countries, the
greater part of it is in loans. T he terms of new development loans from Britain
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
have been progressively softened since 1958 and a policy of making interest-
free loans to lighten the repayment burdens of the poorer developing countries
was introduced in June 1965. In 1972 the total value of bilateral loan commit¬
ments entered into by the British Government, excluding investments by the
Commonwealth Development Corporation (see p. 245), was £115 million and
of this over 86 per cent was on interest-free terms and over 13 per cent at an
interest rate of 2 per cent or less. The recipients included India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Bolivia, South Vietnam and Indonesia.
Where loans bear interest it is at fixed concessionary rates ranging from 2
per cent to 6 per cent, and both kinds of loan carry from two to seven years’
grace periods during which repayments of capital are not made. Of all loans
committed in 1972 the average maturity was 25 years. Britain has more than
fulfilled the 1969 recommendations of the Development Assistance Committee
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
on easing the terms of financial aid; and fully subscribes to new 1972 recom¬
mendations which simplify and improve the terms of financial aid to be aimed
at, and which introduce specially softer terms for a group of least-developed
countries.
Loans and grants are tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and services
from Britain, although there may be a limited element for local costs and up to
20 per cent of the total loan may be used for procurement from third countries
in appropriate cases. Between 1958 and the end of 1972, 371 loans were
negotiated involving a commitment of ^1,159 million, of which £1,000 million
has been disbursed. The recipients of the largest amounts have been India
and Pakistan. During the same period bilateral grant commitments amounted
to around £1,181 million.
Commonwealth
Countries
TABLE 22
Total Official
Flows to
Developing
Countries
1969-72
Historically, Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its
responsibilities towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains
on Commonwealth countries. In 1972 £218 million (82 per cent) of the bilateral
programme was disbursed to Commonwealth countries and dependencies.
£ million
Bilateral
Commonwealth countries (including
dependent territories)
Grants . .
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Other countries
Grants . .
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Contributions to multilateral agencies
Total ..
Total, net of amortisation (as used for
calculation of the 1 per cent target)
Interest receipts
1969
178-7
156-9
39-8
34-9
82-2
21-7
35
8- 7
9- 6
31-7
210-5
178-5
28-4
1970
198-9
176-2
36-6
35-5
104-1
22-8
3-8
10-1
8-9
19-8
218-8
188-9
29-3
1971
247-5
218-2
43-1
43-7
131-4
29- 2
6-4
9-6
13-1
30- 7
277-9
235-8
32-1
1972
265-2
218-0
68-4
47-8
101-8
47-2
6-3
13-0
27-9
51-1
316-3
249-8
33-2
Columns may not total because of rounding.
Source: British Aid Statistics
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
245
Technical
Assistance
Mulitlateral
Contributions
In the past, development aid to the dependent territories was given under
the Colonial Development and Welfare (CD & W) Acts, largely in the form
of grants. Expenditure on economic and social development up to the termina¬
tion of the Acts on 31st March 1970 amounted to some £450 million. The aid
requirements of the few remaining dependencies, which are regarded as a first
charge on aid funds, are now provided under the authority of the Overseas
Aid Act 1966. In 1972 the territories received £32 million in bilateral financial
aid and technical assistance.
An important role in development assistance is played by the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation (CDC), set up by the British Government
in 1948, which provides finance and management for development projects
in Commonwealth countries and dependencies, often in partnership with
governments or private enterprise. In 1969 the CDC’s borrowing powers were
increased and the area of its operations was extended to non-Commonwealth
countries. By the end of 1972 some £165 million had been invested out of a
total commitment of £202 million. Of the latter, ^43 million was in the Far
East, £50 million in the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder in Africa.
New investment approved in 1972 totalled over £21 million.
Expenditure on bilateral technical assistance (the provision of skilled person¬
nel, advice and training) has increased in recent years and was £61 million,
23 per cent of total aid, in 1972. The largest component of expenditure (£35
million in 1972) was on sending or maintaining experts, including volunteers;
the next largest was for students and trainees in Britain (£9 million).
Under the Overseas Service Aid Scheme (OSAS) and associated schemes
Britain meets the additional costs of employing experienced expatriate British
personnel in the public services of developing countries. The schemes cost
.£15 million in 1972.
During 1972, of the 13,500 British persons other than volunteers who were
working in developing countries and financed by the British Government,
some 6,200 were engaged in the field of education, 2,600 in public works and
communications, 1,400 in public administration, 1,300 in agriculture and
allied fields, and 1,000 in health services.
In addition, under the British Volunteer Programme in 1972 there were
2,800 volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in develop¬
ing countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by four voluntary bodies; 75 per cent of the British
costs (;£o-7 million in 1972) are met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 13,800 were financed in Britain in 1972 under regional pro¬
grammes of technical assistance, by awards under the Commonwealth Educa¬
tion Co-operation Scholarships and Bursary Schemes, and under the various
schemes of the British Council.
Britain is the second largest contributor (after the United States) to the World
Bank group of institutions—the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the International Development Association (IDA) and the Inter¬
national Finance Corporation. The British commitment to IDA in the three
years 1968-70 was nearly £65 million; the proposed contribution for the three
years 1971-73 is nearly £130 million. Britain has contributed, or has agreed
to contribute, to the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Develop¬
ment Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the African Development
Bank. Britain has contributed £66 million to the United Nations Development
246
WHOLESALE
TRADES
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Programme since its inception in 1950 and has provided more experts
and training places under multilateral schemes than any other country. Some
1,593 British nationals were serving in developing countries under the United
Nations and its specialised agencies in 1972. Other contributions include
those to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(UNRWA), the World Food Programme and the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF).
INTERNAL TRADE
Internal trade can be divided into two broad categories: trade in raw materials,
capital goods and intermediate products (for example, vehicle components)
and trade in consumer goods, involving the network of distributive trades by
which home produced or imported goods reach the consumer. (For the pattern
of consumers’ expenditure, see p. 204).
There have been a number of official statistical enquiries into the distribu¬
tive trades. The latest censuses taken in Great Britain refer to the wholesale
trades in 1965 and the retail trades and certain service trades in 1971. Sample
monthly and annual enquiries are also undertaken, covering such aspects of
the distributive trades as turnover, stocks and capital expenditure.
Only a proportion of the trade in consumer goods passes through wholesalers:
sales are also made to consumers through producers’ own selling organisations
(including their own retail outlets and mail order businesses); and other sales
are made directly by producers to retailers. The 1965 enquiry showed that a
total of 23,643 business units were engaged in wholesale distribution in Great
Britain; 3,435 dealt in clothing, footwear and textiles, 2,007 in grocery and
provisions, 2,630 in vegetables and fruit, and 3,469 in other food and in drink.
In addition, there were 8,282 dealers (wholesale or retail) in coal, builders’
materials, grain or agricultural supplies, and 9,117 dealers in other industrial
materials and machinery. The book value of stocks held by wholesalers and
dealers at the end of 1972 was £1,928 million; expenditure on capital assets
during the year was about £136 million.
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according to the type of merchandise
handled. Fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to port wholesalers (who
sell to inland wholesalers at the main distribution centres) or, increasingly, is
sold by contract to fryers and processors, or direct to retailers. Fruit and
vegetables may be sold by growers to commission agents (who dispose of the
produce either to wholesalers or direct to retailers) or the grower may deal
only with wholesale firms. The sale of some agricultural products is regulated
by statutory marketing boards (see p. 328).
London’s wholesale markets play a leading part in the distribution of food¬
stuffs, particularly imported supplies. Every year Covent Garden (see p. 329)
handles over 1 million tons of fruit and vegetables, and about 300,000 tons
of meat and poultry pass through Smithfield market; Billingsgate is the prin¬
cipal distributing centre for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has established its own wholesale
organisation to serve the needs of retail societies. The sales of the largest
wholesale society (the Co-operative Wholesale Society), the membership of
which is restricted to incorporated co-operative organisations, amounted to
£581 million in 1972. The other large society, the Scottish Co-operative
Society (formed by a merger of the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society
(SCWS) and the Scottish Co-operative Retail Services in January 1973)
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 247
merged with the Co-operative Wholesale Society in July 1973. Sales of the
SCWS in 1972 amounted to ^93 million.
Since the early 1950s, many wholesalers have joined, either singly or in
groups, with numbers of retailers to form voluntary groups to help to preserve
the existence of retail outlets for the wholesaler and to give to retailers the
advantages of the lower costs of large-scale trading without significant loss of
independence. The 1966 Census of Distribution showed that about 41 per
cent of the turnover of independent grocers was attributable to wholesaler-
sponsored voluntary groups and chains. About 31,000 grocers accounting for
nearly a quarter of the total market are members of voluntary groups.
The number of Cash and Carry wholesale warehouses is increasing. By bulk
purchasing and limiting their expenditure on attractive surroundings or credit
and delivery facilities they can offer large price discounts to bulk-buying retail
traders. There are about 600 stores of this type with total sales of over £600
million a year. Cash and Carry wholesalers account for over two-fifths of all
grocery warehousing.
RETAIL TRADE
Types of
Retailers
Multiples and
Large Establish¬
ments
Retail
Co-operative
Societies
Retail businesses in Britain may be classified under four headings: (1) multiple
traders with ten or more branches; (2) retail co-operative societies; (3) inde¬
pendent retail businesses, including for this purpose the small multiple stores
(that is, chains of stores with nine or fewer branches) and (4) department stores.
Other retail outlets include gas and electricity showrooms and mail order
houses (see p. 250).
Provisional results of the 1971 Census of Distribution (Table 23) indicate a
continuation of the trend for a larger volume of trade to be handled by rather
fewer shops, particularly in the food sector, along with the continuing expan¬
sion of large multiple firms relative to other types of shop. Independent shops
account for just over half of the value of Britain’s retail trade although they
make up more than four-fifths of the number of shops.
A very wide range is covered in the size of retailing establishments. Four
shops had sales in 1966 exceeding £10 million (equivalent to takings of more
than £4,000 an hour). At the other extreme there were more than 16,000 shops
with sales of less than £1,000 a year. In addition there were market and street
traders, whose volume of business may be very small.
According to the Census of Distribution there were over 67,000 shops owned
by multiples (including multiple department stores) in 1971 with a total turn¬
over of over £6,000 million. In 1966 there had been 74,000 shops with sales
of £4,000 million. The fall in numbers, combined with the increase in sales,
reflects the trend for individual shops to become larger and handle a greater
volume of sales. In 1971 the multiples’ share of total sales was about 43 per
cent, compared with 35 per cent in 1966.
The share in total retail trade of co-operative stores dropped from 11 to 9 per
cent between 1961 and 1966 and fell again between 1966 and 1971 when it was
7 per cent. Their share of sales from food shops was 12 per cent compared
with 18 per cent in 1961 and 15 per cent in 1966.
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisations controlled by
their members. Membership is open to anyone paying a small deposit on a
minimum share, which entitles the member to an equal voice with other
members in the society. Share investment by individual members is limited
to £1,000 (less in some societies) and only a low rate of interest is normally
paid on the shares. One large society is introducing a scheme of bonus shares
carrying a higher rate of interest than the ordinary shares.
248
Independent Shops
Department Stores
Retail Trade
Organisation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Traditionally the trading surplus was paid out to members in the form of a
dividend in proportion to their purchases. Recently a large number of societies,
accounting for over four-fifths of total co-operative sales, have introduced
dividend stamps redeemable for cash, other goods, or credit to a share account,
at different redemption rates.
In February 1973 there were about 246 retail co-operative societies. Amal¬
gamations are rapidly diminishing the number of societies (the total in 1958
was 1,015). The largest single society in Britain is Co-operative Retail Services
Limited with 1-29 million members and a turnover of £146 million in 1972.
Total sales of the retail co-operative societies in 1971 amounted to about
£1,100 million and accounted for over 7 per cent of total retail trade.
Independent shops have been giving ground gradually in the face of increased
competition from the larger undertakings. The number of independent shops
fell by about 9 per cent between 1961 and 1966, but the decline has been partly
reduced by the existence of voluntary buying groups (see p. 247) and between
1966 and 1971 there was little change in numbers. Although the independent
shops’ share of trade continued to fall, it still amounts to 53 per cent, and they
continue to play an important role, often in terms of convenience, service, and
range of goods stocked. The proprietors of many of the smaller shops have
other means of livelihood.
Department stores were defined for the purposes of the census as having 25 or
more persons engaged in selling a wide range of commodities notably clothing
and household goods.
There were 914 department stores in Britain in 1971 with a turnover of
£938 million; 296 were owned by multiples and 369 by independents. Co¬
operative societies owned 249 department stores in 1971, with a turnover of
£156 million. Between 1966 and 1971 sales by department stores rose by some
44 per cent.
Out of a total of some 485,000 establishments recorded by the 1971 Census
of Distribution, and shown in Table 23, grocery and other food retailing
groups numbered nearly 202,000 establishments and the clothing and foot¬
wear group over 81,000.
Though the total value of retail trade in Great Britain (inclusive of elec¬
tricity and gas showrooms and mail order business) rose by nearly 37 per cent
between 1966 and 1971, rates of growth (measured in turnover) varied appre¬
ciably between different types of trade. The slowest growth was in confec¬
tionery, tobacconist, newsagent, clothing and ‘other food’ sectors. The fastest
growth was in department stores, mail order business, gas and electricity
showroom sales, household goods, groceries and provisions, and other non¬
foods’. # . .
However, the actual trends are blurred by the introduction into specialised
shops of other specialities, for example, clothing multiples opening food
sections, and vice versa. Though gas and electricity showroom business was
buoyant between 1966 and i97I> combined turnover is relatively small,
amounting in 1971 to £283 million.
The expansion in the value of sales in Great Britain between 1966 and 1972,
when they were valued at £17,200 million, was about 49 per cent. Taking into
account the general increase in prices over this period, the real expansion of
sales by all kinds of retail businesses between 1966 and 1972 was 10 per cent.
The Northern Ireland 1965 Census of Retail Distribution and Other Ser-
TABLE 23
(Retail Trades by
Type of Business
Development
in Methods
of Retailing
Supermarkets
Automatic Vending
Machines
Mobile Shops
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
249
Type of Trade
Grocers and provision dealers
Other food retailers
Confectioners, tobacconists, news¬
agents . .
Clothing and footwear shops
Household goods shops . .
Other non-food retailers ..
General stores
Total
Electricity and gas showrooms
Mail order businesses®
Automatic vending
machine operators®
Establishments
Number
1971
107,563
94,281
54,024
81,139
73,664
70,371
4,304
485,346
2,359
676
60
Percent¬
age
change
1966-71
-12-8
-9-7
-14-7
-2-5
+ 5-1
+ 22-4
+ 52-0
-3-8
-21-8
+ 36-6
+ 7-1
Turnover
£ million
1971
3,993
2,606
1,297
2,248
1,939
1,573
1,562
15,217
283
619
11
Percent¬
age
change
1966-71
+ 37-4
+ 25-2
+ 24-0
+ 29-1
+46-1
+ 59-3
+ 50-0
+ 36-7
+ 52-0
+44-3
® Number of organisations.
vices shows total spending of ^3^5 million through 22,000 establishments. The
value increased by 28 per cent between 1965 and 1972.
1 he development of self-service trading has been a feature of the last two
decades. In 1969 there were some 23,000 stores operating wholly or partly
on self-service lines, compared with about 9,500 towards the end of 1961 and
less than 500 in i95°* The number in 1971 was estimated to be over 28,000.
This development has been accompanied by a trend to larger shops in terms
of both staff and floor space.
Supermarkets may be defined as self-service shops with a minimum selling
area of 2,000 square feet. There were about 870 supermarkets in 1961, accord¬
ing to the Census of Distribution; by 1971 it was estimated that there were
some 4,800 handling nearly one-third of all retail food.
New forms of automatic vending machines have come to the fore since 1955.
About 400,000 machines are in use. Organisations operating automatic
vending machines (not otherwise engaged in retail trade) numbered 60 in
1971, and sales from machines totalled nearly £11 million. In 1966 the same
turnover consisted of £6 million on sales of cigarettes and tobacco, £2 million
on confectionery, ^2*5 million on hot and cold beverages and ^0-5 million on
prepared foodstuffs and other commodities.
Some 24,300 mobile shops and market stalls were reported in the Census of
Distribution for 1971, with sales amounting to £98 million. Scotland (where
the density of population is lower than in England) accounted for nearly a
quarter of this turnover, compared with a tenth of all retail sales. Co-operative
societies accounted for 39 per cent of sales through mobile food shops, against
16 per cent in ordinary food shops. Mobile shops were mainly concerned with
food sales; about two-fifths were travelling grocers, and over one-fifth were
greengrocers and butchers respectively. Only a small proportion were non-food
shops, and these specialised mainly in paraffin supplies and hardware.
25°
‘Out of Town'
Stores
Promotional
Offers
‘Credit Cards'
Mail Order
Sales and
Direct Selling
Service Trades
Catering
Laundries and
Dry Cleaning
Motor Trades
Hairdressing
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A number of large ‘out of town’ stores (hypermarkets) are being opened, pro¬
viding a much wider range of goods under one roof than supermarkets, and
associated with extensive car parking facilities, away from established central
shopping areas.
Forms of consumer sales promotion include reduced price offers, competi¬
tions, gift schemes, and stamp trading. Trading stamps are normally exchanged
for goods but, by law, have to be marked with a cash value and where their
aggregate value is £0-25 or more, redeemed for cash on request.
The ‘credit card’ is widely used in Britain. The cards enable users to have
their signatures accepted on bills in participating shops, hotels and restaurants.
The issuers, which include banks, then meet the bills and recover from the
card-holder through a single account presented periodically.
Mail order trading which was one of the most rapidly growing forms of s^ing
in Britain between 1961 and 1966 slowed its growth rate between 1966 and
1971 although the increase in sales over that period was still strong (44 per
cent). Turnover amounted to £619 million in 1971, when it accounted for
nearly 4 per cent of total retail sales. . , . ,
The Direct Sales and Service Association consists of 25 companies which
sell all their products directly to the consumers. Sales by members of the
association amounted to over £300 million in 1972.
Closely connected with the distributive trades are those which offer a service
directly to the public, notably catering and hotel trades, laundries and dry
cleaners, garage and motor repair trades, hairdressers and shoe repairers.
There were nearly 100,000 establishments concerned with catering (defined to
include public houses, canteens and fish and chip shops, as well as lice™^d
hotels and restaurants) in 1969, compared with nearly 150,000 in 1964. Ihe
1969 turnover was some £2,444 million, an increase of about 22 ?e^ <:ent-
Hotels and holiday camps had receipts of about £408 million, of which £174
million was from residential accommodation. Nearly two-thirds of the total
turnover of the catering trades was from the sale of alcoholic drinks. There
were 203 catering contractors in operation and over 14,000 industrial and office
canteens. In addition, about 100,000 offices and factories have installed coin-
operated beverage and snack machines.
In 1071 there were over 8,000 launderettes, dry cleaning businesses, com¬
mercial laundries and linen and overalls hire businesses. The 1971 turnover
amounted to nearly £200 million.
There were nearly 43,000 businesses in the motor trades in Britain in 1967
with 51,000 establishments. Total turnover amounted to £4,234 million, ol
which sales of new vehicles accounted for £1,510 million and sales of used
vehicles for £766 million. The value of sales of accessories, receipts from
repairs and servicing and sales of petrol and oil amounted to £1 958 million
Between 1967 and 1972 the motor trades turnover increased rapidly by about
73 per cent and in 1972 was 16 per cent more than in 1971. Of the total turn¬
over of about £7,325 million in 1972, sales of new vehicles accounted for some
40 per cent, sales of second-hand vehicles for 17 per cent and other sales for
the remainder.
The 1971 Census recorded over 47,000 hairdressing establishments with a
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Shoe Repairs
Other
Packaging
Instalment
Credit
Advertising
Public Relations
251
total turnover of £165 million. About two-thirds of the number are ladies’
hairdressers.
In 1971 there were some 6,300 boot and shoe repair establishments, the
number having fallen by over a quarter since 1966; takings in 1971 were £25
million, slightly below the 1966 level.
Other establishments offering a service to the public include those of radio and
television rental companies (over 2,500 specialist shops), about 14,500 licensed
betting offices and over 3,500 funeral undertaking businesses.
In Britain the expansion of self-service shops, the spread of branded and
standardised products, and developments in partly prepared foods, for
example, ready-washed vegetables and ready-made cake mixes, have all been
major factors in the sweeping changes which have taken place in packaging
methods. Paper packaging, including cartons and boxes, remains the most
extensively used (turnover of some £500 million a year), the fastest growing
sector being paper sacks (£42 million in 1972). Other important materials are
tinplate, plastics, glass. New uses are being found for tinplate, especially
in sales of soft drinks and beer; sales of glass bottles and jars for newer
packaging uses at £63 million greatly exceed sales for their traditional use as
containers for wines, spirits, beer and cider (£47 million). The use of plastics
continues to develop; output of plastics films is some 98,000 tons per year
and that of polypropylene about 1,904 tons, while the annual output of low-
density polyethylene bottles has risen to about 639 million, providing further
competition for the traditional glass bottle.
1 he rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such
as cars, furniture, washing machines, television sets, refrigerators and cookers,
has been greatly helped by instalment purchase. Total new credit extended in
1972 amounted to over £2,452 million, 22 per cent more than in 1971; about
half was advanced by finance companies and half by retailers.
Hire-purchase in Northern Ireland directly financed by the major finance
houses operating from offices in Northern Ireland amounted in 1972 to
£31-6 million.
About £708 million is estimated to have been spent on all forms of advertising
in 1972; as a proportion of the gross national product (1*3 per cent) and of con¬
sumer expenditure (i#8 per cent), it has fallen slightly over the last ten years.
About £480 million was spent on display advertising and £228 million on
classified, financial and industrial advertising. Most of the advertising is carried
out by agencies, which, in some cases, also provide marketing, consumer re¬
search and other services; their representative organisation is the Institute of
Practitioners in Advertising. The trade association for the whole industry,
including agencies, advertisers and media owners, is the Advertising Associa¬
tion. It was responsible for the setting up of the Advertising Standards
Authority, an independent body whose objective is the promotion and en¬
forcement of the highest standards of advertising, in particular through the
British Code of Advertising Practice.
Industry and commerce pay great attention to improving public understand¬
ing of their work and objectives. Public relations consultancy firms and the
public relations departments of advertising agencies provide general services,
apart from the increasing employment by industrial organisations and trade
252
Consumer
Protection
Legislation
Consumer
Organisations
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
associations of staff specialists in public relations. Their professional body,
founded in 1948, is The Institute of Public Relations which has members in
commerce, industry, the professions, national associations, and central and
local government.
There are various legislative measures to protect the consumer against specific
abuses. The most important are the Weights and Measures Act 1963 and the
Trade Descriptions Acts 1968 and 1972, which are enforced by local weights
and measures authorities; the Food and Drugs Acts 1955 and 1956 which
control the purity, hygiene and description of food and are enforced by local
food and drugs authorities; and the Consumer Protection Act 1961 which
empowers the Government to make regulations to ensure the safety of any
class of goods. The Hire-Purchase Act 1965 and the Hire-Purchase (Scotland)
Act 1965 provide safeguards to the consumer who buys goods on hire-purchase
or credit sale terms. Similar legislation operates in Northern Ireland.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 created the office of Director General of Fair
Trading with wide-ranging powers to regulate or prohibit trading practices
which adversely affect consumer interests.
Under the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 the purchaser cannot
be deprived of his right to be supplied with goods of merchantable quality and
fit for their purpose.
Independent consumer councils attached to each of the nationalised industries
investigate consumer complaints. Many trade associations in commerce and
industry have codes of practice and look into complaints about member firms.
The British Standards Institution (see p. 264) has established a number of
standards for consumer goods, and the Design Council (see p. 264) helps to
foster improvements in the design of consumer goods. ^
A number of private organisations further the consumer s interests. The
largest is the Consumers’ Association (CA) with a membership of over 600,000.
The CA conducts an extensive programme of comparative testing of goods
bought on the open market. Its views and test reports are published in its
monthly bulletin Which?, issued to members.
Work of this kind is also carried out by local groups, whose representative
body is the National Federation of Consumer Groups. Other private con¬
sumer organisations include the Housewife’s Trust and the Research Institute
for Consumer Affairs. A general advisory service is provided by the Citizens
Advice Bureaux (see p. 128), and by some local authorities.
14 Industry
The Structure
of Industry
Manufacturing
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised, and today about 16 people work in manufacturing, mining and
building for every one engaged in agriculture. It is the world’s fourth largest
exporter of manufactured goods, and the range of its industrial manufactures
reflects its position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal,
corporate, co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different
forms, and all are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary from
the many small workshops to vast organisations such as the National Coal
Board, a public corporation with about 335,000 employees, Imperial Chemical
Industries Ltd. and the General Electric Company Ltd., which, with labour
forces in the United Kingdom of 135,000 and 171,000 respectively, are among
the largest limited liability companies; and the Co-operative Wholesale Society
Ltd., with about 23,000 employees.
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Exceptions include
fissile materials and radioactive isotopes, made by two statutory companies;
iron, steel and a small range of chemicals from the plants of the British Steel
Corporation; aero-engines made by Rolls-Royce (1971) Ltd.; locomotives and
rolling-stock built in the workshops of British Railways; and military equip¬
ment and supplies made in establishments of the defence services. Staff of the
Stationery Office do some printing and bookbinding. Certain factories giving
employment to the severely disabled are operated by Remploy Ltd., a non-
profit-making public company financed on the Vote of the Department of
Employment, which appoints the directors (see p. 375). The Government
holds about 49 per cent of the equity of a major oil company, British Petroleum
Limited, and has a controlling interest in a few other companies.
The most recent complete analysis of the size distribution of establishments
and enterprises in manufacturing industry, and of the degree of concentration,
is contained in the Report on the Census of Production 1968. This shows that
some 64 per cent (59,000) of the 92,000 or so establishments which submitted
returns had fewer than 25 employees each, and accounted for 7 per cent of
total employment; some 28,000 establishments, nearly one-third of the total,
had between 25-500 employees, and accounted for over two-fifths of the total
labour force; 2,400 establishments, each with between 500 and 2,000 em¬
ployees, were responsible for 28 per cent of employment; while 21 per cent
was in the hands of the 409 leading groups each with over 2,000 employees. A
high proportion of the biggest establishments were in the heavy industries;
the average size of establishments in industries making consumer goods was
smaller than in manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results
obtained in earlier years suggested a slow but significant trend towards in¬
creased average size of establishments.
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of manu¬
facturing enterprises, as a single enterprise may own several establishments,
254
Building and
Civil Engineering
Mining and
Quarrying
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
not all of them necessarily engaged in the same or similar activities. An enter¬
prise, as defined in the 1968 census, normally consists of either a single firm
or a parent company together with its subsidiaries. Just over 34 per cent of all
employment in British manufacturing industries in 1968 was accounted for
by more than 1,000 large private enterprises employing 1,000 or more people,
the largest 100 or so accounting roughly for a third. A further indication of
company size is the value of capital employed (net assets). In the case of three
companies, the Imperial Chemical Industries group, British Petroleum and
Shell Transport and Trading, the figure exceeds ^2,000 million; about 81
companies registered in Britain have over £100 million net assets.
With intensified competition in the economy and, in many branches of
industry, the growing dependence of profitable operation on concentration and
an increasing scale of production, the trend towards mergers and regrouping
gathered momentum throughout the last decade. Larger units of control have
been established in almost all the leading industries and in some a small
number of big companies and their subsidiaries are responsible for most of
total production. Examples are oil refining, non-ferrous metal smelting, motor
vehicles and aircraft, heavy electrical engineering, electronics, machine tools,
brewing, textiles, basic chemicals, tobacco and magazine publishing. Shares
in these companies are usually distributed among a great number of holders
and it is rare for a few large holders to have a controlling interest. For example,
43 of the largest public companies each have more than 100,000 shareholders.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on
pp. 290-313.
Large-scale building and civil engineering work is usually carried out by
private contractors, although the Department of the Environment (see p. 52)
is the largest single employer of building labour while 37 per cent of the in¬
dustry’s output is for the public sector. Building firms may be divided into
those undertaking general building and civil engineering work and those con¬
cerned with highly specialised work, many of which operate outside as well as
inside the building industry. Building is an industry of small firms; some
90 per cent of the firms employ fewer than 25 employees. For a fuller account
of the building and civil engineering industries, see p. 288.
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining.
Britain’s coalmining industry is operated as a single co-ordinated enterprise
under National Coal Board direction. Nearly all other mining and quarrying
(sand, gravel, chalk, limestone, salt, tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is under¬
taken by private enterprises, usually owned and operated by limited liability
companies; about 44,000 workers are employed, excluding coalmining.
Monopolies and
Restrictive
Practices
Legislation provides for the registration and judicial examination of restrictive
trading agreements and the investigation by an independent administrative
body of monopoly situations. Under the Fair Trading Act 1973, the Director-
General of Fair Trading carries out functions in relation to restrictive trading
agreements, monopoly situations and mergers, and protection of consumers.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Acts 1956 and 1968 as amended by the h air
Trading Act 1973 govern the registration and judicial examination of restrictive
agreements. They require the entry in a public register of the particulars of a
wide range of restrictive agreements (including those relating to common
prices, approved lists of dealers and the limitation of production) which affect
the supply of goods or commercial services for the United Kingdom market.
Proposed agreements of national importance which promote efficiency or
INDUSTRY
Role of Public
Enterprise
255
provide for new productive capacity can be exempted from this requirement
for a specified period by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (see
p. 262). The Director General of Fair Trading is responsible for keeping the
register and for bringing the agreements before the Restrictive Practices
Court set up under the 1956 Act. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy
the court that special circumstances set out in the legislation exist, and that
the restriction is not unreasonable, having regard to the balance between the
benefit it confers and any public detriment likely to result from its operation,
that restriction must be found contrary to the public interest. Agreements are
void in respect of restrictions so found. The court can make orders preventing
the parties from operating their agreement, or from making new arrangements
having the same effect. Agreements relating exclusively to exports are not
subject to this procedure but have to be notified to the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry.
Under the 1956 Act collective enforcement of resale price maintenance was
prohibited, but individual suppliers remained free to enforce minimum resale
prices in the courts. The Resale Prices Act 1964 made minimum resale price
maintenance unlawful, except in respect of classes of registered goods for
which temporary exemption has been sought under the provisions of the Act.
The Director General of Fair Trading has a duty to specify the goods and
services in respect of which the court has refused to make an order of exemp¬
tion from the terms of the Act. Only two classes of goods (books and maps and
medicaments) have so far gained exemption under an order from the court;
nearly 500 classes have been refused exemption.
Monopolies and kindred arrangements (other than those within the scope
of the Restrictive Practices Court) may be referred for investigation and
report to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission by the Director General
of Fair Trading or by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, or in the
case of statutory bodies only by the Secretary of State together with other
ministers where appropriate. If the commission finds that monopoly condi¬
tions operate against the public interest, the Department of Trade and Industry
has powers to remedy or prevent harm which in its opinion may result. The
Fair Trading Act replaces, with revised provision, the Monopolies and Mergers
Acts 1948 and 1965 and makes several changes to widen the scope within
which monopoly and merger situations can be referred for investigation by the
commission. The market share by reference to which monopoly is defined is
reduced from one-third to one-quarter, and there are new powers to refer
local monopolies and public sector industries to the commission. The special
provisions relating to newspaper mergers, and the provisions relating to other
merger cases, remain substantially unaltered. A merger may be referred to the
commission by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if it results in,
or strengthens, a monopoly situation, or if the value of assets taken over exceeds
IS million.
Direct State participation in productive and commercial activities is effected
mainly through special statutory bodies set up to deal with a particular
activity. Such bodies, though not part of a government department, are under
a considerable but varying degree of public control (see below). The most
important of these statutory bodies are the public corporations which operate
major industries and services in the public interest. Altogether about 12 per
cent of the labour force works for these bodies. Their managing boards and
staffs are chosen for their experience and competence in a particular field; they
are not civil servants, and, although accountable to Parliament for their actions
256
Industrial
Association
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring depart¬
ments who are responsible for the management of the corporations. Certain of
the corporations are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer grants to help
them carry out duties with which they have been charged.
These corporations are described in their relevant sections.
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working
of the boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies
from industry to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them.
First, the minister appoints (and may dismiss) the chairman and members of
each board, and, secondly, he has power to give general directions as to how
the industry should be run, but does not interfere in day-to-day management.
It is usually also laid down that the board shall give to the minister any in¬
formation, statistics and financial accounts which he may require. In practice,
as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and major policy decisions
are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom occasion for him to
issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual
statutory requirement is that the board is required to conduct its business so
that receipts at least balance outgoings. However, financial targets have been
agreed by the Government with the different industries (or are under dis¬
cussion) ranging from 12-4 per cent gross return on capital employed to
‘breaking even’ after interest and depreciation have been allowed for. In
addition the industries are expected to apply a test discount rate for new
investment of 10 per cent. The responsible minister is usually empowered
(subject to Treasury approval) to say what shall be done with any surplus
revenues which may accrue. As regards finance for capital expenditure, the
present system is that finance which cannot be met from internal sources is
provided mainly by interest bearing loans from the Exchequer and in certain
cases by borrowing from abroad (see p. 212).
It is usual for the minister responsible for each nationalised industry to be
required by statute to take steps to see that the interests of the industry’s
customers are protected. This is generally done by the establishment of
representative consumers’ councils to consider complaints and suggestions
made to them, and to advise the board or the minister on the changes they
think desirable. ... . • 1 •
Government policy towards the nationalised industries is subject to the
approval of Parliament. Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are
afforded by debates, including debates on their annual reports and accounts,
and by answers to parliamentary questions, which, in principle, are admissible
only if concerned with policy rather than details of administration. A House of
Commons Select Committee on the Nationalised Industries, which examines
the reports and accounts of the nationalised industries and reports to Parlia¬
ment, has been in operation since 1957.
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings
have increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different
purposes. Some of the more important of these are classified as: (1) the pro¬
vision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison with the
Government, and representation of their members’ point of view; (2) the
regulation of trading practices, sometimes including the regulation of prices
(see p. 255); (3) negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of
work. Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with varying
completeness, most of British industry, but there are wide sectors of industry
INDUSTRY
257
Location
Greater London
and the South-east
Region
where there are no collective agreements to regulate trading practices. Em¬
ployers’ organisations which deal with labour matters usually consist of firms
engaged in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. Trade
associations, concerned mainly with representation to the Government, the
provision of common services and the regulation of trading practices are
normally composed of firms manufacturing a particular product or group of
products. In an industrial sector concerned wholly with an allied group of
products, a single association may undertake all the required functions.
There are about 70 national federations and some 1,400 employers’
organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or branches of the
national federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages and conditions of
work (see also p. 384). The number of manufacturers’ associations concerned
with providing common services is not known precisely but is thought to total
some 1,200, varying greatly in importance, structure and activities.
The central body representing British industry nationally is the Confedera¬
tion of British Industry (CBI). It is recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representa¬
tives of private employers as a whole. For its members it acts as an advisory and
consultative body providing them with information and statistics, ascertaining
their collective views and representing them nationally to the Government
and the public and also internationally, for example in the Council of Euro¬
pean Industrial Federations. CBI representatives sit on a number of govern¬
ment advisory committees, on other statutory bodies and on voluntary bodies
concerned with matters affecting industry.
The CBI membership consists of some 11,800 companies, 195 trade
associations and employers’ federations and 37 commercial associations.
Nationalised industries have joined as industrial associates. The CBI has a
regional organisation in the United Kingdom and is widely represented abroad.
In matters of common concern the CBI often acts jointly with the chambers
of commerce. These are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist
to promote the interests of local industry and commerce. The Association of
British Chambers of Commerce, founded in i860, is the central organisation
to which approximately 100 local chambers of commerce (together with 20
British Chambers of Commerce operating abroad) are affiliated. In Scotland
there is an additional central organisation, the Scottish Chamber of Commerce,
and in Northern Ireland, the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and
Industry to which local chambers are affiliated.
The following is a summary of the geographical distribution of British in¬
dustry today, grouped according to the eight standard regions of England,
plus Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
London is Britain’s capital and main communication centre, and is probably
still the world’s most important financial centre. Lying at the head of ocean
navigation on the Thames estuary it is one of the world’s largest cities and
largest ports, though much deep-sea-going traffic has moved down-river to
Tilbury docks. It is the main centre in Britain of printing and the manufac¬
ture of clothing, food and drink, furniture, materials for the arts, precision
instruments and many other specialised products. Small firms predominate in
many of these industries and the average size of manufacturing firms (parti¬
cularly in the central area) is well below the national average. London is also
important, especially in its outer ring, for light engineering, chemicals and
consumer goods and has some heavy engineering plants and a number of
leading research establishments.
258
South-west
Englatid
East Anglia
West Midlands
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Towards the periphery of Greater London (population 7,353,810) and in
the new urban development outside it, industry, particularly the electronics
and a variety of consumer goods industries, has expanded greatly; some of the
largest aircraft plants are in these areas, for example at Weybridge and Hatfield,
as well as factories, at Dagenham, Luton and Dunstable, of two of the four
main motor vehicle manufacturers. There are other major motor vehicle
manufacturing plants at Cowley, Oxford (112,000), some 50 miles north-west
of London. Along the lower Thames and Medway estuaries there are large oil
refineries as well as some smaller shipyards, engineering works and major
concentrations of the paper and pulp and cement industries.
A great part of the Channel coast eastwards from Poole (population 109,000)
and Bournemouth (149,000) consists of built-up areas, which from Brighton
(164,000) eastwards are partly dormitories for people working in London.
Holiday resorts fringe the coast. Portsmouth (207,000) is a naval port with
some shipbuilding and general manufactures. Southampton (214,000) is
Britain’s largest port for ocean-going liners; its industries include ship repair¬
ing, oil refining, cable-making, electronics and synthetic rubber. Dover,
Folkestone and Newhaven are packet ports.
Though famous for its tourism, leisure industries and agriculture, the south¬
west of England has a busy manufacturing sector. In the Camborne, Redruth,
Falmouth and St. Austell areas (93,000), Cornwall has china clay and tin
mining, and machinery manufacture, ship repairing and other forms of
engineering. Plymouth (250,000) with the naval dockyard and electrical and
other industries, is an important manufacturing centre. The towns of Glou¬
cester (91,000), Cheltenham (76,000) and Bath (85,000) are major producers
of machinery, instrumentation and other engineering products. Swindon
(90,000) has vehicle, electrical and electronic engineering. Clothing, footwear,
and other textile products are made at several centres. Bristol (422,000), the
region’s administrative and commercial centre, is a leading port and the
largest industrial city, having food processing, tobacco, packaging materials,
printing, aerospace, machinery and a wide range of other industries ; there are
extensive modern docks at Avonmouth, an industrialised suburb with impor
tant basic chemicals and non-ferrous metal plants.
Besides being one of the most productive agricultural regions, the eastern
counties possess some sizeable towns. Cambridge (100,000) is a leading centre
of research-based industry; Ipswich (123,000) and Peterborough (71,000) are
noted for diesel engines, agricultural machinery and engineering generally;
and Norwich (120,000) for footwear and food manufacture. Food canning and
freezing, based mainly on locally grown produce, have developed rapidly.
The fishing ports of Great Yarmouth (50,000) and Lowestoft (53,000) have
fish processing plants, and have also become important bases for companies
engaged in petroleum and natural gas exploitation in the North Sea.
The main concentration of industry in the West Midlands is in the conurba¬
tion which includes Birmingham (1,007,000), Wolverhampton (269,000),
Dudley (186,000), Walsall (184,000), West Bromwich (165,000), Warley
(162,000) and Solihull (108,000) and in Coventry (336,000). The economy of
the conurbation and Coventry is dominated by the metal-using industries, in
particular by motor vehicle manufacture which itself draws substantially from
the mechanical and electrical engineering industries. Other notable industries
include jewellery, rubber products, chemicals and domestic metalware.
The manufacture of pottery and china is the most important industry in the
INDUSTRY
259
East Midlands
North-west
England
smaller conurbation of north Staffordshire centred upon Stoke on Trent
(262,000). Other manufactures such as rubber and electrical products have
developed in the area in recent years, but coalmining has contracted.
Other industrial centres include Stafford (55,000), heavy electrical and other
engineering; Worcester (74,000), engineering; Burton on Trent (50,000),
brewing and rubber; Kidderminster (49,000), carpets; and Rugby (60,000),
electrical engineering. An important tourist centre is Stratford-upon-Avon
(20,000), the birthplace of William Shakespeare.
The industrial cities and towns of the East Midlands include Leicester
(281,000), noted for hosiery and knitwear, boots and shoes and machinery for
making these products; Derby (219,000) for general engineering, aero-engines
and man-made fibres; Nottingham (300,000) for hosiery, cycles and a variety
of other engineering products, lace, pharmaceutical products and tobacco;
Northampton (127,000), footwear and engineering; and Chesterfield (70,000),
engineering. Corby (48,000), a new town in Northamptonshire, has a large
integrated steel works. Part of Britain’s richest and most highly mechanised
coalfield lies under the north-east of the area. Some of the towns on the coal¬
field, such as Mansfield (58,000), have important manufacturing industries,
particularly textiles.
Manchester (541,000) is Britain’s second most important commercial and
financial centre and a major port. It is the commercial hub of the cotton and
man-made fibre textiles industries and one of the chief centres for electrical
and heavy engineering and an industrial centre for the production of a wide
range of goods including machine tools, petrochemicals, dyestuffs, and
pharmaceuticals. The traditional cotton-manufacturing towns circling Man¬
chester, while adapting to the increasing use of man-made fibres, have seen
engineering outgrow the textile industry. The largest towns are Bolton
(154,000), Stockport (140,000), Oldham (106,000), Blackburn (102,000),
Preston (97,000), Rochdale (91,000) and Bury (68,000), and these have
diversified into printing, paper making, textile and electrical machinery and
heavy commercial vehicles (especially in the Chorley-Leyland area). The few
remaining Lancashire coal mines still being worked lie in the Manchester-
Wigan area.
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of export
traffic, links Manchester and Merseyside. It passes through Warrington
(68,000), with its metal industries (such as wire-drawing), Widnes (57,000)
and Runcorn (36,000) with the chemical industry, and Ellesmere Port
(62,000) with its oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey estuary.
St. Helens (104,000), to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufac¬
ture. Liverpool (607,000) is an important commercial and insurance centre as
well as being the third largest port in Britain and, after London, the largest
centre for processing imported foodstuffs and raw materials (especially flour
milling, soap, sugar refining and rubber products). Its industrial strengths have
changed from the older industries such as shipbuilding and repair across the
river at Birkenhead (138,000) to newer industries, including electrical engin¬
eering, manufacture of heavy industrial plant and, more recently, of motor
vehicles. Its chemical plants are also important users of salt, extracted in
Cheshire.
The north-west has a major international airport at Ringway and a com¬
prehensive rail and motorway system, which not only link the conurbations
to the more northerly industrial towns such as Barrow (60,000) (shipbuilding
and marine engineering), and the tourist resorts such as Blackpool (151,000),
260
Yorkshire and
Humberside
Northern England
Wales
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
but also provide access to the other major ports and conurbations of the
country.
About three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s worsted and woollen industries
are found in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Bradford (294,000) is the com¬
mercial centre of the wool trade and important for worsted; Wakefield
(60,000) produces both worsted and woollens; Morley (45,000), Dewsbury
(51,000) and Spenborough (41,000) have specialised in heavy cloth, but their
production is becoming more diversified. Huddersfield (130,000) has a repu¬
tation for fine woollens and worsteds and Halifax (90,000) for carpets. In most
of the larger centres of the wool industry a variety of engineering products are
manufactured. Leeds (499,000), the commercial capital of the area, has a large
ready-made clothing industry and important engineering plants. Farther south
is the heavy engineering centre of Sheffield (513,000), famous for its high
quality steels, cutlery and tools. The area’s extensive coalfields provide over
one-quarter of Britain’s coal; Doncaster (82,000), also with tractor and nylon
manufacturing, and Barnsley (75,000) are the largest towns on the coalfield.
York (105,000) is noted for chocolates and confectionery manufacture and
has important railway workshops, and Hull (283,000), one of the world’s
largest fishing ports and with many manufacturing industries, including
engineering, vegetable oil processing, chemicals and sawmilling, is the most
important industrial town in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
On the south (Lincolnshire) side of the Humber lie Scunthorpe (70,000),
an important and expanding steel-making centre, and the major fishing port of
Grimsby (95,000) which has a food processing industry and also growing
chemicals and textiles industries close by at Immingham.
The greater part of this region (Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Durham and the North Riding of Yorkshire) is an area of mountains, lakes and
moors and is relatively thinly populated. Most of its population is concen¬
trated in the coastal strip from the coalfields north of the Tyne to the Tees.
Within this area the main centres are Tyneside, including Newcastle upon
Tyne (222,000), Gateshead (94,000), Tynemouth (69,000), South Shields
(100,000), Wallsend (46,000) and Jarrow (29,000); and Teesside (395,000) and
Hartlepool (97,000). Other large towns are Sunderland (217,000), Darlington
(86,000) and in the west, Carlisle (71,000).
The whole region is more dependent than other parts of England on
traditional heavy industries, notably coalmining, iron and steel manufacture,
shipbuilding and repairing and chemicals (the complex of chemical plants on
both banks of the Tees is probably the most extensive in Europe), which
together employ over one-quarter of the male workers. This proportion has
been falling steadily as the result of the region’s efforts, with government help,
to attract new types of enterprise. It is one of the most important areas for the
manufacture of electrical plant, and the many other industries include mining
machinery, rolling mill plant, earth-moving equipment, machine tools, ropes,
paint, glass, clothing and scientific instruments. An aluminium smelter is
operating on the Northumberland coast. Atomic energy is important in
Cumberland, with two nuclear power stations and other installations.
Over two-thirds of the population of Wales and Monmouthshire live in the
two counties of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. In this area are the coal
mines which, though long worked and operating at increasing depths, still
produce nearly all Britain’s anthracite and much of its steam and other special¬
ised coals, and employ more workers than any branch of manufacturing
INDUSTRY
26l
Scotland
Northern Ireland
industry. Rhondda (83,000) and Merthyr Tydfil (55,000) are the largest centres
in the coalmining area. The steel industry, with some of the most modern
plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain’s output of tin plate and much of
its sheet steel. In the past 35 years many new industries have been established,
often on government industrial estates; they include plastics, synthetic fibres,
clothing, electronics, motor vehicle components and light engineering.
The main urban centres are also the three major ports—Cardiff (275,000),
Newport (112,000) and Swansea (172,000). Milford Haven (14,000), a magni¬
ficent deep-water harbour recently developed, has two major oil refineries.
In North Wales a number of light industries, notably man-made fibres, are
located in the seaside resorts and some other towns, particularly Wrexham
(39,000), and there is a large steelworks in Flintshire.
About three-quarters of Scotland’s population of 5-2 million is concentrated in
the central Lowlands between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth. The
principal cities in this area are Glasgow (862,000), a major commercial centre
and Edinburgh (450,000), Scotland’s capital, an administrative and cultural
centre. Clydeside, which includes Glasgow, is a major shipbuilding and marine
engineering centre; it also has a great variety of general engineering enter¬
prises and other industries. The steel industry, sited mainly in north Lanark¬
shire, produces a wide range of products. The widely dispersed electronics
equipment industry is represented by a growing number of firms in such
centres as Glasgow, north Lanarkshire, Dundee and central Fife, as well as in
Edinburgh, where this and other modern industries are expanding alongside
the long-established engineering, printing and brewing industries. Motor car
manufacture has been established in Renfrewshire and in West Lothian there
has been a major expansion of commercial vehicle building.
With the major oil discoveries which have been made in the North Sea (see
p. 275), the area around Aberdeen is becoming a major oil centre and sub¬
stantial development by oil-based industries is taking place.
Outside the central Lowland belt there is considerable industrial concen¬
tration in and around Dundee (182,000) and Aberdeen (182,000) and a number
of towns outside these areas have attracted light industries in recent years.
Dundee’s traditional manufacture, jute, has been supplemented by office
machinery, clocks and watches, refrigerators and electronic products. In
north-east Scotland is the largest concentration of whisky distilleries, while
the paper and metal industries are also important.
Most of northern Scotland is mountainous and much of southern Scotland
is hilly and rugged. These regions are sparsely populated, but the Scottish
Highlands possess significant resources of hydro-electric power (see p. 280).
There are high-quality tweed and knitwear industries both in the valley towns
of the Borders and in the Highlands and Islands. Small engineering and
electronics industries have recently been established in towns in the Borders
and the south-west. Small-scale manufacturing has also been introduced in the
Highlands, and larger enterprises include the experimental atomic reactor
establishment at Dounreay and the aluminium smelter recently commissioned
at Invergordon (see p. 293). There is also large-scale development in oil-
related industries in the Moray Firth and Cromarty Firth areas.
Although the area of Northern Ireland is relatively small and lacking in
minerals, there is substantial and growing industrialisation, particularly in and
around Belfast, the capital city (362,000). Britain’s largest single shipyard
incorporating the world’s biggest shipbuilding berth is in Belfast; other long-
established activities include the manufacture of textile machinery and other
262 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
engineering products, ropes, twine, tobacco and clothing. Northern Ireland
has also long been an important centre for textiles—it is particularly well
known for linen. The textile industry is now diversified; Northern Ireland is
one of the most important areas in Europe for man-made fibre production and
provides over one-fifth of Britain’s output. There has also been extensive
development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronic instru¬
ments, telephone switchgear, shoes and synthetic rubber.
Relations
between the
Government
and Industry
Statistical
Services
The Government can influence industrial activity in a number of ways—
through fiscal and monetary policy, through the level of public expenditure,
through the placing of government contracts, through the policies of publicly
owned enterprises, by physical controls, by inducements, by exhortation and by
the provision of services, information and advice. Apart from labour legislation
(see Chapter 17) and certain export and import controls over a small range of
products (see Chapter 13), there are few physical controls over industry—the
main ones are the use of the legislation concerning monopolies and restrictive
practices already described (see p. 254) and the operation of powers to control
new industrial and office building and changes in land use.
There is close association between industry and the Government through
such channels as the National Economic Development Council, the main
forum for consultation between the Government, management and the trade
unions, and Economic Development Committees (EDCs) which cover parti¬
cular industrial sectors.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), set up in October 1970 to
combine the functions of the Board of Trade and the Ministry of Technology,
is the first single body with responsibility for all policies affecting production
and trade (both internal and export), and for the Government’s relations with
individual industries. Following a review of the machinery for aerospace policy
and defence procurement, the former, together with civil aerospace research,
has become the responsibility of the DTI, while the latter is handled by a
procurement executive at the Ministry of Defence.
Policies on labour matters, including industrial relations, industrial training
and manpower in general are the concern of the Department of Employment.
Other departments involved with industrial issues are the Treasury (fiscal and
monetary policy and medium- and long-term economic questions); the
Department of Education and Science, which is responsible for the promotion
of education and for civil science, operating primarily through the research
councils; and the Department of the Environment (relations with the con¬
struction industry and some regional matters).
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Commerce deals with industry and
industrial development.
The Government Statistical Service which includes the Central Statistical
Office (CSO), the Business Statistics Office (BSO), the Office of Population
Censuses and Surveys and the statistics divisions of the major departments,
provides a service of statistical information and advice. Each department is
responsible for compiling statistics relating to its own policy area and publish¬
ing them, usually through its own publications. Data about individual in¬
dustries are published by the BSO in Business Monitors. Comprehensive
statistical publications are produced by the CSO.
Production and
Productivity
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction,
and gas, electricity and water) was in 1972 some 2-6 per cent higher than a
INDUSTRY
Production Trends
TABLE 24
Production and
Employment in
Industry 1963-72
(1963 = 100)
Productivity
263
year previously, about one-third higher than in 1963 and about double the
pre-war level. The course of production and employment from 1963 to 1972
is shown in Table 24.
Among manufacturing industries output rose fastest between 1963 and 1972
in electrical engineering (73’3 per cent), in chemicals and allied industries
(69*3 per cent), and in coal and petroleum products (56-1 per cent); in the
gas, electricity and water group there was an advance of 72-4 per cent.
Year
Industrial Production
All Industries
Manufacturing
Industries
Employment in
Industry
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
100
108
112
113
114
120
123
125
126
130
100
109
112
114
114
121
126
127
127
131
100
102
103
103
100
98
98
97
94
90
The size of the labour force has fallen slightly in the last five years and the
increases in production have been due mainly to a variety of factors influencing
productivity, including advances in products, machinery, processes and
methods of work; the rate of fixed capital formation; more intensive competi¬
tion and sales promotion; and improved management.
Although gross fixed capital formation at home has, as a whole, been well
maintained since 1966, the proportion devoted to manufacturing has tended
to fall. The total in 1972 amounted to 21 per cent of the gross domestic product
and was estimated (at current prices) to be more than double the 1963 level.
Part of this rising investment is associated with the introduction of new
techniques and equipment and in particular of machines and instruments
which lessen the demand for human skill and supervision though they may
require more skill from fewer people. This process of automation is giving rise
to far-reaching changes in the pattern of industry and in the internal organisa¬
tion and labour requirements of business enterprises and has already been
responsible for consequential increases in production and efficiency which, in
the long run, are likely to be very large. Much investment, however, still con¬
sists of replacements, additions and improvements of a more traditional kind.
Both the long-term and the short-term growth of productivity thus depend
most directly on the decisions of individual undertakings. But though the
promotion of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter for industry,
government departments and educational and research establishments also
have an important contribution to make. Government budgeting and financial
policies also have a strong influence on the extent and direction of demand,
and government purchasing policies take account of national industrial
objectives.
Within industry, employers’ organisations often provide technical assistance,
conduct market surveys, and support schemes of vocational education and
training, and many trade unions organise special training schemes and courses
264
Standards
Design
Co-ordination
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to promote understanding of modern management techniques. Changes in
working methods to facilitate higher output feature in a number of produc¬
tivity agreements negotiated between management and workers. Private con¬
sultants specialising in management and work study are available to advise
firms on measures to increase their productive efficiency; there are also many
specialist institutions, both public and private, concerned with various aspects
of productivity. The local organisations arrange meetings, inter-factory visits,
courses, conferences, film shows and exhibitions.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) is a voluntary non-profit-making
body incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards
in respect of, among other things, quality, performance, dimensions, testing
methods and codes of practice. Voluntary acceptance of such standards by
manufacturers, buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies
the specification of requirements. The BSI is governed by a council consisting
of representatives of the main organisations of employers and workers, pro¬
fessional institutions and the larger government departments.
The Design Council, set up by the Government in 1944 as the Council of
Industrial Design to promote higher standards of design in British industry,
is concerned with all aspects of industrial design from durable consumer goods
to engineering products. The Council, with its Scottish Committee, is a grant-
aided body sponsored by the Department of Trade and Industry; its members
include industrialists, engineers, retailers, architects, designers and educa¬
tionists and trade unionists. At The Design Centre in the Haymarket, London,
a selective but changing display of modern British consumer goods is main¬
tained; exhibits are chosen from Design Index, the Council’s illustrated record
of more than 11,000 well-designed products. Special exhibitions on particular
themes are also arranged regularly. An annual awards scheme, Design Council
Awards, covering capital goods and engineering equipment as well as con¬
sumer products, was introduced in 1967. The Duke of Edinburgh also
presents his annual Design Prize. The Scottish Committee runs the Scottish
Design Centre in Glasgow, and there is an independent regional design centre,
maintaining a duplicate of the Index, at Manchester. The Council organises
temporary exhibitions in regional centres and overseas; arranges regular
conferences and training courses; undertakes industrial study tours in Britain,
and operates a designer selection service which can make recommendations to
any individual or organisation from a list of over 2,800 British industrial,
interior and graphic designers. It publishes a monthly magazine, Design, and
maintains reference and photographic libraries.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society of
Arts (see p. 399), the Society of Industrial Artists and Designers, which is the
representative professional body in Great Britain of designers engaged in
industry and commerce, and the Design and Industries Association (DIA), a
voluntary association of industrial companies, designers, and others interested
in the promotion of good design in industry. The Crafts Council of Great
Britain, the Crafts Centre of Great Britain and the Scottish Craft Centre are
all grant-aided by the Department of Trade and Industry. Their aims are to
improve craft design and to promote closer relations between craftsmen and
industry.
The Department of Trade and Industry is responsible for the co-ordination of
activities related to the improvement of industrial productivity. It is represented
on the EDCs (see p. 262)—which are concerned primarily with the removal of
INDUSTRY
Management
Encouragement
of Investment
in Industry
265
obstacles to efficiency—by seconded industrial advisers. The DTI is also
charged with extending the introduction of automatic control systems and
advanced techniques into industry, sponsors the BSI, the British Calibration
Service and the National Computing Centre, supports the National Data
Processing Service, and provides technical advisory services. It is concerned
directly with research into such factors as productivity measurement tech¬
niques, group technology, production engineering and fatigue among
operators. The Conciliation and Advisory Service of the Department of
Employment advises firms on aspects of productivity connected with man¬
power utilisation and industrial relations. A number of other departments
have responsibilities which bear on productivity.
In Britain, as elsewhere, management is recognised as a subject requiring
special skills and knowledge. This is reflected both in a change in the general
educational qualifications of recruits and in the spread of systematic education
and training for management.
The British Institute of Management (BIM) is the central national manage¬
ment body, independent, non-political and non-profit-making. Its purpose is
to study and promote scientific management, including management education
and training, throughout industry, commerce and public administration. The
BIM receives an annual government grant of about £ 100,000 to help it expand
services to industry. The Industrial Society works to promote better use of
human resources; it advises members and conducts conferences and courses.
Management studies and education for management are expanding rapidly
in Britain and have become a recognised feature of higher education (see
p. 167). There are graduate business schools in London and Manchester.
Training courses for higher management are held at several universities and
colleges, including the Administrative Staff College, Henley-on-Thames, and
Ashridge College of Management, Berkhamsted. The larger firms, especially
those with wide responsibilities, often provide general management courses
for senior executives, and systems of informal training within an organisation
are numerous. There are also bodies concerned with specialised branches of
management, for example, the Institute of Personnel Management, the
Institution of Works Managers, the Institute of Office Management and the
Institute of Marketing.
The growing number of professional personnel working as management
consultants—now about 6,500—and the use of the services of independent
management selection firms in the appointment of senior staff are further
indications of interest in the science of management in Britain.
Under the Finance Act 1972 incentives to encourage capital expenditure in
plant and machinery take the form of a system of free depreciation enabling the
whole of such expenditure to be written off against profits for tax purposes in
the year in which it is incurred; there is in addition a 40 per cent initial allow¬
ance on new industrial buildings and structures and an annual writing down
allowance of 4 per cent. To maintain a greater incentive in the development
and special development areas (see below) the tax allowances available nation¬
ally and free depreciation are reinforced by regional development grants of 20
per cent and 22 per cent respectively towards capital expenditure on certain
new plant and machinery and on new or existing industrial buildings. These
grants are not treated for tax purposes as income receipts and so do not give
rise to corporation tax; nor do they affect the entitlement to the first year
allowance on plant and machinery, and building. The building grants are also
266
Industrial and
Regional Policy
Government
Help for
Industry in
Assisted
Areas
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
available in the intermediate areas and—until March 1974—in derelict land
clearance areas.
The aim of industrial and regional policy is to secure a full and balanced
development of the country’s resources and to stimulate a faster and steadier
expansion in national output.
Major changes in the administration of policy were given effect by the
Industry Act 1972. A Minister for Industrial Development—under the broad
direction of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry—is in charge of the
Industrial Development Executive which includes divisions of the Department
of Trade and Industry concerned with regional development. A Development
Unit within the executive is responsible for the appraisal and implementation
of regional policies. The Minister is advised on major specific cases for
assistance by an Industrial Development Advisory Board composed of repre¬
sentatives from industry, banking and finance while locally based Regional
Industrial Development Boards advise on general industrial opportunities and
on applications for selective financial assistance. Advice on wider planning
matters is given by regional economic planning councils assisted by economic
planning boards which were set up in 1965 (see p. 199).
A new European Community Regional Development Fund, financed from
the Community’s own resources, is planned to be set up before 31st December
1973-
Some parts of Britain have long been less prosperous than others. Their rate of
economic expansion has been below average and their level of unemployment
above average as a result of the decline of some traditional industries or the
lack of job opportunities. For many years unemployment has remained a
persistent problem in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the north-east
and some other parts of England. This regional imbalance has been aggra¬
vated by the tendency for new industries to concentrate in the Midlands and
the south-east where, as a result, the demand for labour has been high and
there have been increasing problems of congestion. An important aim of the
Government’s regional policy is to achieve a better distribution of industrial
development between the different parts of the country. The Government has
in recent years taken important measures aimed at securing balanced economic
development.
Government aid to areas of high unemployment began in the 1930s and has
been developed in various ways since the end of the second world war.
In 1966 most of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, Merseyside and part
of the south-west were designated ‘development areas’ qualifying for financial
assistance. In 1967 additional aid was made available in localities within them
where high and persistent unemployment was expected, and in 1971 these
‘special development areas’ were extended to cover industrial centres in west
central Scotland, north-east England and south Wales. Following investiga¬
tion of the needs of areas with economic problems outside the development
areas, in 1970 a number of localities were designated intermediate areas or
‘derelict land clearance areas’ with eligibility for assistance on a lesser scale
than development areas. The coverage of intermediate areas was extended in
1971 and 1972. The boundaries of the assisted areas are shown in the map on
the opposite page.
Besides the free depreciation allowances and grants on capital investment
there is a wide range of financial and other inducements available under the
Industry Act 1972 and the Local Employment Act 1970 to encourage industry
THE ASSISTED AREAS
Special Development Area
Development Area
Intermediate Area
Derelict Land Clearance Area
Northern Ireland (full range of
incentives under separate
legislation)
Town where Development
Area benefits are available
Towns where Special Development
Area benefits are available
268
Northern Ireland
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to expand in the assisted areas. In the development and intermediate areas the
Department of Trade and Industry may build factories for leasing, in some
cases with an initial rent-free period, or for sale on deferred terms, and provide
selective assistance including loans, and in certain circumstances grants
towards removal expenses.
Factory building and estate management are undertaken on the Department
of Trade and Industry’s behalf by the English, Scottish and Welsh Industrial
Estates Corporations; premises administered by the three Corporations total
over 67 million square feet and give employment to over 220,000 people.
Assistance from other government departments includes 85 per cent capital
grants to local authorities in development and special development areas for
clearing derelict or neglected sites; grants are also available for improving basic
services. The Department of Employment may help with the cost of training
additional labour in development areas and of transferring workers in con¬
nection with establishing new enterprises.
Since 1948 control of new industrial building has been exercised through
the use of a system of Industrial Development Certificates. Any application
under the normal town and country planning machinery for planning per¬
mission for industrial development outside the development areas involving
more than 15,000 square feet of industrial floor space (or 10,000 square feet in
the south-east) must be accompanied by a certificate from the Department of
Trade and Industry certifying that the development in question can be carried
out consistently with the proper distribution of industry. In considering
applications the Secretary of State pays particular regard to the need for
providing appropriate employment in the assisted areas. In practice this
obligation has led to the refusal of certificates for most projects outside the
assisted areas unless it can be shown that the project could not reasonably be
undertaken in such an area or in Northern Ireland. Subject to this priority,
the control is also used to encourage dispersal of industry to new or expanding
towns taking population from the more congested areas. Under the Town and
Country Planning Act 1971 the Department of the Environment has power to
control office development in certain areas. Office development permits are
needed only for developments of over 10,000 square feet in the south-east of
England.
Under separate legislation capital grants are available at 30 per cent of the cost
of new buildings, machinery and equipment for the manufacturing, construc¬
tion and extractive industries in Northern Ireland. Total expenditure inclu¬
sive of grants qualifies for tax allowances. There is also provision for assisting
firms by means of loans to carry out major schemes of re-equipment, to move
to another area in particular need of industrial development or to undertake a
rehousing of their business in association with a major scheme of modernisa¬
tion and reorganisation. Help under the investment grants legislation is made
without regard to how much employment is created as a result.
As an alternative means of assistance in Northern Ireland there are compre¬
hensive and flexible powers authorised under the Industries Development Acts
for projects which offer a reasonable amount of employment. In such cases
individual development grants of up to 4° Per cent of expenditure on new
buildings, machinery and equipment are available, with tax allowances as
above. For those projects which offer exceptionally attractive returns in em¬
ployment or location within Northern Ireland, the assistance offered can
include tenancy of a government-built factory at low rent (including possibly
a rent-free period), grants towards operating costs in the initial stages, and
Councils to
Promote
Industry
Rural Industries
INDUSTRY 269
grants towards costs of removing existing machinery and installing it in a
factory in Northern Ireland.
Since 1945 over 280 new firms have been established in Northern Ireland
with government assistance, and the number of people now employed in
grant-aided industry totals over 77,000. A Finance Corporation with an initial
capital of £50 million has been formed to aid industrial and commercial
concerns which have short-term liquidity problems but long-term prospects of
viability.
Certain regions and areas in England have industrial development associations
concerned with promoting local industry. These are sponsored mainly by local
authorities, trade associations and individual firms.
Several voluntary associations are concerned with Welsh industry. The
Development Corporation for Wales, founded in 1959, is the most prominent.
In Scotland, the Highlands and Islands Development Board, set up by
statute in 1965, works to stimulate the economic and social development of
the seven ‘crofting’ counties (see p. 327). It provides grants and loans to
industrial, commercial and other enterprises; it may also acquire land, provide
management and other advisory services and set up and carry on businesses.
The Scottish Council (Development and Industry), a voluntary association,
promotes the general economic development of Scotland.
Encouragement is given to the development of rural industries. Much of this
work is done under the aegis of the Development Commission1 with finance
from the Development Fund, notably advice and guidance to small businesses
in rural areas and country towns and loans for assistance to tourism in the
rural parts of development areas. In England and Wales this service is pro¬
vided by the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas acting in consulta¬
tion with the Rural Community Councils through their Small Industries
Committees in the counties; by the Small Industries Council for Rural Areas
of Scotland; and in Northern Ireland by the Local Enterprise Development
Unit of the Ministry of Commerce. Another service provided by the Com¬
mission is the financing of small factories to stimulate rural industries and to
combat rural depopulation.
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy used in Britain are coal, petroleum and,
to a lesser extent, nuclear energy, natural gas and water power; secondary
sources produced from these are electricity, town gas and coke.
Coal, most of it mined within the country, represents about 37 per cent of
primary energy consumption, although the amount of coal used and its share
of the total energy market has been falling. Oil has expanded its share of total
energy consumption rapidly from under 20 per cent in 1958 to nearly 48 per
cent in 1972. Although at present almost all oil is imported, the first supplies
are to be produced from the British sector of the North Sea during 1974. With
the advent of nuclear power and North Sea natural gas Britain has moved over
from two fuels to four. A programme for nuclear power stations has been in
progress since 1955 and nuclear power now provides a significant share of
1 The Development Commission recommends, and the Treasury approves and
administers, advances by grants or loans from the Development Fund, established by
the Development and Road Improvement Funds Acts 1909 and 1910. At the present
time the Fund may be used to help and expand the rural economy (including accom¬
modation of tourists) and also to promote the development and improvement of
fisheries.
270
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
electricity supplies although only 3 per cent of total energy requirements. The
share of natural gas is expanding rapidly from supplies from the North Sea
discoveries and in 1972 accounted for 11 per cent of the energy market. Water¬
power resources are very small and cannot be developed much further. Trends
in primary energy consumption are shown in Table 25 and in the diagram
on p. 272.
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of petroleum, are under
public ownership. General responsibility for the effective and co-ordinated
development of fuel and power resources lies with the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry and in the case of electricity in Scotland with the Secre¬
tary of State for Scotland. Research is undertaken by the fuel and fuel-using
industries. The Secretary of State also has an Advisory Council on Research
and Development.
Million tons coal equivalent
TABLE 25
Inland Fuel
and Power
Consumption
(in Terms of
Primary Sources)
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
The nationalised fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total some
650,000 people, or 2-5 per cent of the working population; their capital invest¬
ment in 1973-74 will be in the region of £800 million; their annual turnover
is almost ,£3,500 million; and the value of their net output is nearly 5 per cent
of the national product. The nationalised industry boards’ investment is
financed through internal resources and borrowing from the Government
(long term), the clearing banks (short term), and from overseas (long term)
sources. In each of the nationalised fuel industries there are statutory bodies
set up to protect the interests of consumers.
Following Britain’s entry into the European Community in January 1973
its fuel industries are co-operating to an increasing extent with those of the
other member countries. The coal industry now conforms to the rules of the
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC, see p. 80); under the arrange¬
ments for British accession to the ECSC tariff barriers between the coal
markets of Britain and the other members were removed on 1st January 1973.
Britain’s entry means a doubling of the Community’s coal industry to a
combined annual production of some 300 million tons.
A Community energy policy is in the early stages of development with the
basic aim of guaranteeing certain and lasting energy supplies under satis¬
factory economic conditions. One possibility is that in order to lessen depen¬
dence on imported oil, the European Community will place more emphasis
on the contribution of coal to electricity production. Other possibilities are
more investment in nuclear power plant, and increased exploitation of natural
gas.
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coal¬
mining industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years
COAL
FUEL AND POWER RESOURCES
Dounreay_
0 ^/Vasnakyle'
Q ^-Rannoch
f> / rErrochty/
h Longannet
Cockenzie
ELECTRICITY
■ Conventional Power Stations
(over 1000 MW capacity)
□ Under construction
• Nuclear Power Stations
O Under construction
♦ AEA Power Producing Reactors
Hydro-Electric Power Stations
(over 45 MW capacity)
^ Pumped Storage Schemes
Cruachan
S|°V^
driSffc
H unterston
^ -Hunterston'B' Chapelcross ABlyth'B'
^yp^y^-^/Windscale ^eaton Carew
0
Heysham
•“v
Fiddler's Ferry-,
/vvinat 
'fCalderHall Ferrybridge'C'
Vj-, ^^Eggborough
—Thorpe Marsh
■ West Burton 'A'
Cottam* /
^Ffestiniog
rawsfynydd# u b
RheidolM- |_T-Rugeley'B'
y-s Berkeley lr0nbrid9e
Oldbury—A,
Pembroke*
Aberthaw'E
.r-y?
Hinkley Pt. 'A'-^y
Hinkley ft. 'B'-
Ratcliffe-upon-Soar
Vsizewell
Tilbury'B'
Bradwell
. of Grain
^y-Dungeness 'A'
cO' Kingsnorth Dungeness B
a Natural Gasfields
 Natural Gas Pipelines
 Under Construction &
proposed
o Gas Terminal
V Imported Gas Terminal
4 Oil Refineries (over 1 million tons
annual capacity)
6 Under construction
^ North Sea Oilfields
272
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ENERGY TRENDS 1962-1972
The National
Coal Board
longer than in any other country. British coal exports dominated the world
market until about 1910. In 1913—the peak production year—the industry
produced 287 million tons of coal, exported 94 million tons and employed over
a million workers.
In 1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal
Industry Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board as
a statutory corporation to manage the industry.
The National Coal Board (NCB) consists of a chairman and between eight
and fourteen members appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry. The NCB has, with minor exceptions, exclusive rights over the
extraction of coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private opera-
INDUSTRY
273
Supply and
Demand
Production and
Manpower
tors to work small pits and open-cast sites. It has no monopoly in distribution,
and retail sales remain largely in private hands, but it has some retail depots
and makes bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
The NCB is responsible for the day-to-day running and the commercial
management of the industry, but is answerable to the Secretary of State (and
through him, to Parliament) for its efficiency. The Secretary of State has power
to issue general directives on matters affecting the national interest, and to
authorise borrowings to finance capital investment.
At the end of March 1973 there were 281 NCB collieries in operation, each
on average producing some 462,000 tons of coal, compared with 192,000 in
1947. Of these, 278 were grouped into 16 areas, each controlled by a director
responsible to the NCB. The remaining three collieries (in Kent) are controlled
by a general manager who is also responsible to the NCB.
Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of nearly
4 million tons between 1947 and 1956; sales fell sharply, however, between
1956 and 1959 and large stocks of coal accumulated at pit heads. Growing
competition from oil, increasing efficiency in the use of coal and reduced
requirements of the gas, steel, railway transport and other industries con¬
tributed to the fall in demand which is still continuing (see Table 26). Un¬
distributed stocks have recently been run down considerably and at the end
of March 1973 were 12 million tons.
Over half of total consumption is by the electricity authorities and under
one-quarter by domestic and industrial users together. Coke ovens are other
large users while consumption by the gas industry is falling rapidly with the
switch to natural gas. Consumption by the electricity industry has increased
by 33 per cent since i960 to 71 million tons in 1972-73 whereas the require¬
ments of most other classes of consumer have declined. For domestic users
this fall has been slightly offset by increased purchases of solid smokeless fuels.
Coal exports have declined for somewhat similar reasons; in 1972-73 they
amounted to some 2-3 million tons. The biggest customer is the Federal
Republic of Germany; over 90 per cent of exports go to West European
countries. In 1972-73 imports amounted to over 3-4 million tons.
The fact that the British industry was developed so early has meant that many
of the best seams of coal are now worked out, but there are abundant reserves
of coal with which production can be maintained well into the next century;
there is also scope for opening new collieries should these be required. The
main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and Nottingham¬
shire field, which produces about half of the total output, (2) the Durham and
Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and (4) the Scottish field.
Other important coal-bearing areas are those of Lancashire and the west Mid¬
lands (Staffordshire and Warwickshire).
Table 26 shows the main trends in the industry since 1950.
Coal consumption has fallen steadily over the past 20 years as shown in
Table 26 to 133 million tons in 1972-73. The fall in demand has been accom¬
panied by increases in productivity and has resulted in a rundown of the
labour force from some 700,000 to about 263,000. There were 10,400 fewer
workers in March 1973 than in March 1972. Productivity as a whole has risen
by over a half since 1961 to 2-3 tons per manshift in 1972-73; at the coal face
it has more than doubled over the last 20 years to 7-4 tons per manshift in
1972-73. The increases have been obtained largely by concentration on the
more productive mines and faces, by increasing mechanisation at the face,
274
TABLE 26
Coal
Statistics
I950_72
Capital
Investment and
Financial
Structure
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Total output
of which, open-cast
Total consumption
of which, export
Total labour force®
All underground workers®
Output per manshift®:
at coal face
overall . .
Output mechanically
loaded®
Unit
million
tons
’000
tons
per cent
1950-54
(average)
1960-64
(average)
1965-69
(average)
222-1
11-4
223-0
15-2
688-4
546-1
3-3
1-2
5&
194-2
7-4
198-1
5-9
549-0
437-2
4-5
1-5
56&
176- 0
7-0
177- 1
3-3
418-9
331-8
5-7
1-9
84-1
1972-73
141-3
10-7
133-1
2-3
263-6
207-7
7-4
2-3
93-0
Source: National Coal Board
® NCB mines only.
b Estimate.
and by the use of multi-shift working. At mechanised faces, output now
averages 8-6 tons per manshift compared with 2-7 tons at non-mechanised
faces. Other important measures which have contributed to increased produc¬
tivity include new techniques for obtaining information about the reserves
before they are worked, intensive training of management and men to obtain
the maximum utilisation of equipment on highly mechanised faces, the in¬
creasing use of powered supports, the use of higher horse-power machines
and improvements in the mechanised handling of coal below ground and on
the surface.
The NCB raises capital, including working capital, by borrowing from the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Within certain limits the board
may also, with the permission of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry,
borrow temporarily (by way of overdraft or otherwise). The greater proportion
of investment is financed from internal resources.
A reorganisation of the board’s capital structure became necessary after a
prolonged labour dispute and resulting pay settlement; this had followed years
of contraction in the industry due mainly to competition from oil. Under the
Coal Industry Act 1973 some £450 million, being the NCB’s accumulated
deficit at the end of March 1973 together with the amount by which the
board’s capital assets were overvalued, was written off; the statutory limit on
the NCB’s borrowing is set at £550 million in the first instance, with provi¬
sion for extension to £700 million if necessary. The Act contains a number of
other provisions designed to improve the industry s position. These will allow
the industry’s rate of contraction to be moderated and include a regional grant
to support employment and improved redundancy terms for miners losing
their jobs. In addition certain payments are being made to promote sales of
coal to the electricity industry, towards the NCB’s coal and coke stocking
costs, and to producers of coking coal. Although the board is expected in
future to break even financially (after taking account of grants) provision is
made for an accumulated deficit up to £50 million, to be increased up to £100
million if necessary.
In the year ending March 1973 the NCB made an operating loss of 129
million.
INDUSTRY
275
Research
PETROLEUM
North Sea
Production
Land-based
Fields
International
Trade
The NCB has two research organisations: a Coal Research Establishment,
at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, providing facilities for
fundamental research; and a Mining Research and Development Establish¬
ment, near Bretby, Derbyshire, for the investigation of underground problems,
developing new machines and testing equipment.
Research associations receiving grants from the NCB and the Department
of Trade and Industry include the British Coke Research Association and the
Coal Tar Research Association. Much of the work of other bodies, such as
the Safety in Mines Research Establishment (SMRE), is closely related to the
board’s problems; the SMRE carries out research on explosions and fires,
pneumoconiosis, engineering and metallurgy.
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young,
a Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from
natural mineral oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish
shale deposits, yielding similar products, were first worked in 1858 and ceased
production in 1962. At present nearly all of Britain’s oil supplies are imported.
Seismic prospecting in the North Sea for natural gas and oil has been going on
since 1962 and full-scale exploration activities since 1964, following the enact¬
ment of the Continental Shelf Act 1964, and the subsequent award of a first
round of licences. Further licences were awarded in 1965, 1969-70 and 1971-
72. The total area now under licence is 43,415 square miles (112,444 square
kilometres) out of a total area, over which Britain has exercised its rights to
explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil, of 166,000 square miles (430,000
square kilometres).
Drilling, which started in 1964, has proved the existence of five major fields
of natural gas in the British sector all of which are now in production (see
p. 283). Oil in significant quantities was first found in the British sector in
1970; development plans were announced for the Forties field in 1971, to
provide for output of 12-5 million tons a year by late 1975. First deliveries
through a 110-mile (177-kilometre) submarine pipeline are expected in late
1974. Several other major discoveries have been made including that of the
Auk and Argyll fields, planned to come into operation during 1974, and the
Brent and Piper fields to come into operation a year or two later.
A production rate of from 70 million to 100 million tons a year by 1980 has
been estimated. By the end of 1972 443 wells had been drilled, including 180
production wells.
Annual production of crude oil from land-based oilfields in Britain now totals
about 82,000 tons. Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the
establishment of several small oilfields, notably in Nottinghamshire (Egmanton
and Bothamsell), in Leicestershire (Plungar), in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough)
and in Dorset (Kimmeridge).
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the
Middle East, Far East, Africa and Caribbean areas.
Today production by these companies amounts to about 17 per cent of total
world production and they operate a tanker fleet (partly owned by them and
partly on charter) amounting to over one-fifth of the world s tanker tonnage.
(British registered tanker tonnage is about 13 per cent of the worlds total.)
In 1972 Britain imported 102-9 million tons of crude oil valued at X9I4'9
276
Consumption
Refineries
Oil Pipelines
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million, the largest single item among imported products. Kuwait and Saudi
Arabia supplied approximately 20 per cent each, and Libya 14 per cent. Other
major suppliers were Iran, Nigeria and Venezuela.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1972 totalled about 96 million tons, having more than doubled
since i960. Fuel oil consumption in 1972 constituted 42 per cent of the total.
Demand for gas and diesel oils (including derv fuel used in road vehicles) rose
by 2-6 million tons to over 20 million tons in 1972. Sales of motor spirit
expanded by nearly one million tons to 15-6 million tons in 1972.
The most important uses of gas and diesel oils in 1972 were for non¬
industrial central heating, electricity generation, building and the railways.
Electricity generation accounted for 42 per cent of fuel oil consumption,
followed by the steel industry with 11 per cent; and non-industrial central
heating with a further 8 per cent. Of the remainder, the largest users were the
chemical, paper-making, glass, engineering and textile industries.
Before 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum
products was refined overseas, as it was considered more economic to refine
at the source of production. Since the second world war the industry has
favoured the siting of refineries in the consuming areas.
At the end of 1972 rated refinery capacity in Britain amounted to 123 million
tons a year; capacity is expected to reach an estimated 145 million tons by the
end of 1975. Of the 21 refineries in operation, four have a capacity of under
0-5 million tons. The eleven largest are situated at Fawley, near Southampton
(10-5 million tons); Stanlow, in Cheshire (10-5 million tons); Isle of Grain
(10-9 million tons), Shell Haven (10 million tons), and Coryton (7 million
tons), all three on the Thames Estuary; Teesport, Yorkshire (6 million tons);
Grangemouth, east Scotland (8-9 million tons); Milford Haven and Pembroke
in Pembrokeshire (6*3 million tons and 7 million tons); Llandarcy near
Swansea (8-2 million tons); and Killingholme near Grimsby (8-3 million tons).
Other important refineries are located at Belfast, Billingham, Heysham (Lancs.)
and second refineries at Killingholme and at Milford Haven. Stanlow is to be
expanded by 8 million tons. A new refinery has been completed at Milford
Haven; another is to be built at Canvey Island, Essex, and others are planned.
Output of refined products (excluding refineries’ own consumption) has
risen steadily to 98 million tons in 1972. There is a substantial external trade
in refined products which tends to follow trading and seasonal requirements
and the commercial arrangements of the major oil companies. Exports from
Britain, mainly in the form of heavier products to European countries, were
valued at £195 million in 1972. Imports of refined products (including liquefied
gases) amounted to ^220 million.
Three main crude oil pipelines are in operation in Britain between harbours
capable of berthing very large tankers and refineries: in west Scotland, from
Finnart to Grangemouth; in South Wales, from Angle Bay, Milford Haven,
to Llandarcy; and in north-west England, from Tranmere to Stanlow and
Heysham. A 131-mile (211-kilometre) pipeline is to be built from Cruden
Bay, Scotland, to Grangemouth, for oil from the Forties oil field in the North
Sea (see p. 245). Pipelines also carry refined products to major marketing
areas; for example, from the Humber to the Manchester area, from Fawley to
Staines and Heathrow Airport, and from the Isle of Grain to Walton-on-
Thames and Heathrow Airport. A 245-mile (394-kilometre) pipeline feeds
Research
ELECTRICITY
Present
Structure
England and
Wales
INDUSTRY 277
refined products to north London and the Midlands from refineries and
installations on the Thames and Mersey; a similar line 265 miles (426 kilo¬
metres) long from Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester is under
construction. Pipelines carrying petrochemical feedstocks run from Stanlow to
Carrington, near Manchester, from Fawley to Severnside, near Bristol, and
from Teesside to Fleetwood and Runcorn. The Pipelines Act 1962 is designed
to secure the orderly development of privately owned industrial pipelines.
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities
on a substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames
(the British Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock,
in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon, in Berkshire (Esso). The first of these covers
the full range of petroleum research and development, from geology and
production to product utilisation and petroleum chemicals. In general, the
remainder are concerned with the evolution of new and improved fuels and
lubricants and the development of new uses for petroleum products and of
new products based on petroleum, especially chemicals.
A public supply of electricity was first provided in Britain in 1881, at Godai¬
ming, Surrey. From its earliest days a measure of public control has been a
feature of the industry. In 1919 the Electricity Commissioners were created as
a supervisory body and to promote reorganisation on a national scale through
voluntary agreement. In 1926 the Central Electricity Board was set up to
construct and operate a national grid inter-connecting individual power
stations, thus co-ordinating generation and transmission. In 1943 the North of
Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB) was established as a public corpor¬
ation to develop the water-power resources of the Highlands. In 1948 all
municipal and private undertakings (other than those in Northern Ireland)
were acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British Elec¬
tricity Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of Scotland where
they became the responsibility of the NSHEB. Two subsequent Acts (1954
and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation and gave the industry its
present structure. Electricity supply employs about 197,000 people, including
6,000 in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales, electricity is generated and transmitted by the Central
Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) and distributed by 12 separate area
electricity boards; co-ordination is effected by the Electricity Council. In
Scotland, two boards—the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB)—both generate and distribute electricity. In Northern Ireland
these functions are carried out by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
The Electricity Council is the central body of the supply industry with a
general responsibility for promoting electricity supply and for advising the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry; it is also responsible for a number of
common services, principally capital financing, research and industrial rela¬
tions. The council consists of a chairman and two deputy chairmen, the chair¬
man and two designated members of the CEGB, the chairmen of the 12 area
electricity boards and not more than three other members. The CEGB
controls the operation and maintenance of power stations and the main trans¬
mission system (the national grid) and supplies electricity in bulk to the 12
area boards. The CEGB consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman and
278
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Generation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
between six and eight members. Each of the 12 area electricity boards acquires
bulk supplies of electricity from the CEGB and is responsible for distribution
networks and sales of electricity to its area consumers.
Area consultative councils were set up under the Electricity Act 1947 in
the area of each board to represent the interests of consumers; their chairmen
are ex officio members of their respective area boards. The Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry appoints the chairmen, deputy chairmen and members
of the Electricity Council, the CEGB, the area boards and the consultative
councils; approves each board’s capital development programmes and the
industry’s research programme; and approves, in consultation with the
Treasury, the industry’s borrowing requirements.
The boundary separating the areas covered by the two Scottish boards runs
roughly from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of
Tay. Members of both boards and of the respective consumer consultative
councils are appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland; each board
comprises a chairman and between four and eight members, one of whom is
the chairman of the other board. The Secretary of State’s responsibilities in
relation to the boards are similar to those of the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry in England and Wales.
In Northern Ireland electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast and
at Ballylumford and Coolkeeragh. The Northern Ireland Electricity Service
came into operation on 2nd April 1973. The new body is the result of the
amalgamation of four former electricity undertakings—the Northern Ireland
Joint Electricity Authority, the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland, and the
Electricity Departments of Belfast Corporation and Londonderry Develop¬
ment Commission. It has fixed assets valued at £ 165 million, a capital expen¬
diture programme for 1973-74 of £30 million and estimated sales for 1973-74
of £41 million; it serves 500,000 consumers. A Consumers’ Council has also
been set up.
As Britain has abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail and water
transport for moving it, most of its electricity is produced by coal-fired steam
generating stations. Hydro-electric development on any scale is comparatively
recent, water-power resources being relatively small and in remote areas.
Since 1965, nuclear energy has become increasingly important. Oil and natural
gas are also used.
The output capacity of the generating stations of the electricity boards in
Great Britain at the end of 1972 totalled 63,791 megawatts (MW) (see Table
27), an increase of 5 per cent on the previous year.
In the years 1965 to 1972 some 26,800 MW of generating capacity was com¬
missioned in England and Wales, including 3>00° MW in i972. The SSEB s
total capacity is to be increased to some 7,000 MW in 1974, and the NSHEB’s
to 2,140 MW by 1974.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where, of the total installed
generating capacity of 1,204 MW, 720 MW is in oil-fired and the remainder in
coal-fired thermal stations) amounted to 4,326-3 million kilowatt-hours
(kWh) in 1972.
Generation for the public supply in Great Britain reached nearly 238,000
million kilowatt-hours in 1972; conventional steam power stations provided
87 per cent of the total and nuclear and hydro-electric stations about 11 per
cent and 2 per cent respectively. A high rate of expansion of output has been
a feature of the industry since its earliest years; though the rate has slackened
INDUSTRY
Conventional
Thermal
TABLE 27
Electricity
Generation for
Public Supply in
Great Britain
1972
279
recently the total of electricity generated in 1972 was still over 35 per cent
higher than in 1965.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
—19,719 million kWh in I972- The major sources outside the fuel industries
themselves are the chemical, iron and steel and paper industries and the
nuclear power plants of the Atomic Energy Authority.
An analysis of electricity generation in Great Britain is given in Table 27.
The electricity authorities take over half the British consumption of coal and
about 18 per cent of the consumption of oil.
Oil-fired stations of 2,000 MW have been commissioned at Fawley, on
Southampton Water (one of the most fully automated stations in Europe), and
at Pembroke, South Wales, and others are under construction at Inverkip,
Renfrewshire (1,980 MW), Isle of Grain, Kent (3,300 MW) and Ince,
Cheshire (1,000 MW). Preparatory work on the site of another oil-fired station
at Peterhead, Aberdeenshire (1,320 MW) started in 1973.
A dual-fired station to burn either coal or oil has been commissioned at
Kingsnorth, Kent, and other stations involving some 4,000 MW of plant have
been or are being converted to dual-firing; two can burn natural gas. Average
thermal efficiency (that is, the ratio of the electrical energy output to the heat
energy input of the fuel consumed) of conventional steam stations in England
and Wales rose from 2075 per cent in 1947 to 29-32 per cent in 1972 as new
plant was brought into use. The 20 most efficient stations, containing much
of the newest plant, had an average thermal efficiency of 33-22 per cent in
I97I_72-
Output capacity
(end year)
MW
Electricity
sent out
GWh
Central Electricity Generating Board.
South of Scotland Electricity Board
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board ..
Steam and oil engines . .
Hydro plant
Pumped storage. .
Nuclear plant
Total
56,055
5,920
1,816
58,194
1,286
760
3,551
63,791
197,750
18,632
4,848
195,395
2,846
870
22,119
221,230
63,791
221,230
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
Striking advances have been made in the design of steam-generating plant.
Forty-nine single-shaft units of 500 MW are being installed in 14 stations.
Station capacities are also increasing. Ten stations, each with capacities of
2,000 MW, with four 500 MW single-shaft generating units, are now in
service. Twenty-three 660 MW single-shaft generating units are on order for
installation: three for Drax, Yorkshire; five for Isle of Grain; three for Inver¬
kip: two for Peterhead; and two each for five nuclear power stations under
construction (for locations see map, p. 271). Units of 1,300 MW are under
consideration. A 2,400 MW station at Longannet, Fife, with four 600 MW
cross-compound units, was commissioned in 1970.
2$Q
Hydro-electric
Nuclear Power
Stations
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Large gas turbine units of 55 MW and 7° MW, based on aero jet engines,
have been introduced since 1965 for peak load operation. The CEGB and
SSEB have installed 916 MW of such units and a further 2,850 MW are
planned. Many others of 17 to 35 MW capacity are being used in new stations
to safeguard the auxiliary supplies to the large new steam units, and also to
provide capacity for peak operation. Auxiliary units of this kind in service at
the end of 1972 totalled 1,140 MW.
Hydro-electric generation is at present confined to Scotland and Wales. Most
of the water-power so utilised is drawn from high-level reservoirs with their
own natural catchment areas. The setting up of the NSHEB in 1943 marked
the beginning of an era of intensive water-power development in the
Highlands.
In 1972-73> 2,908 million units were sent out by the NSHEB from water¬
power, compared with 322 million in 1949- At the end of March 1973 there
were 54 main hydro-electric conventional stations in operation in the north
of Scotland with a total installed capacity of 1,049 MW and the largest the
Loch Sloy station—has a capacity of 130 MW. The Cruachan pumped
storage section of the Awe scheme, with an installed capacity of 400 MW from
four reversible-pump-turbines, came into full operation at the end of 1967.
(In pumped-storage schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is used
to pump water to higher levels from which it descends at peak periods to
operate turbo-generators.)
Construction of a 300 MW pumped-storage project at Foyers, Loch Ness,
began in November 1969. It will have two 150 MW reversible-pump-turbines
and is planned for completion in 1974' addition, there are stations generat¬
ing electricity by water-power in the south of Scotland (123 MW) and in
Wales (469 MW). The latter includes the 360 MW pumped-storage station
at Ffestiniog. It is planned to build a 1,500 MW pumped-storage station at
Dinorwic, North Wales.
In 1972 nuclear power stations provided some 10 per cent of Britain’s elec¬
tricity generation for public supply and the proportion is likely to rise to about
one-seventh by the mid-1970s. Britain accounts for about 12 per cent of world
nuclear generation (excluding the Soviet Union). Since 1962 Britain has pro¬
duced over 240,000 gigawatt-hours of nuclear-generated electricity—much
more than any other country—and about 40 per cent of total world generation
from nuclear sources. _
Various stations make up the output. The original prototypes built by the
Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) at Calder Hall, Cumberland (198 MW) the
first in the world to operate on a commercial scale—and at Chapelcross,
Dumfriesshire (198 MW), are now owned and operated by British Nuclear
Fuels Ltd. (see p. 405). This company, one of two set up in 1970 to take over
the AEA’s trading function including the manufacture and reprocessing of
nuclear fuels in Britain and overseas, will be closely associated with the new
single company to be set up by the Government to design and construct steam
supply systems for nuclear power stations (see p. 405).
The AEA has at present three main stations which produce electricity for
the national grid: the Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor (AGR) at Windscale,
Cumberland (14 MW electrical output); the experimental fast breeder station
at Dounreay, Caithness (14 MW); and the Steam Generating Heavy Water
Moderated Reactor (SGHWR) at Winfrith, Dorset (100 MW).
Most of Britain’s nuclear-generated electricity is, however, supplied by
INDUSTRY
Transmission
and
Distribution
281
stations owned and operated by the electricity authorities. These, like Calder
Hall and Chapelcross, are all magnox stations—graphite-moderated, carbon-
dioxide cooled, using natural uranium metal fuel elements canned in magne¬
sium alloy. Under the first commercial programme, originally announced in
1955 but since twice modified, nine magnox stations with a total design capacity
of 4,500 MW were in operation in 1972: Berkeley, in Gloucestershire (276
MW design capacity), and Bradwell, in Essex (300 MW), were both com¬
missioned in 1962; Hunterston ‘A’, in Scotland (300 MW), in 1964; and in the
following year Hinkley Point ‘A’, in Somerset, Trawsfynydd, in Wales (both
500 MW), and Dungeness ‘A’, in Kent (550 MW); Sizewell, in Suffolk (580
MW), was commissioned in 1966; and Oldbury, in Gloucestershire (600 MW),
in 1968. A ninth station, Wylfa, in Anglesey (1,180 MW), was commissioned
in 1971.
Under a second programme announced in 1964 and extended in 1965, a
further 8,000 MW of nuclear capacity is planned of which about 6,500 MW
will be commissioned by 1976. The reactor design chosen for the programme
is based on the AGR at Windscale, a logical development of the magnox
system, which uses slightly enriched uranium dioxide fuel canned in stainless
steel. The first five AGR stations under construction are Dungeness ‘B’
(1,200 MW); and Hinkley Point ‘B’, Hunterston ‘B’, Hartlepool, County
Durham, and Heysham, Lancashire (each of 1,320 MW capacity). Further
stations are planned at Sizewell (1,320 MW) and at Portskewett (1,300 MW)
in Monmouthshire.
A large prototype fast reactor (PER) of 250 MW capacity is to be com¬
missioned by the AEA in 1973 at Dounreay (where in 1962 the experimental
fast reactor became the first of such type to produce electricity for public use
and to operate at a high power level). It is expected that the first full-scale order
for a Sodium Cooled Fast Reactor will be placed in the late 1970s, and that
from the mid-1980s a major part of nuclear orders will be for this type of
station.
Main electricity transmission lines—the national grid—supply most of the
country. By 31st March 1972 those of the CEGB totalled over 8,000 circuit
miles (13,000 kilometres), of which 4,670 miles (7,515 kilometres) were at
400,000 volts, and 2,990 miles (4,811 kilometres) at 275,000 volts. Primary dis¬
tribution in England and Wales is at 132,000 volts, comprising 11,200 circuit
miles (18,000 kilometres) of lines, with secondary distribution at 33,000 volts,
tertiary at 11,000 volts and general low voltage distribution at 415/240 volts
(standardisation of supply to consumers at 240 volts is almost completed). In
Scotland there were some 4,903 circuit miles (7,890 kilometres) of main trans¬
mission lines at the end of March 1972, of which 1,752 circuit miles (2,823 kilo¬
metres) operated at 275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000 volts. Primary
distribution in Scotland is at 33,000 volts. Energy movements on the grid in
England and Wales are controlled through the seven operational areas, set up
for that purpose and distinct from the regions in which the generating side of
the industry is organised; each area has a separate control, and the operations
are co-ordinated by a National Control in London. The grid in Scotland is
operated from the control centres at Pitlochry (NSHEB) and at Kirkintilloch
(SSEB).
The development of the grid system has made the British system the largest
fully interconnected power network under unified control in the world. Twin
cross-Channel cables laid between Dungeness and Boulogne, capable of
transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000 volts (direct current), have been in
282
Capital
Investment
Research
GAS
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
operation since 1961; by this means advantage is taken of the differences
between France and Britain in the timing of peak loads.
In England and Wales the Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers
electricity acquired mainly from the CEGB, supplemented from other sources,
such as industrial plants, and the nuclear power stations of the AEA. There
are 19 million consumers. Industrial concerns are the biggest users of elec¬
tricity. The principal domestic uses of electricity are for lighting, cooking and
for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous other domestic
purposes is rising steadily.
The NSHEB has about 488,000 consumers, many in remote areas. The
SSEB supplies more than 1*5 million consumers.
Some 5 per cent of Britain’s annual gross fixed capital formation in 1972 was
attributable to the electricity supply industry. The industry’s plans for new
capital investment are based on a growth in demand estimated at an annual
average rate of 5*4 per cent up to 1978-79.
Capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry has been expanding
very rapidly: from £249 million in 1956 it rose to £720 million in 1966 but has
since fallen to £400 million in 1972-73. About one-half of the industry’s
capital requirements has been financed from internal resources. The statutory
limit to borrowings by the industry in Great Britain is ^6,150 million, with
provision for extension to £7,700 million. The Gas and Electricity Act 1968
empowered the industry to borrow (long term) from overseas sources.
The Electricity Council, in consultation with the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry, is responsible for drawing up a general programme of research,
comprising direct research carried out by the electricity boards themselves,
supported by co-operative research with selected industrial research associa¬
tions and by research contracts placed with universities and other organisations.
The council itself is empowered to conduct research. It is advised by the
Electricity Supply Research Council. Collaboration on research between the
supply industry and the plant manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power
Engineering Research Steering Committee set up in 1966.
The main research establishments of the industry are run by the CEGB and
comprise the Central Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead,
Surrey, the Berkeley Laboratories in Gloucestershire, concerned with nuclear
problems, and the Engineering Laboratories at Marchwood, on Southampton
Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity utilisation is under¬
taken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst, Cheshire, and
by the area boards.
Both Scottish electricity boards carry out research and experimental work
either on their own or in co-operation with other electricity authorities. The
SSEB undertakes a wide range of research and development work, both in¬
dependently and in conjunction with the universities and manufacturers and,
with the NSHEB, is associated with the activities of the Electricity Council
and CEGB.
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London, was
first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light and
Coke Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London. In
the early years of the industry gas was used almost exclusively for lighting,
provided by a growing number of company and municipal undertakings.
The gas industry developed from a supplier mainly of lighting to a supplier
INDUSTRY
Structure
Production
Distribution
Consumption
283
mainly of heating during the period between the two world wars when in¬
creasing competition from electricity had to be met. It now supplies over 13^
million customers.
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain, in which about
115,000 people are at present employed, under public ownership and control
on 1 st May 1949. The industry’s structure was adapted under the Gas Act
1972 to take account of the change from manufactured to natural gas neces¬
sitating more centralised control of production and transmission. The British
Gas Corporation came into operation on 1st January 1973 taking the place of
the Gas Council, the former central co-ordinating body in the industry, and
assuming the responsibilities of the 12 area gas boards formerly carrying out
the local manufacture and the distribution of gas to consumers. Members of
the Corporation are appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry. In connection with its main duty of developing and maintaining an
efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of gas supply and of satisfying
reasonable demands for gas, it has powers: to search for and extract natural
gas and to extract any associated petroleum; to manufacture or acquire,
transmit and distribute gas; to manufacture, supply, or sell byproducts; and
to manufacture, install, maintain or remove gas plant and fittings.
A National Gas Consumers’ Council, and 12 Regional Gas Consumers’
Councils, have been set up to protect consumer interests.
In Northern Ireland the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a
number of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
The main single source of gas in Britain is now natural gas, supplied either
directly (over 70 per cent) or as feedstock for town gas manufacture, and
accounting for about 95 per cent of total demand.
The first productive well in the North Sea was discovered in 1965. Five
major gasfields have been located: Leman Bank, West Sole, Hewett, Inde¬
fatigable and Viking, all now in production. A number of smaller structures
have also been found and exploration continues.
The first pipeline to pump natural gas to the shore, at Easington in York¬
shire, was put on flow early in 1967. Since then further pipelines have been laid
to bring gas to the terminals at Bacton, Norfolk, and Theddlethorpe, Lincoln¬
shire. Natural gas accounts for about 11 per cent of total energy consumption.
During 1972 the aggregate quantity of gas available amounted to 11,171
million therms,1 an increase of 2,422 million therms (28 per cent) over the
previous year.
In 1972 the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was about 31-3
million therms, most of it for household use.
Since 1964 deliveries of natural gas from the Sahara have been made in liquid
form to Britain. The pipeline system then begun has been expanded to form a
national high-pressure pipeline system for distribution of natural gas derived
mainly from British fields in the North Sea. By March 1973 some 2,000 miles
(3,220 kilometres) of the required 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometres) had been
constructed. The central distribution system is fed from the two shore termi¬
nals by five feeder mains.
Just over half of all gas sold by gas boards is for household use and the re¬
mainder for industrial and commercial purposes. Total consumption has been
1 1 therm = 100,000 British thermal units = 25,200 kilocalories.
284
Domestic Use
Industrial and
Commercial Use
Capital
Investment
Lines of
Development
Research
FUEL
EFFICIENCY
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
rising steadily since 1961, after a period when growth was almost negligible,
and is now doing so with increasing rapidity. It rose by 30-3 per cent in
1971-72 and by 27 per cent in 1972-73- Sales reached a level of 10,179-5
million therms.
About 45 per cent of the domestic load is used for central heating, with gas
fires and cookers accounting for a further 45 per cent. There are some 11
million gas cookers, 9^ million space heaters, million central heating instal¬
lations, over 3^ million water heaters, and over 1 million refrigerators.
Gas has traditionally been used extensively in industries which require the
control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, for example, in the pottery
industry and in certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products.
Natural gas is being used as a chemical feedstock and in bulk fuel markets. In
1972 sales of gas to industry totalled 4,278 million therms; they have risen
sharply since the arrival of natural gas.
Under the Gas Act 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the area gas
boards was limited to £250 million. Since then the limit has been raised as
necessary. For the British Gas Corporation the borrowing limit has been fixed
by the Gas Act 1972 at £2,500 million, to be raised by order if necessary up
to £2,700 million. The Act also empowers the industry to borrow (long term)
from overseas sources.
The industry had been spending about £50 million a year on capital
investment in the period 1955 to 1961 but since 1961-62 expenditure has
increased sharply. Capital needs over the four years to March 1975 afe estima¬
ted at over £1,200 million, of which the largest items are £531 million on bulk
transmission and distribution and £371 million on conversion to natural gas.
About half of the total is to be met from internal resources.
Much of the gas industry’s current research and development effort is con¬
centrated on transforming the industry from one based on manufactured
gas to one based on indigenous natural gas. In 1970 it was estimated that the
switch over to natural gas in Great Britain would be completed in seven to
eight years. . .
A phased programme of converting the 30 million gas appliances is in
progress. Some 60 per cent of consumers had had their appliances converted
at the end of March 1973. Investigations are being made into projects in¬
volving various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions.
Liquefaction and storage facilities for natural gas have been constructed near
Coatbridge, Scotland, and other facilities are under construction or planned.
The British Gas Corporation has a research committee which advises on
research policy at four research centres. The engineering research station at
Killingworth, Northumberland, has concentrated on large-scale distribution
problems. Research is also done on behalf of the Corporation at a number of
universities and colleges. Work is being carried out on Corporation processes
for manufacture of substitute natural gas, in which there is wide interest
overseas, especially in areas where natural gas is running short. The Corpor¬
ation’s total expenditure on research, development and testing amounts to
£8-3 million a year.
Efficiency in the use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, has
been assisted by various bodies representing producers and consumers and
by the technical advisory services of the fuel and power industries.
INDUSTRY
New
Arrangements
285
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National
Coal Board, solid fuel distributors and appliance manufacturers and distri¬
butors. Originally formed in 1932, it informs and advises domestic users on the
best use of solid fuel, including the choice of installation and the operation of
solid fuel appliances.
The National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service, originally formed in 1954
and sponsored by the fuel and power industries to promote fuel saving in
industry is now run by private enterprise. In addition to consultancy work, it
provides advice and services to all non-domestic fuel users in a variety of
forms, from ‘spot’ inspection to full-scale surveys and regular visits on a
contract basis.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, with progressive development, sufficient for
domestic and industrial requirements. The sources of water are often distant
from the areas where supplies are needed, however, and water undertakings
are therefore mainly concerned with abstraction, storage, treatment and dis¬
tribution. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as mountain
lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river intakes, and
partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and boreholes. A
major reorganisation of water services in England and Wales is due to come
into effect on 1st April 1974.
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies
became a general public service, largely due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick
(a well-known social reformer) and his colleagues who demonstrated the
dangers arising from inadequate water supply and sanitation. The Public
Health Act 1848 laid the basis for a long series of statutes dealing with public
health. From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards a number of water
undertakings were set up to provide water to the expanding urban population,
and the water supply system developed rapidly, although in piecemeal fashion
and with some overlapping and waste.
The householder receives his domestic water supply at a comparatively
small charge, varying in different areas, which he usually pays by way of a
water rate levied, like other rates, on the value of his house. Industrial users
are charged in most cases according to actual metered consumption.
The Water Resources Act 1963 (which came into full operation in April
1965) created an administrative structure for England and Wales consisting
of a number of river authorities and a central Water Resources Board to meet
growing domestic, industrial and farm irrigation needs.
Until April 1974 water supply is in the hands of over 1,400 separate bodies,
including: 22 river authorities in England, three lying across the Anglo-
Welsh border, and four in Wales; 180 water undertakers providing supplies of
piped water for domestic and other uses; and over 1,200 sewerage authorities,
which are mainly local authorities or in some cases joint boards of local
authorities. There are also nearly 2,000 miles (3,220 kilometres) of canals and
river navigation administered by the British Waterways Board (see p. 357).
Under the Water Act 1973, a radical reconstruction of the water services in
England and Wales will come into effect in April 1974 alongside the re¬
organisation of local government (see p. 67). Responsibility for promoting
jointly a national policy for water in England and Wales will rest with the
Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales and the Minister of
286
Water Authorities
National Water
Council
Supplies
Scotland
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. A Central Water Planning Unit of the
Department of the Environment will take over responsibility for national
planning studies from the Water Resources Board. A Water Space Amenity
Commission has been set up to advise on recreation and amenity in England.
The Act provides for the setting up of nine regional water authorities in
England and a Welsh National Water Development Authority in Wales. Each
water authority consists of a chairman appointed by the Secretary of State,
members appointed by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and a
majority of members appointed by local authorities. The functions of the
water authorities will include water conservation; water supply; sewerage and
sewage disposal; control of river pollution; maintenance, development and
improvement of fisheries; land drainage; and recreational amenities relating to
water.
Also under the Act a National Water Council has been set up consisting of a
chairman appointed by the Secretaries of State, the chairmen of the water
authorities and ten other members with special relevant knowledge, of whom
eight have been appointed by the Secretaries of State and two by the Minister
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. The main function of the council is to
advise and assist ministers and water authorities.
Public water supplies in England and Wales—reaching over 99 per cent of
the total population—now total some 3,050 million gallons (13-9 million
cubic metres) a day, out of a total estimated abstraction of nearly 5,850 million
gallons (26-55 million cubic metres) a day (excluding water used for cooling
in connection with electricity generation). Capital expenditure on water
supply, sewerage and sewage disposal is estimated at £300 million in 1972-73;
an annual increase of 7 per cent in real terms is envisaged.
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by
grants under the Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Acts 1944 to 1971. By
March 1973 schemes costing over £132 million had been completed or were
in progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The administrative arrangements for water supply and distribution in Scotland
were reorganised by the Water (Scotland) Act 1967 under which the functions
of 200 local water authorities were transferred to 13 regional water boards in
May 1968. The Act also established the Central Scotland Water Development
Board which supplies water in bulk to its seven constituent regional water
boards; it does not supply direct to individual consumers. All the members of
these boards are members of town or county councils.
The water problem in Scotland is broadly similar to that in England and
Wales except that there is not the same need to allocate water between
competing interests and requirements are met almost entirely from surface
sources. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for general over¬
sight and co-ordination and has a general duty to promote the conservation of
water resources in Scotland; and to require regional water boards to provide
supplies of wholesome water everywhere in their regions, where this can be
done at reasonable cost; at present, they supply over 98 per cent of the total
population. The Scottish Water Advisory Committee advises the Secretary of
State on general questions relating to resources and supplies and the organisa¬
tion of the water service. The Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Act i944>
as amended, makes available to Scottish regional water boards and to local
authorities grant assistance up to a maximum of £60 million towards the cost
of water supplies and sewerage schemes in rural areas.
INDUSTRY
Northern
Ireland
Measurement
of Resources
Barrages
Pollution
Control
287
The 12 new regional and island councils to be set up in Scotland in 1975 to
carry out local government functions (see p. 69) are to be responsible for
water supply and sewerage; separate river purification authorities will con¬
tinue to be responsible for the regulation of the discharges of effluent to rivers
and certain tidal waters. The Central Scotland Water Development Board will
be reconstituted to carry out co-ordinating functions and administer water
schemes supplying more than one regional council in central Scotland.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water for both domestic and
industrial consumption. Over 90 per cent of the population has a piped supply.
Under the Water Supplies and Sewerage Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 the
Ministry of Development may pay grants towards the cost of water schemes.
Since 1945 over £80 million has been invested—over ^40 million by way of
government grants. The Ministry of Development, already responsible for
water conservation and pollution control, took over from local authorities, in
April 1973, responsibility for water supply and sewerage services.
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation’s water
resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain, and in
the Ground Water Year Book for England and Wales published annually by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. Detailed studies of the resources and use of
water in specified areas have been published in the series of hydrological
surveys which cover approximately half of England and Wales. General
information on rainfall, published annually in British Rainfall, is the res¬
ponsibility of the Meteorological Office. The Hydraulics Research Station
of the Department of the Environment at Wallingford and the Water Research
Association’s station at Medmenham carry out research into problems of the
design and calibration of gauging weirs and flumes for the measurement of
surface water, and into other hydraulic problems.
A Water Research Centre is to be set up to co-ordinate research in the
whole of Britain.
Barrage projects involve dams across or within tidal estuaries to form a lake
of fresh water, and studies have been carried out for several estuaries in
Britain. A report on a study for Morecambe Bay, Lancashire, published early
in 1972, put forward several suggested schemes, including a barrage and storage
reservoirs. A three-year survey is being carried out into plans for the Wash,
and a report has been published on the estuary of the Dee.
At present each river authority is responsible for the control of pollution of
rivers and certain tidal waters in its area and its approval must be sought before
polluting effluents are discharged. These responsibilities will pass to the
regional water authorities in April 1974, and new legislation on control of
pollution is projected.
The Government’s aim is to improve the quality of water in all the main
rivers by the early 1980s. According to the River Pollution Survey (see
Bibliography p. 478) much progress has already been made in diminishing
river pollution in recent years.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory at Stevenage investigates
problems connected with the treatment of polluted water, the treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention
of pollution of surface water and underground water.
288
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
Output
Housing
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industry includes firms engaged on the construction, altera¬
tion, repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage and
sewerage systems, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works, electrical
wiring, heating and other installation work, open-cast coal prospecting and
mining, and structural work connected with thermal and hydroelectric power
stations and telecommunications. About i-8 million people are engaged on
construction, including the self-employed. They represent some 7 Per cent of
the total civilian labour force. Nearly a quarter are employed in the public
sector. The construction industry accounts for about 12 per cent of the total
industrial product. A quarter of output consists of maintainance work, and
about half of all work is commissioned by public authorities.
Constructional work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. About five-sixths of the work is
done by private firms. Although there are over 66,000 firms employing two or
more people over 90 per cent of them employ fewer than 25 people.
Public authorities as a whole employ about 240,000 operatives but a very
large proportion of these are engaged on repair and maintenance work which
local authorities, for example, carry out with their own labour.
Over 40 per cent of operatives are occupied on building maintenance, valued
at over £1,500 million annually. The total labour force includes about 700,000
skilled craftsmen, most of whom have been trained for four or five years under
the industry’s apprenticeship schemes. A further 72,000 are employed as
apprentices.
Some firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake respon¬
sibility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the
smallest projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either
by architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects,
by consulting engineers. The functions of the latter, acting on behalf of a
client, embrace advice on the feasibility of projects, the drawing up of plans
and the supervision of the constructional work by the contractor.
The Department of the Environment (see p. 52) is responsible for the
construction programmes undertaken directly by the Government (except for
health and education projects), including work for the armed services, both at
home and overseas. It is also responsible for co-ordinating research and
development throughout the government service and seeks to influence
methods and techniques in the building industry as a whole. A Property
Services Agency was set up within the department in 1972 to deal with the
Government’s property and building functions.
The value of work done in 1972 amounted to £6,088 million, of which £699
million represented work carried out by the labour employed directly by
public authorities. Private contractors carried out the remaining £5,389
million (£4,284 million on new work and £1,105 million on repair work).
Some 350,432 houses were started in 1972 and 319,097 were completed,
of which 196,270 were for private owners. Of the £1,423 million of new
housing carried out by private contractors, £851 million, or over half, was
for private owners and the remainder for public authorities. Industrialised
building methods employing prefabricated components are used in much of
the work.
INDUSTRY
civil
Engineering
Projects
Overseas
Constructional
Work
Research
289
The National Building Agency is an independent advisory body, managed
by a board of directors appointed by the Department of the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and at present financed by a
government grant and the fees which it earns. Fee income has increased
rapidly, and the grant is to end by April 1974. Its main function is to encourage
the adoption of advanced methods of house building, and to provide technical
advice and services to government departments, local authorities and other
clients.
Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale
modern industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment
to carry out major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent
figures in the early development of civil engineering included John McAdam,
pioneer in road construction; Thomas Telford, builder of roads, bridges,
canals, docks and railways; George and Robert Stephenson and Isambard
Kingdom Brunei, pioneers of railway building.
Among important construction projects in hand in Britain in 1973 were
several major conventional power stations and nuclear power stations (see p.
280), dams and reservoirs, hospitals, large-scale housing developments, a
3^10 million office and shop development in Victoria Street, London, a £22
million scheme to extend the London underground railway system to London
Airport (Heathrow) and the first stage of the new Fleet underground line
across London. Projects for road construction, bridges and tunnels included
about 235 miles (378 kilometres) of motorways under construction in England
alone (see p. 351), and the ^28 million second Mersey Tunnel scheme of which
the first of two tunnels was opened in 1971.
Among important construction projects being undertaken by British con¬
tractors in overseas countries during 1973 were: a ^50 million dry dock and
ship-repairing scheme in Dubai; road schemes in many areas; a j£io million
governmental buildings scheme in Nigeria; work at the Chambishi copper
mine in Zambia; a ^13*5 million contract to extend and modernise an oil
refinery in Belgium; and an ^8 million pipeline scheme in the Soviet Union.
Recently the value of new overseas contracts obtained by British construction
firms, in a large number of different countries, has been running at about £300
million a year. A substantial and growing amount of overseas business is also
being done by British architects and surveyors, as well as by other types of
consultant. British members of the Association of Consulting Engineers had
projects worth about £3,784 million in hand on 1st January 1973, bringing in
some £50 million net in invisible export earnings.
The Directorate-General of Research in the Department of the Environment
works closely with the building industry on many aspects of construction
research. The Building Research Establishment which forms part of the
department includes the Building Research Station originally set up in 1921,
when Britain was the pioneer of organised building research; it is concerned
with all aspects of building and provides a technical advisory service for
construction firms. An Agrement Board, set up by the Government, tests and
certifies new products and methods.
The construction industry is served by several of the industrial research
associations. The Construction Industry Research and Information Associa¬
tion is concerned with structural design, civil engineering construction, build¬
ing design and construction, earthworks and foundations, hydraulic and public
290
METAL
MANUFACTURE
Iron and Steel
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
health engineering, and underwater engineering. The Heating and Ventilating
Research Association deals with heating and air-conditioning in dwellings and
commercial buildings. The application of materials is the main concern of the
Timber Research and Development Association and the Cement and Concrete
Association. Other research associations deal with bricks, paint, plastics in
building, welding and civil engineering hydraulics. The major construction
firms have research departments working on plant, materials and methods.
Other bodies concerned with research include the universities and colleges of
technology. Most of the producers of primary building materials have trade
associations which maintain research institutions chiefly devoted to seeking
new and more efficient use for their materials.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Britain’s manufacturing industries supply a wide range of products, many of
which are of major importance in world trade. Output has increased by nearly
one-third since 1963; output per head advanced by 7-6 per cent in 1972
bringing the rise since 1963 to 41 per cent. In 1972 the manufacturing sector’s
fixed capital expenditure totalled £1,775 million (at 1970 prices), 75 per cent of
which was spent on plant and machinery. The number of employees in manu¬
facturing industry (including the unemployed and those absent from work
through sickness and other causes, but excluding employers and the self-
employed) was 7-6 million in June 1972, 35 per cent of the total number of
employees. . m . • j-
The employment and production figures listed in Table 28 give an indica¬
tion of the relative importance of broad sectors of manufacturing industry.
Expansion has been particularly marked in those industries utilising advanced
technologies such as electronics, the newer branches of mechanical engineer¬
ing, instrument engineering, most sectors of the chemical industry and man¬
made fibres. In the subsequent sections, employment statistics refer to numbers
in Great Britain at June 1972, output figures are taken from the latest avadable
Business Monitor (see p. 262) and export figures from the Overseas Trade
Statistics of the United Kingdom. Some production figures are given in metric
terms, where statistics for an industry are published in this form. Conversion
tables are on p. 463.
The metal manufacturing industries employ 515,000 persons. Of these,
250,000 are in the iron and steel industry, and 86,000 in the manufacture ol
iron castings, 52,400 in the manufacture of aluminium and aluminium alloys,
and 63,800 in the copper, brass and other base metal industries. Exports of
iron and steel products and non-ferrous metals in 1972 had an aggregate value
of £724 million.
Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the
seventeenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the
discovery of the processes which led to the great expansion of steelmaking in
the second half of the nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world s fifth
largest steel producing nation.
Output of crude steel in 1972 totalled 25-3 million ingot tonnes, 5 per cent
more than in 1971. Pig iron production in 1972 totalled 15-3 million tonnes.
Net deliveries of finished steel amounted to 21*2 million tonnes in 1972. ihe
4-8 million tonnes of iron and steel products which were exported were worth
INDUSTRY
29I
£377 million; the United States (^72-3 million), India (^26 million) and Spain
(£24-4 million) were the main overseas buyers.
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public super¬
vision since 1932. The Iron and Steel Act 1967 brought into public ownership
13 major steel companies together producing well over 90 per cent of Britain’s
crude steel and employing some 70 per cent of the manpower in the industry.
Their shares and securities were vested in July 1967 in the British Steel
Corporation (BSC), whose specific duties include promoting the efficient and
economic supply of iron and steel products, exports and research and develop¬
ment; it is also statutorily responsible for the finances of the nationalised
industry. In March 1970, the BSC was reorganised on the basis of four
product divisions covering iron and steel and two covering constructional
engineering and chemicals. The two latter divisions have since been converted
into wholly owned subsidiary companies of the Corporation.
The main producing districts are: Wales (34 per cent of total crude steel
output); Yorkshire and Humberside (24 per cent); Northern (16 per cent);
and Scotland (12 per cent). Wales concentrates mainly on the manufacture
of flat products, especially sheet steel and tinplate; the output of the north-east
coast and Scotland is predominantly of heavy steel products (plates, sections
and rails), but a wide strip mill for sheet production is also in operation in
TABLE 28
Industry Groups:
Sales of Goods
Produced and
Work Done,
Production,
Employment
and Capital
Expenditure
Industry Group
Goods Produced and
Work done in 1971“
£
million
Percentage
of total
Index of
Industrial
Produc¬
tion
1972
1963
= 100
Number
of
Employees
(thou¬
sands)
June
1972
Fixed
Capital
Expendi¬
ture in
1972 at
1970 prices
A
million
Food, drink and tobacco
Coal and petroleum
products
Chemical and allied
industries
Metal manufacture
Mechanical engineering
Instrument engineering
Electrical engineering
Shipbuilding and
marine engineering
Metal goods not else¬
where specified
Vehicles
Textiles, leather and
clothing
Paper, printing and
publishing . .
Other manufacturing
industries
Total: all manufac¬
turing industry
8,507-5
1,503-8
3,599-2
3,820-4
4,890-1
629-4
3,489-3
644-2
2,626-4
4,592-8
4,256-3
3,023-6
4,413-7
18-5
3-3
7- 8
8- 3
10-6
1-3
7-6
1-4
5- 4
10-0
9- 3
6- 6
9-6
127-9
156-1
169-0
101-2
126-5
149-9
177-8
80-6
106-1
113-4
121-0
126-2
729-8
41-9
424-0
515-6
963-8
155-7
780-4
176-9
552-6
775-6
1,028-7
572-6
895-8
262-5
108-8
264-6
255-0
} 343-4
108-4
114-7
111-4
206-2
45,996-7
100
130-8
7,613-3
1,775-0
“ Census of Production 1971 {Provisional Results) the most recent year for which figures
are available.
n.a. = not available.
292
Iron Castings
Non-ferrous
Metals
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland. Production of special alloy and stainless steels is centred on Sheffield,
while Scunthorpe concentrates on heavy and medium products. The emphasis
in investment has been on improving efficiency rather than raising total
capacity and Britain has some of the most modern plant in Europe. Between
i960 and 1972 steel production by the basic oxygen steelmaking process
increased from 6 per cent of output to 44 per cent; by electric furnaces from
7 per cent to 19 per cent, while the share from older open-hearth processes
fell from 84 per cent to 37 per cent. Output per blast furnace has risen
markedly in recent years through improvements in efficiency, such as better
preparation of raw materials and the injection of oil and gas both to save
expensive metallurgical coke and to increase blast temperatures and by
improvements to blast furnace design. Outstanding development projects
completed in the last few years include a large-scale basic oxygen steelmaking
plant and a deepwater harbour/ore terminal at Port Talbot, and a basic
oxygen plant at Lackenby, Teesside. A major new steelmaking and finishing
complex at Scunthorpe was ready to commence operations early in 1973 74"
In December 1972 the Government approved a ten-year strategy by BSC
for the modernisation and expansion of its activities. This entails an invest¬
ment programme of £3,000 million (Cmnd 5226, see Bibliography, p. 478).
Expansion will take place at five existing sites—two in Wales at Llanwern and
Port Talbot, one at Ravenscraig in Scotland, one at Scunthorpe and one at
south Teesside where a new steelmaking complex will be constructed and the
existing Lackenby works expanded.
Total annual research and development expenditure by the industry is
about £14 million, most of which is incurred by BSC in its divisional and
corporate laboratories.
On 30th April 1973 the BSC adopted the European Coal and Steel Com¬
munity pricing system, under which the final price reflects differences in
transport costs from ‘basing points’ which vary according to product, through¬
out the country, and at which flat-rate prices, excluding transport costs, apply.
Some 800 foundries are engaged in the production of iron castings. Output
of castings in 1972—3-28 million tonnes—was 2 per cent less than in 1971.
The main users of iron castings are the motor vehicle industry, accounting for
nearly one-third of the total tonnage sold, the general engineering industry, the
manufacturers of pressure pipes and fittings, the building and associated
industries and the steel industry. Exports are included in the total for iron and
steel in the previous section.
The non-ferrous metals industry is the largest in Europe and as a consumer
of aluminium, copper and lead Britain is second only to the United States
among Western countries. Output in 1972 included: aluminium, 171,480
tonnes of virgin metal and 184,800 tonnes of unwrought alloys; refined
copper, 49,200 tonnes of virgin copper and 130,800 tonnes of secondary metal;
lead, 159,760 tonnes; zinc, 74,200 tonnes of slab metal; and tin, 26,200 tonnes.
Mining in Britain is confined to the small-scale working of tin; three mines are
operating in Cornwall, and the possibility of reopening several more is being
evaluated. Selective grants to encourage exploration for a range of minerals in
Britain have been introduced by the Government.
In 1972 exports of non-ferrous base metals were valued at £347 million.
The main products exported, including alloys and semi-finished products,
were copper (£8i-8 million), nickel (£57-2 million), aluminium (^35-
million) and lead (£18-8 million). The Federal Republic of Germany (£44-
N>
INDUSTRY
293
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
Agricultural
Machinery
Metal-working
Machine Tools
million), the United States (£44 million), and Switzerland (£32-5 million)
were the largest purchasing countries. Indirect exports are also substantial.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands; other centres in¬
clude south Wales, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where one of the
world’s largest zinc smelters (capacity 120,000 tons a year) was opened in
1968. Firms are engaged in smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling,
extrusion and drawing and the techniques of powder metallurgy and pressure
diecasting are also employed.
Two of the three major aluminium smelters whose construction was
approved by the Government in 1968 are now operational. When the three
smelters are in full production by 1974 they will provide over half of Britain’s
requirements for aluminium.
Britain is also a major producer of the newer specialised metals including
uranium, zirconium and beryllium for the nuclear energy industry; niobium
for aircraft production; and selenium, silicon, germanium and tantalum for
electronic apparatus. Scientific and technological research for the industry as a
whole is conducted by the British Non-Ferrous Metals Research Association.
Mechanical engineering, employing some 963,800 people, comprises a family
of industries including all types of machinery, machine tools, industrial
engines, mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment, industrial
plant, and ordnance and small arms. Vehicle engines are included in the section
on vehicles (p. 299). The aggregate value of the main products of all sections
other than small arms was about £4,590 million in 1972. Exports of non¬
electric machinery were valued at £2,054 million in 1972.
There are over 400 firms, employing 25,800 people, in the agricultural
machinery industry, including six large firms employing well over 1,500 workers.
In 1972 deliveries were valued at £77 million and exports were worth £45 •!
million; the main overseas markets were the Irish Republic, France, the
United States, the Federal Republic of Germany and South Africa.
The number of self-propelled combine harvesters, forage harvesters, pick¬
up balers and grain driers in use has increased in Britain in recent years.
Deliveries in 1972 included 5,666 combine harvesters, 4,792 milking machines,
and 854 grain and grass driers.
Britain was the birthplace of the modern machine tool industry. The industry’s
output today ranges from watchmakers’ lathes weighing a few pounds to
machines weighing hundreds of tons, and to numerically controlled machine
tools giving accuracies of one-ten-thousandth part of an inch. Almost 4,000
numerically controlled machine tools have been installed in Britain. The
Government, through the Department of Trade and Industry, is assisting the
industry in various ways, including a pre-production order scheme, and the
placing of research and development contracts.
The pattern of machine tool production is highly cyclical; deliveries in 1972
were valued at £162 million, including numerically controlled tools worth
£n-6 million. Exports of complete machines in 1972 had a value of £83-5
million, and of the orders on hand at the end of 1972 (£99‘2 million), 43 per
cent were for export; the Soviet Union (£8-9 million), France (£7-6 million),
United States (£6*i million), the Federal Republic of Germany (£5-6 million)
and Australia (£4-9 million) were the main overseas markets in 1972. The
seven major groupings in the industry’s 200 or so companies provide about
half of total deliveries, although because of the high degree of specialisation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
small firms are numerically predominant. Centred mainly in London, the
Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire, the industry employs about 67,500
people.
The Machine Tool Trades Association is the representative body of most
manufacturers and importers, and is responsible for the international machine
tool exhibition held in Britain every four years, the next being due in 1976.
The industry is served by its own research body, the Machine Tool Industry
Research Association.
Pumps, Valves
and
Compressors
Industrial pumps and valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are
vital components in many industrial processes particularly in the chemicals,
oil and electric power industries. The total work force is some 79,000 and
there are 450 companies of which ten employ more than 1,000 people. In 1972
deliveries of pumps and valves were estimated at £170 million and those of air
and gas compressors and fluid power equipment at £52 million and £62
million respectively. Exports of all types of equipment were an estimated £170
million.
Industrial Britain manufactures a wide range of industrial engines. Deliveries of internal
Engines combustion engines (including parts) had a value of £142 million in 1972
and exports (including parts and marine engines) were worth £61-1 million.
The brake horse-power of the internal combustion engines produced ranges
in size from under 3 b.h.p. to over 4,000 b.h.p. Production is concentrated
among the large firms in the industry, and a total of 27,800 people are employed.
Textile The textile machinery industry produces machines and accessories for the
Machinery and manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural and
Accessories man-made fibres. Comprising about 500 firms, four of which account tor
more than one-half of the total output, the industry has some 35,800 employ¬
ees and is situated mainly in Lancashire, Yorkshire, Northern Ireland,
Leicester and Nottingham. In 1972, the industry’s exports (£i39-6 million)
accounted for roughly two-thirds of total deliveries. Principal markets were the
United States {£27-6 million), the EEC (£23-4 million), the Commonwealth
(j£22'i million) and South America (j£i6*3 million).
Construction and
Earth-moving
Equipment
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including crawler tractors, motor graders, scrapers, trenchers, dozer
equipment, dumpers, excavators and loading shovels, and crushing, pulveris¬
ing and screening plant. The labour force numbers 36,600.
The value of deliveries from the industry was £307 million in 1972 of which
/150 million was for export; earth-moving machinery accounted for 80 per
cent of total deliveries. France, Spain and Australia are important markets.
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Almost every industry makes use of mechanical handling equipment, which
extends from individual units and accessories to complete operating systems.
The value of deliveries in 1972 was some £289 million, the main products
being cranes and bridge transporters, lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators,
hoists and powered industrial trucks. Exports of mechanical handling eclulP-
ment (including industrial and works trucks) in 1972 were valued at £76
million. There are some 640 firms in the industry, four-fifths of which have
fewer than 100 employees; the labour force totals 61,200.
INDUSTRY
Cable manufactured
for the new Cantat 2
telephone link
between Britain
and Canada.
Above:
Mainshaft roller
bearing for aero¬
engine.
Above right:
Electric melting
installation for the
manufacture of
ship’s propellers.
New device for
providing direct
computer input for
written characters.
Above:
Height gauge
micrometer and
dial indicator stand.
Above right:
Machine for grind¬
ing a surface finish
of 5 micro-inches.
Right:
Testing nuclear
valve actuators.
APPRENTICE
TRAINING
Right:
Tool making.
Far right:
Arc welding.
Printing.
INDUSTRY
295
Office
Machinery
Industrial Plant
and Steelwork
Boilers and
Boilerhouse Plant
Iron, Steel and
Non-ferrous Metal
Works Plant
Process Plant
Engineering
Nuclear Power
Station
Construction
Other Industrial
Plant
The office machinery industry comprises some 70 firms, 11 of which account
for about three-quarters of total output. Deliveries have been expanding
rapidly and in 1972 were valued at £127-2 million (excluding computers and
copiers). Exports of all office machinery (including electronic computers and
data processing equipment) were valued at £203-4 million. The most important
overseas purchasers were the Federal Republic of Germany (£35-5 million),
France (£31-6 million) and the United States (£21-6 million). British sub¬
sidiaries or associates of overseas firms are prominent in some sectors of the
industry. There are 30,400 persons employed.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial plant and
steelwork and in 1972 the estimated value of equipment deliveries was £500
million, of which £95 million was for overseas markets. Of particular impor¬
tance are chemical and oil refining (process) plant, steam-raising boilers,
sintering plant, metallurgical furnaces and plant, lime and cement kilns,
nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant, and fabricated steelwork
for bridges, buildings, and industrial installations. The industry, comprising
both equipment manufacturers and plant contractors, has many large-scale
enterprises, including nine with over 2,000 workers, and in all employs 167,100
people.
British companies delivered shell boilers and other boilerhouse plant to the
value of £108 million in 1972. Water tube boilers of advanced design and of
large steam-raising capacity are produced for power stations, whereas shell
boilers are used for steam-raising and heating in factories and buildings.
Exports of steam generating boilers in 1972 amounted to £io-i million, and of
boilerhouse plant to £10-9 million.
The steelworks plant industry, in association with firms producing rolling
mills, provides almost all Britain’s requirements as well as plant for export.
The value of deliveries in 1972 was £143 million. This industry consists of a
small number of firms, which often collaborate or form temporary consortia
to carry out particular projects. Finland, South Africa, Canada and Brazil
are a few of the countries in which British firms have undertaken major plant
projects.
The design, engineering, construction and commissioning of complete process
plants for the chemical, petrochemical, oil refining and gas industries has
expanded rapidly in recent years. There are now 30 process plant contracting
groups in Britain, half of which are United States subsidiaries. In 1972 expen¬
diture on plant in Britain by the process industries amounted to £200 million
and export contracts were worth an additional £100 million.
In March 1973 the Government announced that a new £10 million single
British nuclear reactor construction company was to be formed to replace the
two consortia formed in 1968 for this purpose. The largest British electrical
engineering company holds 50 per cent of the capital, members of the two
existing consortia have been given the opportunity to buy into a separate
organisation to hold 35 per cent and the remaining 15 per cent is held by the
Government through the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (see
p. 405).
A wide range of specialised equipment for industrial plant is produced.
Deliveries in 1972, valued at some £112-2 million, included distillation
296
Miscellaneous
Non-electrical
Machinery
General
Mechanical
Engineering
INSTRUMENT
ENGINEERING
Scientific and
Industrial
Instruments
Photographic
Equipment
Watches and
Clocks
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
columns, heat exchangers, lime and cement kilns, refuse disposal equipment
and water treatment plant. Exports amounted to £32-8 million in 1972.
In addition to the mechanical engineering firms described in the preceding
section there are about 2,200 enterprises whose principal product is a type
of machinery not so far mentioned. The main products include: mining
machinery (deliveries worth £106 million in 1972); printing, bookbinding
and paper goods machinery (^67 million); non-domestic refrigerating
machinery (£44-4 million); space-heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment (^151 million); food and drink machinery (^66 million), and
miscellaneous machinery (some ^43° million). There are some 229,700 workers
employed in these industries.
Behind the firms manufacturing the major products outlined in this section
are about 4,900 enterprises, employing 185,600 people, whose main functions
are to supply parts and components, to conduct research and development
work, and to undertake general sub-contracting, fabricating and repair work.
(Some enterprises are included because the mixed character of their work pre¬
cludes their classification under any single industry.) The sector includes ten
large undertakings with more than 2,000 employees. Ball and roller bearings,
and chains, are important products; exports of the former were valued at
£26-3 million in 1972 and exports of chains at ^9-2 million.
With a product range extending from scientific instruments to photographic
equipment and timepieces, instrument engineering is an important sector of
the engineering industry. Aggregate output was valued in 1972 at some £522
million and has increased, in volume terms, by 50 per cent since 1963* In a^>
some 155,700 people are employed in this sector.
The scientific and industrial instruments industry has a labour force number¬
ing 101,200. Deliveries of scientific instruments in 1972 some ^34^ million
—comprised: optical instruments, £29 million; electronic instruments, ^159
million; and non-electronic instruments, ^158 million.
Exports of scientific instruments have risen from ^27-9 million in i960 to
£145-1 million in 1972. In addition to various government research labora¬
tories the Sira Institute conducts research on behalf of the industry.
Deliveries of photographic, cinematographic and document copying equip¬
ment in 1972 totalled £68-8 million, and exports totalled £74 million.
The present industry has largely developed since the 1940s. It employs 13,300
people, and many of its factories are located on new industrial estates in the
older industrial areas, particularly in Scotland. Output in 1972 included
watches (£16-7 million), clocks (£io-6 million) and time recorders and parking
meters (£i-3 million); export sales, including parts, were valued at £16-4
million.
The electrical engineering industry, with a labour force of 780,400, is engaged
in the manufacture and installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment,
including all types of generating, transmission and distribution equipment;
motors; telecommunications and broadcasting apparatus, television and radio
receivers; computers; specialised electronic equipment; and domestic appli¬
ances. The volume of output has risen by 77 per cent since 1963 and the total
value of production in 1972 was estimated at almost £3,300 million.
INDUSTRY
297
Electrical
Machinery
Insulated Wires
and Cables
Electrical Goods
and Domestic
Electrical
Appliances
Exports of electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances in 1972 were
valued at ^662 million. Products are exported to all parts of the world; in 1972
South Africa (^42-6 million), the United States (3£39,2 million), the Federal
Republic of Germany (£38-9 million), France (£29-5 million) and Australia
(^29-1 million) were the main markets.
The industry’s leading representative organisations are the British Electrical
and Allied Manufacturers’ Association and the Electronic Engineering Associ¬
ation ; industry-wide scientific and technological research is carried out by the
Electrical Research Association.
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic
advances in the generation and transmission of electric power. The experi¬
ments of Michael Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity
as a source of cheap and abundant power. Sir Charles Parsons produced and
patented the first turbo-dynamo, the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating
sets of today.
In 1972 deliveries of electrical machinery were valued at £527 million,
comprising £92 million worth of generating equipment, ^49 million worth
of transformers, ^177 million worth of switchgear and control gear and
£209 million worth of other electrical machinery, including electric motors.
Exports of electric power machinery (generators, motors, converters, trans¬
formers and rectifiers) amounted to ^94’2 million in 1972, the main purchasers
being Australia (£7-7 million), Canada (^7-4 million) and South Africa
(^7-2 million). Switchgear, starting and control gear exports were valued at
£69-2 million.
Almost 570 firms manufacture electrical machinery, but recent mergers
have led to the creation of one of the leading electrical engineering groups in
Europe, while a number of smaller firms have been reorganised into larger
units. The total labour force numbers 136,500. Manufacture takes place in
many areas, including Birmingham, Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside and
Stafford.
The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power,
for telegraph and telephone networks and for many other purposes; its pro¬
ducts include submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of
materials. It is supplying the high voltage cable to carry the expanding output
of electric power in Britain (see p. 281). The value of deliveries in 1972 was
£315 million. Exports of electric cables, wires, and similar products, were
worth ^46-9 million; the main purchasers were Hong Kong and South Africa.
Most of the industry’s labour force of 44,900 are employed in five major
groups.
Deliveries of other electrical goods in 1972 included domestic electrical
appliances, £327 million; electrical equipment for motor vehicles and air¬
craft, £167 million; batteries and accumulators, £110 million; electric lamps,
j£6i million; and miscellaneous electrical goods, ^113 million. In terms of
volume, deliveries included: 0-9 million electric blankets, 2-5 million vacuum
cleaners, 1-2 million domestic washing machines and 2-1 million electric irons.
In 1972 exports of domestic electrical equipment were valued at ^52-5 million,
including washing machines and parts (^12-7 million), space heating equip¬
ment (£13'2 million) and vacuum cleaners (^9-i million); the main markets
were the Federal Republic of Germany and the Irish Republic. Exports of
BRITAIN 1974*. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
batteries and accumulators in 1972 were valued at ^177 million. The industry
has a labour force of 196,600.
Electronic Production of electronic equipment is one of the most rapidly expanding of
and Radio British industries. United Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many
Equipment basic contributions to electronics—the thermionic valve, which made amplifi¬
cation possible, the development of radar, the first public transmission tele¬
vision service, and the ‘printed circuit’, which has led to far-reaching changes
in the radio industry. Total deliveries in 1972, valued at £1,665 million, were
207 per cent up on 1971; export deliveries totalled £400 million. The industry
employs 317,500 people.
Capital Equipment Deliveries of electronic capital equipment in 1972 were valued at £658 million
(39 per cent of total output), including £248 million for export. (Indirect
exports incorporated in ships, aircraft and machinery are not included in this
figure but are also considerable.) Computers are the most important item of
capital equipment; the computer equipment industries include a number of
plants owned by United States multi-national, as well as British-owned,
companies. Output and export figures in 1972 were the highest yet recorded.
Total deliveries were valued at £246 million in 1972 and exports at £102
million.
Deliveries of radar and navigational aids were valued at £114 million in
1972, over six times the i960 level, and over one-third of total output was ex¬
ported. Three-quarters of the world’s radar-fitted merchant ships use British
equipment, as do most of the world’s civil airports outside the American
continent. All-weather landing systems, inertial (automatic) navigation
systems and marine radar based on solid-state electronics are among recent
developments. Other important items of capital equipment include electronic
control equipment (£93 million), radio communications equipment (£75
million) and electronic measuring and testing equipment (£48 million).
Components Deliveries of components (£345 million in 1972) comprised active components
at £177 million and passive components at £168 million. The industry s
increasing emphasis on miniaturisation has led to the replacement of conven¬
tional valves by transistors, and this development has led to microcircuits in
which large numbers of individual circuits are accommodated on a single
small slice of silicon.
Consumer Goods The consumer goods sector of the industry manufactures radio and television
sets, audio equipment, radiograms and tape recorders. The industry is
dominated by several large firms. Output of television sets in 1972 rose to
3 million (including 1-5 million colour television sets compared with 830,000
in 1971). Production of radios and radiograms numbered 1*9 million in 1972
and total sales were worth £31 million: the value of production of stereo
systems, estimated at £500,000 in 1971, has been doubling annually. Deliveries
of tape recorders amounted to over 446,000 worth nearly £6 million.
Telecommunications Only a part of the telecommunications industry is concerned with electronic
equipment, but it is normally considered as a sector of the electronics industry.
The degree of involvement in electronics is, however, increasing and will con¬
tinue to do so with the advent of new switching systems. Britain is a major
exporter of telegraph and telephone equipment with overseas sales valued in
1972 at £49 million. Research and development work is done by firms in the
industry in co-operation with the Post Office. The industry employs 84,900
people, and three firms are responsible for almost all the output.
INDUSTRY
299
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT
AND SHIPS
Motor Vehicles
Cars
Commercial
Vehicles
Accessories,
Parts, etc.
Tractors
Cycles and
Motor Cycles
Cycles
The industries which manufacture vehicles and aircraft are an important
source of overseas earnings; exports of transport equipment in 1972, valued
at £1,300 million, formed some 13 per cent of total exports. The labour force
numbers 952,500 and includes: 487,700 in motor vehicle manufacture,
201,000 in aerospace construction and repairing, 176,900 in shipbuilding and
marine engineering, 43,200 in the manufacture of locomotives and railway
wagons and carriages, 26,500 in wheeled tractor manufacturing and 17,200 in
the making of cycles and motor cycles.
The largest section of the vehicle industry comprises the manufacture of cars
and commercial vehicles.
At one time located mainly in the Midlands and the London area, the in¬
dustry, during the last decade, has built manufacturing and assembly plants on
Merseyside, in Wales and in Scotland.
Car and commercial vehicle output is dominated by the four largest firms—
British Leyland Motor Corporation, Ford, Chrysler United Kingdom and
Vauxhall—which account for over 95 per cent of complete vehicle production;
the balance is in the hands of smaller, specialist producers of heavy com¬
mercial vehicles, omnibuses, coaches, limousines and sports cars. The principal
trade association is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which
holds a motor show annually in London and a commercial vehicle exhibition
every two years. The Motor Industry Research Association carries out collec¬
tive research on vehicles and components.
Output of passenger cars in 1972 totalled 1*92 million units, compared with
1-74 million units in 1971. Exports in 1972 amounted to 630,000 cars valued
at £332 million. The United States (£65 million) was again the largest single
purchaser, followed by Belgium (£26*7 million), Canada, Iran and New
Zealand.
Production of commercial vehicles, including chassis, totalled 408,000 in 1972.
Exports in 1972 of new commercial vehicles (including chassis) numbered
150,000 worth £189 million. South Africa (£16 million), Nigeria (£11 million),
Australia and the Irish Republic were the main markets. Since 1961 Britain
has been one of the world’s largest exporters of commercial vehicles. The pro¬
totype of a gas-turbine-powered commercial vehicle is being evaluated.
Prototype battery electric buses are being evaluated in public service.
Exports of parts and accessories for cars and commercial vehicles, including
bodies, chassis and engines, had a value of some £375 million in 1972; caravan
and trailer exports totalled £28-9 million.
The bulk of British tractor output and exports consists of agricultural tractors.
Some 134,000 agricultural and industrial wheeled tractors were delivered in
1972, 103,000 (77 per cent) for export. Exports of new agricultural and track¬
laying tractors were valued at £145*9 million in 1972; South Africa (£13*9
million), the United States (£8*2 million), Canada (£7 million), Finland
(£6-6 million), Australia (£67 million) and Denmark (£67 million) were the
main buyers. Production is dominated by two large organisations. Britain has
one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world (see p. 323).
Sales of bicycles amounted in 1972 to 2 million. Most of British manufactur¬
ing capacity is in the hands of a single group of companies concentrated in the
Nottingham area. Some 1 -i million cycles worth £17*9 million were sent over¬
seas in 1972; the United States (£87 million) was the largest single market.
3 00
Motor Cycles
Railway
Vehicles
Aircraft and
Aero-engines
Aircraft
Aero-engines
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sales of motor cycles in 1972 amounted to 44,100. Manufacture is dominated
by one large group. Exports of motor cycles and parts totalled £20-6 million in
1972, with the United States (£147 million) much the biggest market.
The British Railways Board has its own workshops which supply British
Railways and certain other users in Britain; private firms build locomo¬
tives, carriages and wagons for British Railways, for industrial users and for
export.
The total value of exports of railway vehicles and parts in 1972 was £22-5
million; Malaysia, South Africa and Kenya were the largest purchasers.
The turnover of the aerospace industry totalled £988 million in I972, terms
of sales to final buyers, output in 1972 was valued at some ^672 million; about
41 per cent of this was accounted for by complete aircraft and airframe parts,
about 43 per cent by engines and parts and some 15 per cent by guided
weapons and space activities. The most notable turbo-prop aircraft in current
production and operation is the Hawker Siddeley °f which over 270 have
been sold or are on order. A second generation of jet airliners, the medium-
haul Trident and the BAG One-Eleven, the world’s first jet transport designed
to operate economically on short-haul routes, have been in service for over
eight years. Other civil aircraft in production include the HS125 executive
jet, the Skyvan all-purpose light transport, the luxury commuter version, the
Skyliner, and the Islander and Trilander, economical feeder-line aircraft.
Flight trials of the Concorde, the western world’s first supersonic airliner,
developed jointly by Britain and France, are at an advanced stage.
The industry produces a wide range of military aircraft, including the
Jaguar, in collaboration with France, and the Harrier vertical take-off strike
aircraft, 90 of which have been ordered for the United States Marine Corps.
Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy are jointly developing a
supersonic multi-role combat aircraft (MRCA) to meet the needs of their aii
forces during the late 1970s and 1980s. The industry is producing or has under
development about 18 types of guided missile for use by the armed services
of Britain and several overseas countries. Its space activities include sounding
rockets, scientific and communications satellites and work on the United
States programme to develop a space shuttle craft.
Hovercraft, a new type of transport vehicle invented in Britain, are being
increasingly used throughout the world. Britain has built a number of types,
including the 190-ton SRN4 which now carries over 20 per cent of cross-
Channel passengers and car traffic. Military craft are in service particularly in
the Middle East.
In 1972 exports of the aerospace industry totalled £418 million. Exports of
new aircraft and parts in 1972 (excluding electrical equipment) had a value of
£1927 million, 19 per cent more than in I971, Leading buyers included
France (^39’2 million) and the United States.
The construction of aircraft is dominated by two large airframe manufac¬
turers and one helicopter concern; outside these groups are a few important
smaller companies. Besides extensive research work by the industry, research
on a substantial scale on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out
by the Government, chiefly at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the
National Gas Turbine Establishment, both at Farnborough, and the Royal
Aircraft Establishment at Bedford. The industry has over 50 collaborative
agreements with overseas governments and companies.
Exports of aero-engines and parts have provided well over ^1,300 million in
INDUSTRY
301
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Merchant
Shipbuilding
Ship Repairing
Marine
Engineering
overseas earnings since 1946, and in 1972 were valued at £191‘5 million, 36
per cent more than in 1971: major customers were the United States (^78-8
million), France (^267 million) and the Federal Republic of Germany
(£15-6 million). More than 12 different types of British jet engines power
aircraft currently in production overseas. Famous engines include the econo¬
mical Dart turbo-prop, the Spey turbo-fan, the revolutionary Pegasus lift-
thrust engine for vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft, and the
Olympus, the power plant for the Concorde and the advanced technology
RB211 which powers the Lockheed Tristar.
Almost all of Britain’s aero-engine manufacture is in the hands of Rolls-
Royce (1971) Ltd., a publicly owned company, to which the essential assets of
Rolls-Royce Ltd. were transferred in May 1971.
The building of large ocean-going vessels is concentrated in four main areas:
the river Clyde in Scotland, the north-east and north-west coasts of England
and Belfast in Northern Ireland. Numerous yards around the coast build
smaller vessels such as naval ships, fishing vessels, yachts and harbour
craft.
Co-operative research into shipbuilding and marine engineering is under¬
taken by the British Ship Research Association with its headquarters on the
river Tyne.
Since the publication in 1966 of the report of the Shipbuilding Enquiry
Committee, many British shipyards have embarked on programmes of
modernisation and reorganisation. In many cases this was facilitated by
assistance from the Shipbuilding Industry Board (SIB) which was in operation
from 1967 to 1971. Shipyard modernisation has been paralleled by major
structural changes. A series of mergers has led to the creation of two major
groups on Clydeside (one of which has been reorganised following its liquida¬
tion), three in north-east England, one in eastern Scotland and one in southern
England. Together with one firm on the River Mersey and one in Belfast—
where the world’s largest building dock is now operational—they accounted
in 1972 for more than nine-tenths by gross tonnage of the industry’s new
orders for merchant vessels.
A gradual fall in tonnage launched from the 1955 peak of 1-5 million gross tons
was halted in 1964, and launchings in 1972 totalled 1-24 million gross tons.
British launchings were the fourth largest in the world in 1972 accounting for
4-6 per cent of the world total. Thirteen oil tankers, totalling 360,000 gross
tons, were launched in 1972. Launchings also included 14 bulk carriers
totalling 442,000 gross tons and 42 cargo ships amounting to 306,800 gross
tons. At the end of 1972 orders on hand for merchant vessels of over 100 gross
tons were 220 (256 in 1971) totalling 4 million gross tons with a value of £643
million. Of these vessels, 49 (1-4 million gross tons) were for export.
There are many specialist ship-repairing establishments and most of the larger
shipbuilding firms also carry out repair work. Repair yards and dry docks are
situated in all the large ports.
Many of the larger shipbuilding yards maintain or have closely associated
engine building works, constructing various types of marine slow-speed diesel
engines, usually under licence. One independent firm is taking part in the
design of a large slow-speed diesel engine. There are two other independent
builders of slow-speed engines. Steam turbines of the highest powers are also
built.
302
MISCELLANEOUS
METAL
PRODUCTS
Engineers’
Small Tools
and Gauges
Cutlery and
Flatware
Domestic
Hollow-ware
Hand Tools and
Implements
Jewellery, Gold
and Silver Ware
CHEMICALS
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The group of industries manufacturing metal products not already described
consists of a large number of companies with a total labour force of 552,600
in 1972; the main groups were engineers’ small tools and gauges (65,000
persons), bolts, nuts and screws (38,900), wire and wire manufactures
(38,400), cans and metal boxes (27,500), jewellery, plate, and the refining of
precious metals (19,300)* hand tools and implements (20,300), cutlery (14,100),
and other metal industries (329,000). The total value of exports in 1972 was
about j£2oo million.
The manufacture of engineers’ small tools and gauges is an expanding
industry, deliveries having nearly doubled in value since i960. Totalling £115
million in 1972, they included jigs and fixtures (£20 million), press tools and
moulds (£21 million), hard metal-tipped tools (£16 million) and other metal
cutting tools (£52 million). Export deliveries in 1972 totalled ^24 million.
The production of cutlery and flatware is centred mainly in the city of
Sheffield and the industry’s reputation has been built on the skill of its
craftsmen. Mass-production methods are, however, extensively used except
in the case of some of the highest quality wares, although firms are mainly
small. The value of sales of cutlery and flatware in 1972 was £18 million,
including export sales of ^7-9 million.
This industry, located mainly in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, south
Wales and London, produces a wide range of domestic utensils, such as
saucepans, buckets and dustbins, mainly from aluminium and wrought steel.
The value of sales in 1972 was £30 million, of which £9-8 million were sales for
export.
The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest British industries, covering
the manufacture of such tools as files, saws, hammers, axes and spades,
Sheffield, Birmingham and other Midland towns are the most important
centres. The value of sales of implements and tools, other than machine tools
and portable power tools, was ^55-2 million in 1972, of which £17 million
worth were exported; the totals included sales of hand tools, at home and for
export, valued at £54 million and £16 million respectively.
The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware and the refining of precious
metals is an industry in which British craftsmen are heirs to a long tradition.
Most of the firms in the industry are small. The law requires that gold and
silver plate shall not be sold until it has been hall-marked at one of the Assay
Offices situated in London, Birmingham, Sheffield and Edinburgh. The
Birmingham office, located in the main centre of the jewellery industry, is
the largest of these. The total value of sales of jewellery, goldsmiths’ and
silversmiths’ wares, including coins and medals, and electro-plated nickel
silver wares in 1972 was £63 million, of which ^i5’2 million was for export.
The chemicals industry, with a labour force of 424,000, comprises the manu¬
facture of: general chemicals (140,000 employees), pharmaceutical chemicals
and preparations (74,100), toilet preparations (24,800), paint (26,200), soap
and detergents (15,400), synthetic resins, plastics materials and synthetic
rubber (45,900), dyestuffs and pigments (18,200), fertilisers (11,409), and other
chemical products (67,900). The industry is capital intensive, its fixed capital
expenditure, excluding mineral oil refining, amounting to almost £2,428
INDUSTRY
Inorganic and
Organic
Chemicals and
Dyestuffs
Pharma¬
ceuticals
Plastics
3°3
million during the eight years 1964-71, and totalling £310 million in 1972. A
significant proportion of this investment has been devoted to sectors with the
fastest changing technologies, notably petrochemicals and plastics. The value
of exports in 1972 was ^962 million, or 9-9 per cent of total British exports.
Production in the general chemicals industries rose by 69 per cent between
1963 and 1972.
Over half the output of the inorganic chemicals industry consists of a limited
number of relatively simple chemicals, such as sulphuric acid, caustic soda,
chlorine and ammonia, produced in very large quantities and serving as basic
materials for industry. Sulphuric acid has the largest production of any
chemical and 3-5 million tonnes were produced in 1972. The remaining output
of this sector consists of a very wide range of chemicals of varying complexity.
Substantial quantities of inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture
of such products as fertilisers, detergents, paint, glass and metals. About one-
sixth of output is estimated to be exported directly.
Production of organic chemicals (which include coal-tar chemicals) rose
by 93 per cent between 1963 and 1972. To an increasing extent petroleum is
the raw material used and it is estimated that in 1972 petroleum-based
chemicals accounted for over four-fifths of the total output of organic chemi¬
cals; deliveries of feedstock for the petroleum chemical plants totalled 6-3
million tonnes in 1972 compared with 0-3 million tonnes in 1959. The most
important products (by weight) in 1972 were ethylene (1-12 million tonnes) and
propylene (542,000 tonnes). The main outlets for organic chemicals are plastics
materials, solvents, synthetic rubber, man-made fibres and detergents.
Production of dyestuffs is geared primarily to demand by the textile industry;
about 51,000 tons of synthetic dyestuffs were produced in 1972.
Exports of chemical elements and compounds amounted to £254-3 million
in 1972. Major purchasers were: the Netherlands (£36-8 million), the United
States (£27-4 million), France (£14-2 million) and the Federal Republic of
Germany (£12-5 million).
The whole range of drugs is produced in the United Kingdom, including
antibiotics, sulphonamides, anti-malarial drugs, anti-histamine products,
anaesthetics, vaccines, sera and naturally occurring drugs.
Notable British contributions to the development of new products include:
the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming and its evaluation by Sir
Howard Florey and E. B. Chain; the evaluation of sulphapyridine (M & B 693)
by Sir Lionel Whitby; the discovery of griseofulvin; and, more recently, the
isolation of the penicillin nucleus and the development of several semi¬
synthetic penicillins and the cephalosporin antibiotics. Several of the larger
pharmaceutical companies in Britain are subsidiaries of overseas firms.
In 1972 exports of medicinal and pharmaceutical products and goods rose
by 7 per cent to £180-8 million, of which £22-4 million worth were antibiotics.
The largest purchasers were the Irish Republic (£11-2 million) and Japan
(£10-4 million).
The first plastic, Parkesine (later called Celluloid), was produced and patented
in Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes; other British discoveries include
polyethylene. Plastics manufacture is one of the fastest growing sections of the
economy. Output of synthetic resins has doubled since 1963 and total produc¬
tion in 1972 was 1-2 million tons including o-8 million tons of thermoplastic
resins.
3°4
Synthetic
Rubber
Fertilisers
Crop
Protection
Products
Paints
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Expansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of
which the most important are polyethylene (used in coverings and packaging
notably for foodstuffs), polyvinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a wide
range of industrial purposes and consumer goods) and polystyrene (a material
used for toys, light mouldings and many consumer goods). One of the newer
thermoplastic materials is polypropylene, which can be fabricated as mould¬
ings, films and fibres. A new family of plastics materials reinforced with
carbon fibres is now in commercial production in Britain; they are up to three
times the strength but only half the weight of steel. Rapid expansion of capa¬
city for all the main types of plastics materials is planned. Exports in 1972
amounted to about 680,000 tonnes, valued at £176 million. The main pur¬
chasers were Australia (£13-1 million), Sweden (£13 million), the Irish
Republic (£12-8 million) and South Africa (^n-i million).
The first general purpose synthetic rubber to be manufactured on a com¬
mercial scale in the United Kingdom was marketed in 1958. High styrene
rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use where oil
resistance is required, are in large-scale production, and neoprene rubber is
manufactured in Northern Ireland. Production in 1972 amounted to 306,824
tonnes, most of which came from the styrene-butadiene plant at Hythe, near
Southampton. Exports of synthetic rubber and latex were worth £257
million in 1972.
The development of artificial fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
the British scientists Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert. Production is
dominated by three firms and there are a number of firms marketing com¬
pound fertilisers from the principal constituents—nitrogen, phosphorus and
potassium. Output of nitrogenous fertilisers (in terms of nitrogen content)
has been increasing and in 1971-72 totalled 760,000 tons, while 466,000 tons
(in terms of phosphate content) of phosphatic fertilisers were produced; pro¬
duction of compound fertilisers amounted to over 3 million tons in 1971-72.
The use of ammonium nitrate (35 per cent nitrogen), ammonium phosphate,
and, to a limited extent, urea (mostly 45 per cent nitrogen) is resulting in more
concentrated fertilisers. The value of exports of manufactured fertilisers,
mainly nitrogenous, was ^7 million in 1972-
Notable discoveries by the British crop protection industry include the
insecticidal activity of BHC (benzene hexachloride), the first selective hor¬
mone weed-killer, MCPA, and more recently Gramoxone, a non-residual
general herbicide. Sales of pesticides and allied products were valued at £90
million in 1972, over double the 1971 total; herbicides (£21 million) were the
largest single category. Exports of insecticides, fungicides and disinfectants in
1972 totalled j£33'5 million.
Manufacturers’ sales of paint and varnish during 1972 amounted to some 606
million gallons (including 29 million gallons of emulsion paint) valued at £193
million. Britain is one of the largest exporters of paints in the world; exports ot
pigments, paints, varnishes and related materials in 1972 amounted to £52 7
million. Indirect exports in the form of surface coatings for finished goods are
considerable. . j • 1 j-
In recent years many improved techniques have been introduced, including
new ranges of synthetic resins and pigments, quick-drying paints and paints
needing only one application.
INDUSTRY
305
Toilet
Preparations,
Soap and
Cleaning
Preparations
Radioisotopes
TEXTILES
Cotton
Wool
Sales of toilet preparations were provisionally valued at .£178 million in 1972,
including export sales of ^28-2 million; home market sales of hair preparations
totalled about £46 million. Petroleum is the source of the principal raw
materials used in the manufacture of organic surface-active agents in deter¬
gents; the other main constituent, polyphosphates, is derived from inorganic
sources. Sales of synthetic detergents amounted to 524,000 tons in 1972,
including 36,000 tons for export. Deliveries of soap totalled some 243,000 tons.
Sales of polishes in 1972 were valued at £20 million, including floor and
furniture polishes worth j£ii million. Exports of perfumery and toilet pre¬
parations, soap and associated products were valued at ,£54*7 million.
Radioisotopes are processed and marketed by The Radiochemical Centre Ltd.
at Amersham, one of the new companies set up under the Atomic Energy
Authority Act 1971 (see p. 405). In the year ended March 1972 sales of radio¬
isotopes were valued at .£6 million, of which 62 per cent represented exports,
the highest proportion so far.
In recent years, the boundaries between the various fibre-based sectors of the
textile industry have become indistinct and considerable vertical integration
has taken place, connected with the rapidly developing technology of man¬
made fibres. Large multi-fibre, multi-process groups have been formed, four
of which now control the bulk of spinning and warp knitting.
The industry has a labour force of 558,000, half of whom are women;
35,700 are engaged in the production of man-made fibres, 63,500 in the spin¬
ning and doubling of cotton, flax and man-made fibres, 49,000 in the weaving
of cotton, linen and man-made fibres, 107,000 in the woollen and worsted
trades, 127,500 in hosiery and knitted goods, 50,600 in textile finishing and
43,000 in carpets. The total value of textile exports in 1972 was £445 million.
Production of textiles rose by 4-6 per cent in 1972 and was 28 per cent higher
than in 1963. The industry’s main research body is the Cotton, Silk and Man¬
made Fibres Research Association.
Cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods industry and cotton piece-goods
its largest export during the nineteenth century. Increasing low-cost competi¬
tion has cut progressively into British markets and a global limit has been in
force on imports of cotton textiles from most countries since 1966.
Output in 1972 consisted of: 268 million lb. of single cotton yarn, 180
million lb. of spun man-made fibre and mixture single yarn, 166 million lb. of
doubled yarn, 215 million lb. of textured man-made fibre continuous filament
yarn, 561 million linear yards of woven cotton cloth, and 514 million linear
yards of man-made fibre and mixture cloth. In 1972 exports of cotton yarn
(excluding man-made fibres) were worth £11-7 million, exports of woven
cotton fabrics were valued at £29 million, with the Irish Republic the most
important market.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county
being mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning.
Manchester is the commercial centre and Liverpool the chief port of entry for
raw cotton.
The wool textile industry, one of the largest in the world, is the most ancient of
Britain’s staple industries and has been important since medieval times. There
are two main branches—woollen and worsted. The small or medium-sized
business predominates, with only a few large firms. While the West Riding of
3°6
Man-made
Fibres
Hosiery and
Knitwear
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Yorkshire is by far the most important producing area, Scotland and the west
of England remain famous as specialised producers of high-quality woollen
cloth. In recent years an increasing amount of man-made fibre has been
blended with wool.
In 1972 output included 75 million kg. of wool and hair tops and 131
million kg. of woollen yarn. Deliveries of worsted and semi-worsted yarn
amounted to 102 million kg. and of woven fabrics to 220 million square yards.
In addition, large, but declining, quantities of raw wool are scoured and
cleaned in Britain. Consumption of raw wool in 1972 was 152 million kg.
Exports in 1972 included wool yarns (£27-3 million), woollen fabrics (£40
million) and wool worsted fabrics (£23-5 million). The main buyers of woollen
and worsted fabrics were Japan (^9'3 million), the Federal Republic of
Germany and Canada. Raw wool (cleaned or scoured in Britain) and other
animal hair and tops exported had a value of £44 million. Research is carried
on mainly by the Wool Industries Research Association.
Much of the early development of viscose rayon and acetate took place in
Britain. Production is spread throughout the country with Northern Ireland
of growing importance. Large firms predominate in the industry. There has
been a rapid expansion of output in recent years, the 1972 total of 627,000
tonnes being 67 per cent more than in 1964. Output consisted of 363,000
tonnes of staple fibre and 264,000 tonnes of filament yarn in 1972. Of the
staple fibre, 178,000 tonnes, and of the continuous filament, 196,000 tonnes,
were of fully synthetic materials.
Two main types of man-made fibres are manufactured: those made from
cellulose (such as rayon) and those produced by fully synthetic processes from
chemical substances (such as nylon). Viscose rayon is still the most widely
used of all man-made fibres and output in 1972 totalled 4537 million lb. The
world’s largest rayon staple factory is at Greenfield (north Wales), with an
annual output of over 260 million lb., while other large rayon plants are at
Grimsby and Preston. Almost all the rayon produced in Britain is made by a
single company and its subsidiaries.
Production of nylon, the first fully synthetic fibre, in the form of nylon 66,
started in Britain in 1941; another type of nylon (nylon 6) has been manu¬
factured since 1963.
Terylene, a polyester fibre, was invented in Britain during the second world
war. It is resistant to fading and is particularly suited to blending with wool.
A group of fibres of growing importance are the acrylic fibres: Courtelle (a
British discovery) and Acrilan are examples. Synthetic elastomerics or spandex
fibres, which are man-made textile fibres having inherent properties of stretch
and recovery, are now produced commercially.
Exports of man-made fibre synthetic and regenerated yarns had a value of
£95 million in 1972, and woven fabrics ^25-4 million. The United States,
Switzerland, Sweden and the Irish Republic were the most important pur¬
chasers of yarns.
The hosiery and knitwear industry is predominantly one of small-scale
enterprises. Although widely distributed, the industry is centred in the east
Midlands, the north-west of England and in Scotland. Sales of knitted goods
were valued at £474 million in 1972 including £180 million worth of outer¬
wear and £97 million worth of socks, tights and stockings. Sales of knitted
fabrics were worth ^197 million in 1972. Exports of knitted or crocheted
clothing and accessories were valued at £5 5 "9 rmllion in 1972; the largest
INDUSTRY
Other Textiles
Linen
Jute
Lace
Miscellaneous
Textile
Manufactures
Carpets
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FOOTWEAR
SO?
buyers were the United States, the Irish Republic and Switzerland. Exports of
knitted and crocheted fabrics amounted to £43-3 million. The Hosiery and
Allied Trades Research Association, with laboratories at Nottingham, under¬
takes collective research.
The linen industry is concentrated in Northern Ireland (the greatest linen¬
manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder in Scotland.
Broadly, the Northern Ireland industry concentrates on yarns and the lighter
types of fabrics, while in Scotland production is largely of coarse linens and
canvas, although household types are also produced. Northern Ireland manu¬
facturers produced 23*4 million linear yards of cloth in 1972, while weavers in
Great Britain delivered 25-9 million square yards, including 9-8 million
square yards of sailcloth and canvas. Exports in 1972 included ^6-6 million
worth of linen fabrics and £3-8 million worth of flax yarns and linen thread.
Jute is manufactured on a large scale in the Dundee area—the centre of the
world’s oldest jute industry. Jute yarn is used in the manufacture of carpets,
cordage, ropes and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the
packaging, carpet, upholstery, building and motor car industries.
New uses for jute, as a plastics reinforcement for example, have been deve¬
loped. In 1972, 94,000 tons of raw jute were used, and exports of jute fabric
and yarn totalled ^2-4 million.
Sales of finished lace goods amounted to j£i8*i million in 1972. The most
important lace product is manufactured on warp knitting machines, with
sales valued at ^7-3 million. Exports of principal products were worth £4-1
million in 1972.
In addition to the products mentioned above, British textile firms manufacture
a wide range of other goods, including many special yarns and fabrics, net,
household textiles such as blankets, tablecloths and curtains, and floor cover¬
ings other than carpets. Sales of floor coverings of linoleum, vinyl and other
synthetic materials were valued at nearly £40 million in 1972; just under one-
sixth was for export. The cordage industry is one of the largest in Europe.
Exports of ropes, cordage, nets and netting in 1972 were valued at ^4-8
million.
Almost 150 enterprises are engaged in the manufacture of carpets and rugs,
including several large groups. Total sales in 1972 amounted to some 180
million square yards worth about £290 million. Over half of the volume of
sales is accounted for by tufted carpets, in the production of which the pile,
usually with a high man-made fibre content, is inserted into a pre-woven
backing; woven carpets, such as Axminster and Wilton make up most of the
remainder of sales, and form over one-third of the value of exports—£51-6
million in 1972. The principal manufacturing centres include Kidderminster
(in Worcestershire), Halifax and Bradford (in the West Riding of Yorkshire),
Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland) and several towns in Northern Ireland.
About one-quarter of the carpets produced (by quantity) are made pre¬
dominantly of wool and a growing proportion of traditional woven carpets
contain some man-made fibre.
There are 470,700 employees in the clothing, leather and footwear industries.
Some 337,900 are in the clothing industry, 87,800 in the footwear trade and
45,000 in leather, leather goods and fur manufacture. The aggregate value of
their exports in 1972 was £109 million.
goB BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Clothing The British clothing industry is the largest in Europe and total deliveries of
made-up clothing have increased by 21 per cent since 1963. Exports in 1972,
excluding knitted goods, were valued at £65-1 million; the Irish Republic
(£7-6 million) was the main purchaser.
Although there are some large firms employing mass-production methods
on an increasing scale, the typical firm is small. The principal manufacturing
centres are London, Leeds and Manchester, but several firms are also situated
on industrial trading estates throughout the country. The Clothing Export
Council, representing some 220 companies, organises promotions for various
sectors of the industry.
Leather Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. In 1972 the industry s
output totalled £157 million; exports were valued at £41’9 million. The United
States (£7-3 million) is the largest single market, followed by Canada (£47
million) and the Federal Republic of Germany.
Tanneries are situated in most parts of Britain, but there are important
concentrations in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, the north Midlands and
the London area. Many different types of leather are produced, ranging from
the heavy types for industrial uses, such as machinery belting, to high quality
leather for footwear, leather goods, gloves and clothing. Collective research is
carried out by the British Leather Manufacturers’ Research Association.
Footwear The British footwear industry is among the largest in the world. In 1972
manufacturers’ sales of footwear totalled 184 million pairs. Exports of all
types had a value of ^32-i million; the United States (£5*2 million), the
Irish Republic and Canada were the largest markets.
Factories are located throughout Britain. Some areas concentrate on pro¬
duction of particular types; for example, the Rossendale Valley region of
Lancashire on slippers, and Leicester and Norwich on women’s and girls
shoes. The Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world-wide
reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
FOOD, DRINK The food, drink and tobacco industries employ 729,800 people in the pro-
AND TOBACCO Auction of a great variety of goods. The value of their combined exports in
1972 was £619-5 million. Exports of alcoholic and other beverages accounted
for £266 million; sugar, sugar preparations and honey for £46-4 million; cereal
and cereal preparations for £33-9 million; fruit and vegetables for £31-4
million; and coffee, cocoa, tea and spices for £50-6 million.
Many of the industry’s leading firms have been involved in mergers in
recent years.
Bread and Flour
Confectionery
and Biscuits
The household consumption of bread, which has been falling, averaged about
2 lb. 2 oz. (0-96 kg.) per head per week in 1972. The trend is heavily towards
concentrating production in large mechanised bakeries; about two-thirds of
the bread is made in these bakeries, which specialise in sliced and wrapped
loaves; three groups have a dominant position. In the smaller bakeries produc¬
tion of cakes and other flour confectionery is usually allied to bread production.
There are 121,100 employees in the bread and flour confectionery industry
and a further 24,300 in grain-milling. ,
There are 43,700 employees producing biscuits, and annual output has been
about 600,000 tons in recent years. Weekly consumption of cakes and biscuits
per head in Britain was 10-7 oz. (0-3 kg.) in 1972. British biscuits have
gained a world-wide reputation, and, despite the problem of import restnc-
INDUSTRY
Cocoa,
Chocolate and
Sugar
Confectionery
Fruit and
Vegetable
Products
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Beverages
Whisky
3°9
tions in several overseas markets, exports in 1972 were valued at j£i3-4
million.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which has 73,000
employees, is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and
many medium-sized and small firms. The main ingredients used by the
industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose, milk, nuts and fats. Production of
chocolate and sugar confectionery was 766,000 tons in 1972. Consumption of
chocolate and sugar confectionery in the United Kingdom is among the
highest in the world, being equivalent to 8 oz. (0-23 kg.) per head per week.
The value of exports in 1972 of cocoa preparations (including chocolate)
was ^26-4 million and ofsugar confectionery ^21-9 million. The United States
and Canada were the main markets for sugar preparations. An estimated 30
per cent of total world exports of chocolate and sugar confectionery come from
Britain, the world’s largest exporter of these products.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen and dried fruit and vege¬
tables, jam, marmalade and pickles. The labour force numbers 54,700. Output
of jams and marmalade, which fell from 329,000 tons in 1949 to about 215,000
tons in 1956, has since remained little changed, totalling 181,000 tons in 1972.
Raspberry, strawberry, apricot and blackcurrant jams are the most popular.
Exports of jams and marmalade in 1972 were valued at ^2*5 million.
In 1972, 785,000 tons of canned vegetables were produced. The British
Navy was using canned foods in 1813, but rapid development in the industry
did not take place until after 1935. Beans in tomato sauce (297,000 tons) and
processed and fresh peas (255,000 tons) are the vegetables most in demand as
canned products. In addition, output in 1972 included 62,000 tons of canned
and bottled fruit. Strawberries, rhubarb and plums are the most important
fruits used for canning, followed by prunes, gooseberries and fruit salad.
Sales of prepared fruit pie fillings are increasing.
Nearly 235,000 tons of vegetables were processed by quick freezing in 1972.
The industry comprises the curing of bacon and ham, the canning and pre¬
serving of meat and fish, the manufacture of sausages and pies and the pre¬
paration of extracts and pastes. The labour force numbers 108,800. Output of
canned meat and canned meat products in 1972 totalled 135,000 tons, and the
quantity of bacon and ham cured was 272,000 tons. Quick-frozen fish output
amounted to some 104,000 tons in 1972; small quantities (15,000 tons in 1972)
are also canned. Exports of fish and fish preparations had a value of £29-3
million in 1972 and those of meat and meat products were worth ^49-4
million.
The industries producing beer, spirits, wines, cider and soft drinks have a
labour force of 127,200.
Exports of whisky (almost all of it Scotch whisky) totalled 69 million proof
gallons with a value of ^228 million in 1972; almost half went to the United
States (j£ioi million). Scotch whisky was first distilled in the fifteenth century.
It is blended from 20 or more different types, some from malted barley and
some from other grains. Whisky requires several years to mature, and the
172-3 million proof gallons of Scotch whisky produced in the 1972 distilling
year will not be on sale for some years. Stocks of whisky amount to more than
600 million proof gallons, representing 10 years’ consumption. About four-fifths
of annual sales are to overseas buyers.
3IQ
Gin
Brewing and
Malting
Soft Drinks
Tobacco
BRICKS,
POTTERY, GLASS
AND CEMENT
Brickmaking
and Refractory
Goods
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early 1950s. The main
distillers are in London and one company accounts for a large proportion of
total output. Although the larger manufacturers also own distilleries abroad,
exports had a value of £14-1 million in 1972.
There are 69,200 employees in the brewing and malting industry. There are
seven major brewery groups which market their products throughout the
country. In 1972, 35-3 million bulk barrels of beer were produced, the highest
since 1920, and consumers’ expenditure on beer amounted to £1,650 million.
Exports in 1972 of malt beer were 431,000 bulk barrels, worth £6 million.
Firms have introduced new production methods, including continuous brew¬
ing processes, and automated batch production plants are well established.
The main raw materials used in brewing are malt, hops and some sugar.
Malt is made almost entirely from home-grown barley. Some brewers make all
or part of their own malt, others purchase it from independent maltsters who
also supply distillers, vinegar brewers and malt extract manufacturers. British
malt is used by brewers throughout the world, and exports in 1972 amounted
to 83,000 tons, worth £5 million.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade although
sales are liable to be seasonal. Output in 1972 included 71 million gallons of
concentrated liquid, and 291 million gallons of unconcentrated drinks. Though
there has been some amalgamation in recent years, there are still several
hundred firms supplying regional markets. There are two very large firms
among about 20 producing widely advertised brands which are marketed on a
national scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by firms in the pro¬
duction of various types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes
and cordials, tonic waters and ‘mixers’, and comminuted drinks (in which the
whole fruit is used).
The tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other tobacco
goods sold in Britain. In 1972 the industry’s total sales were valued at £1,658
million. Exports worth £46-8 million (of which cigarettes accounted for
90 per cent) were shipped to a large number of overseas markets; Saudi Arabia,
the Netherlands and Belgium being the most important. The main centres of
production are in and around Bristol, Liverpool, London, Manchester,
Newcastle, Nottingham, Glasgow and Belfast. The two biggest manufacturing
groups account for over 90 per cent of total output. The industry has 34,200
employees.
The tobacco industry used 291-4 million lb. (132-2 million kg.) of un¬
manufactured tobacco in 19725 all of which was imported. In 1972 the main
sources were the United States, Canada and India. Output included 254*5
million lb. (115-4 million kg.) of cigarettes, including 205-7 million lb. (93-3
million kg.) of tipped cigarettes; 4-5 million lb. (2 million kg.) of cigars; and
29 million lb. (13-2 million kg.) of pipe and other tobacco.
This group comprises the manufacture of bricks, fireclay, refractory goods,
pottery, glass, cement, abrasives, asbestos and other building materials. The
industries have a combined labour force of 294,900 which includes 48,400 in
the bricks, fireclay and refractory goods trades, 72,400 in the glass industry
and 53,600 in the pottery industry.
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
pots, fireclay ware and heat-resisting products including furnace and kiln
linings. Brickmaking, one of Britain’s oldest industries, was introduced by
INDUSTRY
Pottery
Glass
Cement
311
the Romans, and manufacturing methods vary from traditional hand fabrica¬
tion to highly mechanised systems. In 1972 about 6,940 million building
bricks were produced in Great Britain, made mainly in the Bedford and Peter¬
borough areas. Refractory goods (firebricks, silica bricks, magnesite bricks
and chrome-magnesite bricks) are manufactured mainly for home use.
The pottery industry, supplying almost all home needs for domestic and
industrial pottery, is a long-established and complex industry, largely located
in the Stoke-on-Trent area of Staffordshire. Almost all of its raw material is
indigenous, such as china clay, ball clay and china stone from Devon and
Cornwall.
Domestic pottery, including china, earthenware, stoneware, jet and Rock¬
ingham, accounts for about half of the industry’s output; the other main
divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware, and such specialised
industrial products as acid-proof stoneware, porous ceramics and laboratory
porcelain are also manufactured. Among famous makes of British pottery are
Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton, Coalport and
Royal Crown Derby. Total sales of domestic pottery were ^77*1 million in 1972
including record export sales of ^36 million; the United States and Canada
are the leading markets.
There has been considerable re-equipment in the industry; kilns fired by
gas or electricity have replaced almost all the coal-fired kilns, and new decorat¬
ing techniques and automatic and semi-automatic machinery have been
introduced.
Britain’s glass industry is one of the largest in the world. The section of the
industry devoted to the manufacture of plate and sheet glass in their various
forms is organised for quantity production, much of it in the form of the
‘float’ glass process, which, developed in Britain and perhaps the most marked
advance in the history of glass-making, has been licensed to glass makers
throughout the world. The use of glass for internal decoration and as a finish
for internal and external walls has greatly increased in recent years. Large
quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor industry. Other products
include tubular glass (produced on a large scale), mirrors, lamp and bulb
glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of glass
containers (most of which is made automatically). A traditional product is
hand-made lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
Direct exports of glass and glassware reached the record value of ^49-3
million in 1972. Those of glass were worth £28-2 million, the most important
markets being Australia, the United States and South Africa. The figure
included ^I0’4 million of float glass.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research
Association, and much research work is also carried out by the Department
of Glass Technology of Sheffield University.
The cement industry of the United Kingdom, with 14,600 employees, is chiefly
concerned with the manufacture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph
Aspdin and patented in 1824, this material and the methods of its production
have been the subject of continuous technical improvement and intensive
research. The capacity of the industry has expanded substantially in recent
years. The Dartford-Gravesend district of Kent is an important producing
area. Output totalled 17-9 million tonnes in 1972.
312
PAPER, PRINTING
AND PUBLISHING
Paper and
Board
Printing and
Publishing
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The paper, printing and publishing industries have 572,600 employees,
including 70,900 in the manufacture of paper and board, 84,500 in the
production of packaging materials, 139,300 in the printing and publishing of
newspapers and periodicals, and 211,700 in other types of printing and
publishing.
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until
1678, but records show that some paper was produced as long ago as 1492.
The British paper and board industry is one of the largest in Europe. Total
production in 1972 of all types of paper and board amounted to 4-4 million
tonnes. Of this, newsprint accounted for 469,000 tonnes and other printing and
writing papers for 1-07 million tonnes; 1-24 million tonnes was board and the
remainder was made up chiefly of wrapping papers, industrial and special
purpose papers and tissues. Exports of paper and boaid reached a new record
level of ,£68-9 million in 1972 and exports of manufactured paper items were
valued at ^32-9 million. The main purchasers were the Irish Republic,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Netherlands.
Total sales of household paper products, including facial tissues, have risen
sharply to £65 million. In 1972, sales of cardboard boxes and cartons were
valued at £170 million while those of fibreboard packing cases totalled £175
million; sales of manufactured stationery amounted to £198 million in 1972.
Wallpaper manufacturing is dominated by two firms; a recent development
has been the introduction of plastics and plastics-coated wall coverings.
The main raw materials are woodpulp and waste paper. Woodpulp pro¬
duced in the UK is of increasing importance although it still represents only
a small percentage of total supplies (some 975,000 tonnes per annum of home¬
grown pulpwood are used in its manufacture). The amount of waste paper
consumed by paper and board mills in 1972 was i’9 million tonnes, most of it
collected as salvage in this country.
There are a few very large groups in the industry and many medium-sized
and small firms. The large groups hold considerable interests abroad, includ¬
ing pulp and paper producing mills in the United States, Canada, other parts
of the Commonwealth and Europe.
Research is undertaken by The Research Association for the Paper and
Board, Printing and Packaging Industries.
The printing industry produces an immense range of goods, from national
newspapers and periodicals to books, catalogues and greetings cards. The
industry includes many very small enterprises. Mergers in recent years have
led to the formation of large groups in the newspaper, magazine and book
publishing sections. Three large firms each employ more than 15,000 persons.
General printing, publishing, engraving and bookbinding remains essentially
an industry of small firms.
Book publishers’ turnover in 1972 is estimated at £197 million, of which
export sales accounted for £69 million. Book titles published in 1972 totalled
nearly 33,000, over 25,000 of them new ones. Popularity of paper-backed
books has increased rapidly in recent years. Exports of printed matter, manu¬
scripts and typescripts were valued at ^119*8 million in i972> including books
and pamphlets (£69-2 million), and newspapers and periodicals (£18-1
million), but these figures do not include parcel post shipments, which are
possibly as large again as the recorded totals. The United States, Australia and
the Netherlands are the most important overseas markets. The Book Develop¬
ment Council of the Publishers’ Association promotes the supply and use of
INDUSTRY
313
British books overseas. Firms have introduced the latest developments in
high-speed printing equipment, including electronic engraving machines and
advanced processes of photographic reproduction, and several newspapers are
now set by computer.
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Other manufacturing industries include the timber and furniture group, with
270,200 employees, rubber manufacture, with 114,000 employees, and a group
of miscellaneous manufactures employs some 216,700 including 113,000 in
plastics moulding and fabricating.
Rubber
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
Tyres and tubes represent more than half the output of the industry but firms
also make a variety of goods, the most important being rubber footwear,
conveyor belting, cables, hose, latex foam products and other vehicle com¬
ponents and accessories.
In 1972 the industry’s consumption of rubber totalled 464,100 tons, com¬
prising 173,500 tons of natural rubber, 269,400 tons of synthetic rubber and
21,200 tons of reclaimed rubber; the proportion of synthetic rubber used is
increasing. In i972> 230,000 tons of rubber were used in the production of
tyres and tyre products. Tyre manufacturers include several subsidiaries of
United States and other overseas companies. The largest tyre group in Europe
came into being in January 1971, following the merger of Britain’s leading
tyre producing company and its Italian equivalent. Direct exports of rubber
and rubber manufactures in 1972 were worth ^96-4 million, with Sweden,
the United States and Australia as the main markets. This figure included
tyres and tubes valued at £52-5 million, but excluded large indirect exports on
vehicles. In addition, the industry exported about £4-6 million worth of
rubber footwear and £4 million of rubber gloves and other miscellaneous
products. Tyres are now being developed which remain safe after puncturing.
Deliveries of domestic furniture rose by nearly 60 per cent in volume between
1963 and 1972, and in the latter year their value was an estimated £315 million.
Exports of all furniture were worth .£35 million in 1972. Numerous enterprises
manufacture furniture in Britain (including domestic, upholstered, office,
school and other furniture) and the labour force is of the order of 88,000. The
bedding industry employs 21,300 people; sales of new bedding in 1972 by
larger manufacturers were valued at £57 million. Scientific research and
technical and other information services are provided by the Furniture
Development Council and the Furniture Industry Research Association.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain, and embraces highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units. The value of sales in
1972 was £43 million, of which jCys million was for export.
The timber industry employs 92,700 people. Britain is mainly dependent
on imported supplies of timber (valued at £253 million in 1972) but sawmill
output of home-grown timber was about 610,000 cubic metres in 1972. Other
products include plywood and chipboard.
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
The number of people engaged in manufacturing toys and sports equipment
and children’s carriages in Britain is 42,000. Sales of toys and children’s
carriages in 1972 were worth £102 million and exports had a value of ^32-5
million. The Federal Republic of Germany and the United States were the
main overseas markets. The value of manufacturers’ sales of games was £9
million and that of sports equipment £32 million.
15 Agriculture, Fisheries
and Forestry
THE LAND AND
ITS USES
Size of Farms
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on
imports for nearly half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest
and most important industries. It occupies 647,000 people or 2-8 per cent of the
total in civil employment, provides about 2-9 per cent of the gross national
product, and uses 47 million of the 60 million acres (19 million of the 24
million hectares) of land.
The soils of the country are varied (see p. 5). Land used for farming is
conventionally divided into land suitable for cultivation (crops and grass) and
rough grazing. In hill country the area of cultivated land is often small, but is
usually supplemented by grazing on a comparatively large area of hill land.
In Britain there are 30 million acres (12-2 million hectares) under crops and
grass. Cultivated land, rough grazing, woodlands (ancillary to farming) and
other land used for agriculture together represent 79 per cent of the land area.
The rest is mountain and forest, or put to urban and kindred uses. The area
available for farming is gradually decreasing to meet the needs of housing and
industry; so far, the loss has been offset by the increase in output from what
remains. The ratio of rough grazing—used for stock, mainly sheep to better
quality agricultural land varies considerably throughout Britain. In the
southern half of England, for example, it constitutes only about one-tenth of
the total acreage, increasing to a quarter in Northern Ireland, about a third
in the hill regions of England and Wales and nearly three-quarters in Scot¬
land.
There are about 293,400 statistically significant farming units in Britain. Some
44 per cent are very small units, mostly farmed part-time, and accounting for
less than a tenth of the industry’s total output. Of the 165,000 full-time farm
businesses some 37,500 are classified (by standard man-days) as large farm
businesses (capable of employing four or more men full time): these, account¬
ing for some 13 per cent of the number of holdings, produce nearly half the
industry’s total output. There are about 55,000 medium-sized (two-three
men) and 72,000 small farm businesses. The total is falling by about 2 per cent
Amalgamation of small farms into larger, more viable units has been en¬
couraged by successive governments. The average size of full-time holdings
in Britain is 232 acres (94 hectares) of crops and grass (including rough
grazings). . • tvt u
Some 35,000 of the total of significant farming units are in Northern
Ireland: about half of these provide a full-time occupation for the owner and
produce over four-fifths of the total output. The typical farm size is between
40-70 acres (16-28 hectares). Other holdings, of which there are about 27,000,
are either extremely small or let in conacre (seasonal lettings for crops or
grazing).
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Types of
Farming
AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION:
CROPS AND
LIVESTOCK
Production
3i5
The increasing use of intensive methods of production both in crops and in
animal husbandry has led to greater specialisation. Three-fifths of the full¬
time farms in Britain are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle and sheep.
One in six is a cropping farm and the remainder specialise in pigs, poultry or
horticulture or are mixed farms. In England the farms devoted primarily to
arable crops are in the eastern part of the country—in East Anglia, Kent,
Lincolnshire and the East Riding of Yorkshire. In Scotland the rich lowlands
of the east coast are also primarily arable. Potato and vegetable growing on a
substantial scale marks the farming of the Fens (south Lincolnshire and
Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers Thames and Humber
and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes are an important crop
in Pembrokeshire and the south-west. Elsewhere, horticultural crops are
widely dispersed amongst agricultural crops.
Dairying occurs widely, but there are concentrations in south-west Scot¬
land, the western parts of England and south-west Wales, where the wetter
climate encourages the growth of good grass. Sheep and cattle are reared in the
hill and moorland areas of Scotland, Wales and northern and south-western
England. Beef fattening takes place partly on better grassland areas and partly
in yards on viable farms.
In Northern Ireland dairying is the main occupation on 40 per cent of the
full-time farms, while a further 30 per cent concentrate on beef and sheep
production. The remainder are either specialised cropping and horticultural
holdings, intensive pig and poultry units or mixed farms with no predominant
single enterprise. Oats and barley are widely grown, mainly for livestock
feeding, and the only important cash crop is potatoes.
The increase in production which has occurred over the past decades is a
result of the effort of individual farmers, of farmers’ organisations, of research
workers and advisers and of government action. The role of the Government
is described on pp. 323-26.
The steady expansion in production and in yield per acre of arable land which
has taken place since 1936 is summarised in Table 29. Apart from a slight
decline between 1961 and 1964, and another in 1968, total cattle stocks have
risen each year since 1957, to reach a record figure of nearly 14 million at the
end of 1972. The milk-producing herd, having been fairly constant in size
since i960, has begun to expand, and the beef herd is also expanding. Numbers
of sheep and lambs reached their highest level in 1966; although they later
declined, some expansion is now evident again. Numbers of pigs have in¬
creased by one-quarter during the past decade, as have those of poultry.
Arable production has shown a greater diversification since the second world
war. Total cereals production has increased considerably since i960, reaching
a record of over 15 million tons in 1972-73. Potato production is susceptible
to weather conditions but, on average, adequate supplies are maintained.
Between 1963 and 1972-73 output of pigmeat increased by nearly one-quarter
and eggs by one-tenth; these increases, together with those in beef and milk,
resulted in higher consumption of feedingstuffs, mostly from home resources.
Between 5 and 6 million tons of concentrated feeds are imported each year,
depending on the size of the home crop of cereals.
The index of agricultural net product (all holdings) at constant prices has
risen steadily. By 1953-54 it: was some 56 per cent above the immediate pre¬
war average; it rose a further 36 per cent between 1954-57 and 1964-67.
3l6
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Years commencing 1st June
TABLE 29
Land Use,
Produce and
Livestock
Item and Unit
Averages
1936-38 1960-62
Land Use (’000 acres)
Total crops and fallow
Temporary grass
Permanent grass
Rough grazings
Total
8,907
4,180
18,750
16,476
48,313
Main Crops
Cereals: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
of which—
Wheat: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield {cwt. per acre)
Barley: area (’000 acres) ..
harvest (’000 tons)
yield {cwt. per acre)
Oats: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield {cwt. per acre)
Potatoes: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield {tons per acre)
Sugar area (’000 acres) . .
beet: harvest® (’000 tons)
yield {cwt. per acre)
Livestock (’000 head)
Total cattle and calves
of which—dairy cows
beef cows
heifers in
calf
Sheep and lambs
Pigs 
Poultry
Livestock Products
Milk (million gallons)
Eggs (million dozen) . .
Beef and veal (’000 tons)
Mutton and lamb (’000 tons)
Pigmeat (’000 tons) . .
Poultry meat (’000 tons)
5,301
4,442
1,856
1,651
17-8
929
765
16-5
2,403
1,940
16-1
724
4,873
6-7
335
415
24-8
11,044
6,991
12,683
18,202
1971
b
1972
48,920
7,709
10,229
2,062
3,159
30-5
3,729
4,996
26-7
1,742
1,876
21-7
757
6,691
8-8
429
819
38-2
12,139
5,718
12,172
16,501
46,530
8,675
; y 3,281
554
25,786
4,466
76,236
1,555
558
578
195
435
89
11,855
3,234
911
818
28,779
6,163
108,775
2,482
1,085
864
257
745
333
12,021
5,825
12,132
16,342
46,320
1972
metric
equiva¬
lents
4,865 <*
2,357d
4,910d
6,6Ud
18,745*
9,416
14,729
2,710
4,739
35-0
5,654
8,423
29-8
896
1,339
29-9
634
7,280
1L5
471
1,125
54-0
12,804
3,234
1,378
831
25,981
8,724
139,016
2,843
1,171
933
223
990
624
9,386
15,246
2,786
4,686c
33-6
5,653
9,093
32-2
777
1,235
31-8
584
6,441
110
468
899
46-0
13,483
3,325
1,476
954
26,877
8,619
140,045
2,973
1,134
967
231
993
661
3,798*
1,127*
4-21e
2,288*
4-04*
314*
3-99*
236*
27-6°
190*
5-9*
13,515^
0 Raw equivalent basis.
Source: Agricultural Departments.
d ’000 hectares. / million litres.
e tonnes per hectare.
6 From June 1970 agricultural holdings in Great Britain include statistically significant
holdings of one acre or less, previously excluded.
c Provisional.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Grassland
Crops
Cereals
Fodder Crops
Sugar Beet
Potatoes
Dairy Farming
31?
With the average of 1964-67 as a base, the index for all commercially signi¬
ficant holdings reached 118 in 1971-72; 117 is forecast for 1972-73.
The British climate suits grassland farming. Grassland forms an important
section of the economy of most farms, whether as permanent grass, mostly
occupying land less suitable for cultivation, or as sown grassland (leys), often
part of the arable rotation. A wide range of herbage species and varieties are
used.
Grassland production has been enhanced over recent years by the develop¬
ment and application of new techniques, notably the increased use of fertilisers
(especially nitrogenous), methods of grazing control, improved herbage con¬
servation for winter feed and irrigation. Rough grazings remain as semi¬
natural grassland used for extensively grazed flocks and herds, producing
young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Wheat is grown mainly in the eastern half of the country. About 47 million
tons were harvested in i972> with average yields estimated at 34 cwt. per acre
(4-3 tonnes per hectare). Between one-third and one-half of the wheat crop
is used for flour milling, the remainder going mainly for animal feed.
Since 1961 the area under barley has increased by nearly 50 per cent and in
general production has risen faster because yields have also increased. The
malting and distilling market currently absorbs about one-sixth of the crop;
most of the remainder is retained by farms or sold for animal feed.
The widespread use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation
of drying and storage facilities on many farms. Such equipment is also often
used on a co-operative basis.
In Great Britain the total area of fodder crops has fallen because in many
cases farmers can provide winter feed more economically by increased grass
production and improved methods of conservation. The principal fodder crops
are beans and kale in England and turnips and swedes in Scotland.
Beet is grown mainly in East Anglia and Lincolnshire under contract to the
British Sugar Corporation, which takes the entire output at guaranteed prices
and also provides technical advice and assistance. More than three-quarters
of the crop is mechanically harvested.
Potatoes are grown in most parts of Britain. First supplies of early potatoes
normally come at the end of May. The lifting of main crop potatoes usually
starts in September. Seed potato production for Britain and for export is
chiefly centred in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Britain is normally self-sufficient in main-crop potatoes. As yields are
increasing, requirements, including the increased demand for processed
potatoes, can be met from a declining acreage. The area planted with potatoes
has declined from 829,000 acres (335,000 hectares) in i960 to 584,000 acres
(236,000 hectares) in 1972. The average yield per acre from the 1972 crop was
11 tons, resulting in an overall balance of supply and demand. Although potato
production is becoming increasingly mechanised, much hand labour is still
needed.
Milk is more valuable when sold on the liquid milk market than when con¬
verted into cheese, butter or other milk products. In Great Britain milk is
produced primarily for liquid consumption, but in Northern Ireland the greater
part of the milk is used for manufactured products. Average consumption of
liquid milk per head is 4-6 pints per week.
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Average yields per dairy cow have increased during the last decade by about
14 per cent and now average some 888 gallons a year. Freedom from tuber¬
culosis has reduced herd wastage, and a campaign to eradicate brucellosis is
under way. The Friesian breed is dominant in the dairy herds of England,
Wales and Northern Ireland, and the Ayrshire breed in Scotland. Average
herd size is 34 cows. Milk production has been stimulated by advances in
grassland management, intensive grazing techniques and new methods of
making high quality hay and silage. Most dairy farmers practise some degree
of intensive grass management, but hay or silage of the traditional type supple¬
mented with purchased concentrates remain the basic winter feeds.
A great number of specialised breeds of livestock have been developed over
the centuries in Britain. Substantial sales of animals and semen are made to
overseas buyers seeking to replenish and improve their herds and flocks.
British breeds have recently been joined by a number of continental breeds.
Artificial insemination plays an important part in cattle breeding, nearly
two-thirds of the dairy herd in Great Britain being bred in this way, through
centres operated by the Milk Marketing Boards and other organisations.
In the hill regions hardy herds of beef cattle are kept, especially of the Gallo¬
way and Welsh Black breeds and their crosses; in marginal land and lower
areas the sires used are predominantly of the Aberdeen Angus and Hereford
breeds. About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the dairy
herds, some females being mated to beef sires. There is a large and complex
trade in store cattle (increased by animals imported from the Irish Republic),
a typical movement being from the upland west to grazing areas in the Mid¬
lands. The demand for lean tender beef at an economic price has stimulated
the development of intensive and semi-intensive systems of production.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production. More than 30 breeds and
innumerable crosses are to be found in Britain, each breed having originated
within a particular area. Research has provided vaccine and sera protection
against nearly all the epidemic diseases.
In the hills, and especially in the Highlands, winter conditions are usually
severe. Draft ewes and lambs are brought from the hill areas every autumn
to swell the lowland flocks, usually in two stages; first, to farms at inter¬
mediate altitudes, where they are mated with rams of a larger and more rapidly
maturing breed; then, the cross-bred progeny pass on to the more genial low¬
land conditions, where they become crossed again with Down rams for fat
lamb production. The hill breeds bring in hardiness and the lowland sires
fecundity and early maturity. Fat lamb production provides the main source
of income for sheep farmers but wool is also of considerable importance,
especially to farmers in hill areas.
Pig production is carried on in most parts of Britain but is particularly
important in the eastern and southern counties of England and in Northern
Ireland, where numbers have doubled since about I950, There is an increasing
concentration into specialist units and larger herds. The most frequently used
breeds are the Large White and the Landrace though considerable cross¬
breeding takes place. Pig improvements are fostered through research by the
Meat and Livestock Commission and by leading commercial firms. Artificial
insemination is available nationally.
About 30 per cent of the pig meat is used for bacon and 70 per cent tor
pork and manufacturing into sausages and other processed forms.
Poultry
Horticultural
Industry
Fruit
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 319
The British poultry industry has expanded rapidly in recent years, largely
owing to the application of improved husbandry and management techniques
in intensive production units and to genetic improvements in stock. Only a
small proportion of total production is in the hands of the smallest producers—
more than three-fifths of the laying birds on farms are in flocks of 5,000 or
more while two-thirds of the broilers are in flocks of 50,000 or more. The
average yield of eggs per bird is about 230 a year and nearly all eggs consumed
in Britain are home-produced. About 330 million broilers and other special
table chickens were produced in 1972.
The horticultural industry produces a wide variety of fruit, vegetables and
flower crops which are together worth nearly 12 per cent of the total from
agriculture as a whole—an estimated £333 million in 1972-73 out of a total of
£2,841 million.
At the June 1972 census the land on which these crops were grown amounted
to nearly 674,000 acres (272,000 hectares), just over 2 per cent of the land used
for crops and grass. Of crops in the open, fruit accounted for 191,000 acres
(77,500 hectares), vegetables, excluding potatoes, for 441,000 acres (179,000
hectares), and flowers, bulbs and nursery stock for 38,000 acres (15,400
hectares). Crops under glass, including mushrooms, occupied 5,000 acres
(2,000 hectares).
Horticultural crops are largely grown on specialised holdings where soil,
climate, skilled labour and water can produce maximum yields of high quality
crops and where access to markets or good roads enable them to be sold at
economic prices. Most horticultural enterprises are expanding with the help
of improved planting material, new techniques of cultivation and environ¬
mental control and the widespread use of machinery. Some horticultural crops
form parts of general farm rotations but the returns from increased specialisa¬
tion favour separate horticultural enterprises. Traditional market gardening,
which once flourished around the large centres of population, has declined over
the years, mainly due to the growth in the field-scale production of vegetables
to meet the demands of the processing industries.
Of the 191,000 acres (77,500 hectares) used for fruit growing in 1972, 45,000
acres (18,200 hectares) were devoted to small fruit and the remainder was
under orchards. Dessert apples are the most widespread fruit crop, covering
some 55,000 acres (22,200 hectares), mainly in Kent and neighbouring
counties, in East Anglia and to the north and south of Bristol. Recent plantings
are largely of the autumn and winter variety of Cox’s Orange Pippin; many of
the new orchards consist of closely planted dwarf trees which can be efficiently
pruned, sprayed and picked. England and Northern Ireland are among the
few countries which grow varieties of apples especially suitable for cooking,
the best-known of which is Bramley’s Seedling. Cooking-apple orchards
cover 24,000 acres (9,700 hectares) in England and about 7,000 acres (2,800
hectares) in Northern Ireland. There are nearly 13,000 acres (5,300 hectares)
under varieties of cider apples.
Although pears thrive best in the warmer Continental climate, in the east
and south-east of England where somewhat similar conditions prevail the
Conference pear and a few high quality varieties are produced. Cherries and
plums are grown in Kent, and plums also in the Vale of Evesham and parts of
East Anglia. Around Perth in Scotland is the largest concentration of raspberry
plantations in the world. This forms the basis of an important processing
industry.
320
Glasshouse
Crops
Nursery Stock
and Bulbs
Vegetables
Hops
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Strawberries are the most widespread small fruit, accounting for some 20,000
acres (8,100 hectares), the main-crop areas being in Kent and East Anglia.
Blackcurrants are also widely grown in Britain, mainly for the preparation of
juice for the manufacture of soft drinks and flavours for confectionery. Other
fruits include gooseberries, red and white currants, loganberries and black¬
berries. Almost all the nuts consumed in Britain are imported but a few cob
nut and filberts are still grown in parts of Kent.
Much of the glasshouse sector of the horticultural industry has been re¬
equipped since the mid-1960s with the aid of grants under the Horticultural
Improvement Scheme. There are now, in many parts of the country, large
units with automatic control of light, heat, ventilation, water and the carbon
dioxide content of the atmosphere. Tomatoes form the most important glass¬
house crop, either as a single crop or in rotation with others, and together with
lettuce and cucumbers represent some 95 per cent of the total value of
glasshouse vegetable output. There is increasing demand for sweet peppers
and aubergines, two crops which were formerly hardly grown or consumed in
Britain. Cucumbers are extensively grown in the traditional glasshouse area
in the Lee Valley to the north of London. Mushrooms, which have a farm-
gate value of over £20 million annually, are grown in specially constructed
sheds in several parts of the country.
Bulbs and hardy nursery stock each occupied some 17,000 acres (6,900
hectares) in June 1972; flowers in the open took 4,000 acres (1,620 hectares).
Many nurseries concentrate on the production of popular plants in containers
for sale through the garden centres which have been established on the out¬
skirts of many towns.
Cut flowers are grown and bulbs cultivated in many areas but particularly
in the Holland area of Lincolnshire, Norfolk, the east of Scotland, Cornwall
and in the Isles of Scilly where more than 50 per cent of the cultivable land is
devoted to bulbs which flower there from November to May.
Vegetables and outdoor salad crops are grown in the traditional areas of the
Thames Valley, north Kent, Vale of Evesham, south Lancashire and the West
Riding of Yorkshire, but newer areas, especially suited through soil type or
climate to production of a particular crop, have come into prominence. West
Cornwall, south Devon, Pembrokeshire and Kent send winter cauliflowers and
spring cabbage to most urban markets while almost half the summer and
autumn cauliflowers come from the intensive horticultural holdings in Lin¬
colnshire. The light soils of Norfolk and Cambridgeshire are especially suit¬
able for carrots and onions, and the Holland area of Lincolnshire accounts for
almost a third of the onion acreage. Brussels sprouts are grown extensively in
Bedfordshire; their production has also extended from the Vale of Evesham
into Gloucestershire and well up the east coast of England wherever freezing
factories are sited for the processing of fish as well as vegetables. Peas and
dwarf beans are largely sold frozen, canned or dried and so are grown close to
factories in the east of England and in Scotland. Celery is mainly grown on the
deep soils of south east Lancashire, Norfolk and the fens of Cambridgeshire.
Nearly three-quarters of the early rhubarb is produced in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, where plants grown in the open are then forced in unlit sheds.
Hops for the brewing industry are grown in Kent and Sussex, Herefordshire
and Worcestershire. They occupy only about 17,000 acres (6,900 hectares) but
have a very high yield per acre and value by weight.
321
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
FOOD SUPPLIES Britain now produces just over half of its total food requirements or two-thirds
of all that can be grown in temperate climates. Home production of the princi-
Home Production pal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of total supplies in Table 30.
Table 31 shows how the level of the main food supplies passing into consump-
Consumption tion has changed since the end of war-time rationing. Rising living standards
have led to increased consumption of high protein foods. More recently the
pattern of food consumption has tended to stabilise but with a more pro¬
nounced trend towards partly prepared and ‘convenience’ foods.
TABLE 30
United Kingdom
Production as a
Percentage of
Total Supplies
Food product
1956
1964
1972
(provi¬
sional)
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham
Shell eggs . .
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent)
Sugar (as refined) ..
Wheat and flour (as wheat equivalent)
Potatoes for human consumption. .
62
42
96
100
43
9
16
22
20
93
69
38
98
100
42
6
10
27
47
95
72
44
100
100
55
21
16
33
53
95
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
TABLE 31
Annual Food
Consumption
Per Head
1956
lb.
1964
lb.
1972
lb.
kg.
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham
Poultry meat . .
Fish: fresh, frozen and cured
Eggs in shella
Liquid milk
Cheese. .
Butter . .
Margarine
Oils and fats
Sugar6
Flour . .
Potatoes
Fresh vegetables (including
tomatoes) . .
Fresh and dried fruit . .
Canned and bottled fruit
Tea
Coffee . .
101-5
23-3
7-2
19-3
212
323-1
9-3
15-5
17-1
21-2
109-8
178-7
224-5
107-3
71-4
13-8
10-1
1-5
103-7
25- 3
15-8
17-0
249
324-4
10-6
19-8
13-4
26- 0
108-0
156-1
226-9
115-3
79-7
19-5
9.4
2-7
99.9
24-8
27-2
14- 1
251
306-6
11-9
15- 9
14-0
24-7
105-6
141-4
219-1
115-9
77-5
17-6
8-0
4.4
45-3
11- 3
12- 2
6- 4
139-0
5- 4
7- 2
6- 4
11-2
47-9
64-1
99-3
52-6
35-2
8- 0
3-6
2-0
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
0 Number.
6 Including sugar in all home-produced and imported manufactured goods, and in
brewing.
322
FARM
EXPENDITURE
AND EARNINGS
TABLE 32
Estimated
Farm Output
and Input
1972-73
Capital
Requirements
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and the aggregate net income of agri¬
cultural producers are prepared annually by the agricultural departments
(see Table 32). The aggregate net income of farmers rose from ^469 million
in 1964-65 to ^706 million in 1971-72 and £790 million in 1972-73. The
figures given in Table 32 show that Britain’s farming is predominantly based
on livestock enterprises. Over seven-tenths of total farm output is in the form
of livestock or livestock products.
Output
£
million
As a per¬
centage
of total
Input
£
million
As a per¬
centage
of total
Farm crops
Horticulture
Livestock
Livestock products
Other
Total Output
503
333
1,170
822
14
17-8
11-7
41-2
29-0
0-5
2,841
100-0
Production grants
and sundry
receipts . . 126
Total Receipts .. 2,967
Work in progress
change +185
Gross Output .. 3,152
Feedingstuffs
Seeds
Imported livestock
Fertilisers and lime
Machinery
Farm maintenance
Miscellaneous
expenditure
TotalExpenditure
Stocks change
Gross Input
Gross Product" .
Depreciation
Net Product
Labour ..
Net rent and interest
Net Income
706
59
92
159
212
115
194
1,537
+ 25
1,562
1,590
252
1,338
449
99
790
46-0
3-8
6-0
10-3
13-8
7-5
12-6
100-0
Source: Annual Review of Agriculture 1973.
Figures may not add to the totals shown because of roundings.
a Gross product = Gross output less Gross input.
Of all farm expenses, purchased feedingstuffs amount to nearly one-third,
wages to nearly one-fifth and machinery (including depreciation) and equip¬
ment to over one-sixth. Since i960 male agricultural earnings have more than
doubled, offsetting the manpower economies made possible by mechanisation
and increasing farm size, while labour productivity has risen by about 6 per
cent a year since 1964-65.
The capital required for land and buildings may be provided by the farmer,
if he is an owner-occupier, or by the landlord, if the farm is let to a tenant.
In 1972 provisional ‘fixed capital’ totalling £167 million was added to the
value of buildings and works and ^180 million was invested in new plant,
machinery and vehicles. The bulk of the capital required to stock and run the
farms is provided by the occupiers. Bank advances are an important source of
outside capital, both fixed and working; about two-thirds of the total bank
advances to agriculture are believed to be for short-term purposes. Agricultural
merchants are also an important source of short-term credit. Mortgage loans
Mechanisation
Net Incomes
THE ROLE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 323
form the chief source of long-term credit and are provided by specialised
financial institutions (see p. 326) and private sources.
Accounts of some 3,000 farms in Britain, collected by agricultural economists
in 1972, show average valuations of occupiers’ capital ranging from about £2
per acre (^y4 per hectare) on hill farms with extensive rough grazings to over
£80 per acre per hectare) on some lowland farms. On all types of
farm investment in machinery is a heavy item: on dairy and arable farms it
averages about £20 per acre (£50 per hectare); on stock-rearing farms it may
amount to £8 per acre (£20 per hectare).
Britain has one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world, with 512,000
tractors in 1972 or one to every 35 acres (14*2 hectares) of arable land. Power-
take-off implements now characterise arable farming; and some 60,000
combine harvesters were in use in 1972. A wide variety of machines for
harvesting and preservation of grass are employed. Milking machines are
installed on all except the smallest farms.
Over 90 per cent of the farms in Great Britain have an electricity supply
and accompanying equipment. There are about 1,700 farmers’ machinery
syndicates through which farmers have the use of expensive equipment with¬
out tying up their own capital.
Research, development and testing of farm machinery are carried out by
the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering.
The range of net incomes between individual farms is very wide, varying with
the type and size of farm, quality of land, and managerial ability of the occupier.
The average net income for farms in England and Wales of different types is
generally within the range of £2 to £35 per acre (^12 to £86 per hectare) with
the exception of pig and poultry farms and horticultural holdings, which are
more intensive in their use of land. Net income per acre on dairy and arable
farms has nearly always been higher than on stock-rearing farms, which are
generally larger than the other types and are situated on poorer land. In
Scotland incomes per acre range from about £1 on hill farms to £23 (£56-8 per
hectare) on dairy farms.
The functions of government in relation to agriculture are mostly exercised
by the agricultural ministers; for England and Wales the Minister of Agricul¬
ture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Wales, for Scotland
the Secretary of State for Scotland, and for Northern Ireland the Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland. The Advisory Council for Agriculture and
Horticulture in England and Wales provides the minister and his department
with independent advice on any agricultural or horticultural subjects remitted
to it.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food operates through func¬
tional divisions. Its relations with individual farmers are conducted mainly
through its local offices, grouped in England in regions, with regional man¬
agers. Local offices in Wales are grouped under a Welsh Secretary with similar
functions and with special responsibility for Welsh affairs.
In 1966 an Economic Development Committee for agriculture was estab¬
lished, comprising representatives of farmers, workers and landowners, as well
as official and independent members.
In Scotland most of the agricultural functions of the Secretary of State are
discharged through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries. The
Secretary of State for Scotland also appoints the members of the Crofters
324
Annual Review
Common
Agricultural
Policy
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commission (see p. 327) and the Red Deer Commission, which deals with the
conservation and control of red deer.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for imple¬
menting agricultural policy. It is organised on similar lines to the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, for which it acts as agent in the administra¬
tion in Northern Ireland of United Kingdom agricultural schemes.
Britain began to take part in the European Community system of agricultural
support under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) on 1st February 1973.
The Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce was set up in 1972 to
administer the system; although administratively separate from the agricul¬
tural departments, the board maintains close working links with them and is
responsible to the agricultural ministers, who remain responsible for policy.
In February each year, the agricultural ministers review the economic condi¬
tion and prospects of the industry in consultation with representatives of
agricultural producers (in practice, the three farmers’ unions in Britain). They
consider such factors as production trends and market requirements, world
market prospects, the cost of subsidies, income trend in the industry as a
whole, the increasing efficiency of the industry and changes in production
costs. The conclusions drawn from the review form the background for the
determination of guaranteed prices in Britain and contribute towards the
formulation of policy in respect of the CAP and of other aspects of the Com¬
munity support system.
The cost of government support to the industry in 1972-73 was about
£282 million; the estimate for 1973-74, including the 1973 review decisions,
forecast an increase to about £374 million. These figures include some expendi¬
ture under the CAP arrangements, part of which will be reimbursed from the
European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (FEOGA).
The objectives of the CAP are to increase agricultural productivity and earnings,
to stabilise markets and to provide adequate supplies at reasonable prices to
the consumer. For most commodities there is free trade within the Community
with a common system of variable levies to regulate imports from third
countries, and common price levels within the Community designed to give
producers an adequate return from the market. For these products market
prices are maintained by variable import levies which keep import prices up to
a minimum or ‘threshold’ price, while in most cases the internal market is
supported by an intervention price, slightly below the threshold price, at
which any surpluses are bought by the Community’s agricultural fund.
Britain has introduced intervention prices which will be gradually increased to
full Community levels in six equal steps, subject to some flexibility, over the
five-year transitional period. During this period there will be free trade
between Britain and the other Community members in the main agricultural
products subject to arrangements to compensate for the differences in price
levels. For fresh fruits and vegetables the market organisation is similar,
although third country trade is subject to a common customs tariff and not to
variable import levies. Items of particular importance to Community producers
are covered by a market intervention system and a form of minimum import
prices.
The principal tasks of the Intervention Board in administering this system
are the issue and control of export/import licences and the payment of export
refunds; market support for certain commodities, including support buying,
aids to private storage and the payment of denaturing premiums. The board also
Price
Guarantees
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 3^5
pays the minor Community production and producer subsidies not adminis¬
tered by the agricultural departments. Expenditure under the CAP arrange¬
ments is estimated at about ^15 million in 1972-73 and £65 million in
1973-74-
From the Annual Review the agricultural ministers determine guaranteed
prices for the coming year for cereals, potatoes, sugar beet, fat sheep, fat pigs,
milk, wool and eggs. By the end of the transitional period (31st December
1977) the guarantees for all commodities for which the Community has a
common market organisation will have been ended. Fat cattle have been
removed from the guarantee arrangements from 26th March 1973 and rye
from 1st July 1973. The guarantee for eggs is to end on 30th March 1974 and
that for sugar beet on 30th June 1974.
The guarantee system operates by means of deficiency payments to stabilise
prices to farmers at appropriate levels. These payments make up the deficit
between the open market price of a commodity and the price guaranteed by
the Government.
For cereals payment is made by the agricultural departments on the
acreage declared to be harvested. Deficiency payments for fatstock are made
weekly to producers on certified sales on a liveweight or deadweight basis. For
eggs, a subsidy, based on the difference between the guaranteed price and the
estimated producer price, is paid to producers through registered packing
stations.
For milk, wool and potatoes in Britain and for fat pigs in Northern Ireland,
the Government operates the guarantee through the appropriate marketing
boards which take account of any payments from or to the Government in
deciding what to pay producers for their produce. In the case of milk there
are five boards; the Government pays a full guaranteed price only on a
‘standard quantity’, which covers all the milk sold for liquid consumption
plus more than one-third of that sold for manufacturing purposes. Milk
produced in excess of the standard quantity is sold for manufacturing below
the full guaranteed price. The boards average out the returns from these two
sources, the guaranteed price for the standard quantity and the actual price
of the remainder, and pay producers a ‘pool price’. The retail price of liquid
milk is determined by the Government so that, taking one year with another,
the full cost of the guarantee is met. Support is provided for main-crop
potatoes (excluding new potatoes) through a system of acreage limitation and
the purchase of surplus potatoes, as many as possible of which are then sold
for stockfeed. The Potato Marketing Board in Great Britain and the Ministry
of Agriculture in Northern Ireland undertake support activities in order to
bring the average market price for the season up to the guaranteed price. The
Government pays the greater part of the cost.
For wool a fixed price is guaranteed to the British Wool Marketing Board
for every pound of fleece wool it buys from producers. This enables it to fix in
advance a schedule of producers’ prices, based on types and quality, after
making allowance for the board’s marketing costs.
The British Sugar Corporation contracts to buy sugar beet at not less than
the CAP minimum price up to the equivalent of 886,000 long tons (900,000
metric tonnes) of refined sugar. If necessary it will also be enabled to pay the
guaranteed price on the whole of the crop from a specified acreage—443,000
acres (179,000 hectares)—but this arrangement applies only for the 1973 cr0P>
to ease the transition to the Community system of support. Under the CAP
there is no acreage limitation and for the 1973 crop the Corporation agreed to
326 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
contract for 468,000 acres (190,000 hectares). Any sugar produced in excess
of 900,000 metric tonnes must be exported from the Community and the
returns to the beet growers and processors will reflect prices on the world
market.
The Sugar Board buys Commonwealth sugar under the Commonwealth
Sugar Agreement (CSA) and sells it commercially at the ruling world price.
On import into Britain the price is adjusted to a fixed level. These special
arrangements have been made with the Community both to safeguard the
sugar-exporting interests of developing Commonwealth countries which are
members of the CSA and to allow the effective marketing of their sugar in
Britain without prejudicing the marketing of Community sugar, until the
end of 1974.
Other Grants The price guarantees, whose relative importance has declined in recent years,
and Subsidies do not cover all major commodities, the main exceptions being horticulture
and poultry meat. The Government does, however, offer to farmers a wide
range of other inducements to increase productivity. The cost amounted to
£196 million in 1972-73 and is estimated to reach £204 million in 1973-74-
Of the total for 1973-74 some £77 million was provided to maintain breeding
herds of cattle and sheep, particularly in upland areas, to retain calves suitable
for beef production and to promote brucellosis eradication. A further ^18
million is expected to be spent on subsidies on fertiliser and lime usage.
Grants are available under the Farm Capital Grant Scheme towards capital
expenditure incurred on a wide range of work and facilities, such as farm build¬
ings, farm waste disposal systems, the supply of gas and electricity, and field
drainage. The standard rate of grant is 20 per cent but higher rates are payable
towards the approved cost of some works; for field drainage the rate is 60 per
cent with an extra 10 per cent for drainage works benefiting hill land; other
work in hill land qualifies for a rate of 50 per cent. The estimated cost in
1973-74 of grants under this scheme and earlier schemes which it replaced is
£93 million. Likewise the Horticulture Improvement Scheme makes pro¬
vision for grants of 40 per cent to horticulturists to meet the capital cost of a
wide range of buildings, plant and equipment used in the production, storage,
preparation for market and transport of horticultural produce. The cost of
this scheme to the Exchequer, together with a scheme to provide working
capital to small scale horticulturists, is expected to be about £7 million in
I973_74-
To promote the improvement of farm structure, grants are available to
encourage the voluntary amalgamation of small uncommercial farms with
other land to form commercial units. They are given to those who carry out
approved amalgamations and to outgoers who give up uncommercial holdings
for amalgamations. The cost of the structure schemes in 1973-74 is estimated
to be £3 million.
OTHER
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
AND ACTION
Agricultural
Credit
In England and Wales finance for the purchase or improvement of agricultural
land and buildings is available from the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
Ltd. whose funds are derived mainly from public issues of stock, with some
government support. Loans for agricultural purposes secured on agricultural
land in Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities Corpora¬
tion Ltd. which works on a similar financial basis to the Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation Ltd.
Loans for carrying out improvements to agricultural land and buildings are
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Smallholdings
Crofting
Arterial
Drainage and
Sea Defence
327
also available to landowners from the Lands Improvement Company, whose
funds are provided privately.
In Northern Ireland loans are available to farmers from the Agricultural
Loans Fund, administered by the Ministry of Agriculture. Half of the loans
issued are short-term for agricultural machinery and the remainder are
medium- or long-term loans for such purposes as the purchase of livestock, the
erection and improvement of farm buildings and farm dwellings, and the
purchase of land for amalgamation and subsequent restructuring.
The Government can make loans in Great Britain to help finance the pur¬
chase of land acquired for approved amalgamations of small farms and appro¬
ved remodelling expenditure. These loans may be granted up to 90 per cent
(100 per cent for certain small amalgamations) of the valuation of the com¬
bined unit determined by the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Ltd. in
England and Wales and the Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Ltd.
in Scotland, which act as the Government’s agents.
In England and Wales, about 11,200 smallholdings are provided by local
authorities and about 800 lettable holdings by the IVIimstry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food. For financial assistance in improving smallholdings'
authorities can obtain the amalgamations and capital grants available to
farmers generally. The minister and local authorities may make loans of up to
75 Per cent °f required working capital to their smallholding tenants.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central
Government, which now owns and maintains about 417,000 acres (169,000
hectares) of land settlement estates, comprising some 3,190 crofts and holdings.
In the seven Scottish crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness, Inverness, Orkney,
Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland and Shetland—much of the land is held by
crofters or tenants whose holdings are generally either rented at a cost of not
more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding 75 acres (30 hectares).
The Crofters Commission, with headquarters in Inverness, is responsible
for the administration and regulation of crofting. Its functions are to re¬
organise, develop and regulate crofting in the crofting counties, to promote the
interests of crofters and to keep under review matters relating to crofting. The
commission s statutory powers include supervising the letting of crofts and
collaborating with other organisations whose activities affect crofting interests.
It also acts as the Secretary of State’s agent in administering grants to crofters
for cropping and land improvement.
Until April 1974 land drainage (including flood protection) in England and
Wales is the responsibility of 27 river authorities, two catchment boards
(which exercise the functions of river authorities) and about 310 internal
drainage boards. From 1st April 1974 the land drainage responsibilities of
river authorities (but not those of local authorities or internal drainage boards)
will be transferred to ten water authorities as part of the reorganisation of water
services provided for in the Water Act 1973 (see p. 286). Local authorities also
have general land drainage powers. There are no comparable authorities in
Scotland, where arterial drainage of agricultural land is the owners’ res¬
ponsibility. The work of river authorities is concerned with the improvement of
land drainage, the prevention of inland flooding and the construction and
maintenance of defences to protect low-lying areas from tidal flooding. River
authorities also have powers relating to water resources generally, freshwater
fisheries and river pollution.
BRITAIN 1974*. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal drainage boards are concerned with very much smaller areas and
their work is chiefly in low-lying agricultural districts.
River authorities and catchment boards obtain most of the funds needed tor
drainage purposes from local authorities. The Government pays grants to¬
wards the cost of improvement schemes carried out by these authorities. The
grants vary from 10 per cent to 80 per cent according to the financial position
of the authority, with an additional premium for sea defence works. Internal
drainage boards levy drainage rates on owners and occupiers and also receive
government grants at a flat rate of 50 per cent. Local authorities receive grants
ranging from 20 per cent to 50 per cent. In Scotland 60 per cent grants (70 per
cent if for the benefit of hill land) are available to owners or occupiers of
agricultural land. . , , .
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Agriculture is the drainage authority in
respect of watercourses designated by the Drainage Council as mam or minor
watercourses.
Land Tenure
In Great Britain more than half, and in Northern Ireland almost all, farms are
owner-occupied. In order to protect the respective interests of landlords and
tenants and to eliminate uncertainty as to their rights and liabilities, a code o
landlord and tenant relationships has been written into legislation.
Legislation provides for any tenancy of agricultural land, with the exception
of certain short-term lettings, to continue in force from year to year until
terminated by a valid notice to quit. With certain exceptions the tenant can
contest it by serving a counter-notice; the notice to quit then becomes in¬
operative unless the landlord can satisfy an independent body (in England and
Wales the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish Lan
Court) that his claim for possession is in the interests of sound estate manage¬
ment or good husbandry or that the land is required for certain specified
P There is a code of compensation to which the tenant is entitled on termina¬
tion of the tenancy. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord and
tenant and may be varied by agreement at any time or, failing agreement, by
arbitration.
MARKETING
Lgricultural products are marketed mainly through private trade channels or
irough producers’ co-operative organisations. A fairly recent development
as been the growth of contract farming. For certain commodities marketing
rrangements are influenced by boards operating under the Agncultura
Marketing Act 1958. These boards are producers’ organisations with statutory
owers to regulate the marketing of particular products. The schemes under
vhich they are constituted and operate must be approved by Parliament and
onfirmed by a poll of the producers. Most of the members of the boards aie
lected by the producers but a minority are appointed by the minister or
ninisters concerned. Further safeguards serve to protect consumers and other
nterests affected by schemes and the public interest generally.
Marketing boards fall into two broad categories: first, those which are sole
juyers of the regulated product from all producers not specially exempted
jr, alternatively, those exercising a comparable influence by controlling a
;ontracts between producers and first buyers; and, secondly, boards whic
maintain only a broad control over marketing conditions, leaving Pr0^cer
free otherwise to deal individually with buyers. The boards for hoPS> mdk and
wool fall into the first category and the potato board into the second. Northern
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
329
Ireland has its own marketing boards, based on local legislation, for milk, pigs
and seed potatoes.
For certain other commodities there are broadly based organisations
representing producer, distributor and independent interests.
The Home-Grown Cereals Authority was set up to improve the marketing of
home-giown cereals. It operates a scheme of bonuses to growers who make
forward contracts for the deliveiy of grain, provides market intelligence and
promotes research and development of value to the cereals market. It also acts
as agent in cereals work for the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce.
I he Meat and Livestock Commission is charged with improving the pro¬
duction, marketing and distribution of livestock and meat in Great Britain. It
has a range of executive functions extending from breeding to retail distribu¬
tion, including acting as agent for the Intervention Board. It is not empowered
to trade in either livestock or meat.
Since April 1971 eggs have been covered by a broadly based Eggs Authority
which has the general duty of improving the marketing of eggs. It provides
market intelligence, cairies out promotional work and operates support buying
on a limited scale.
Grants of up to one-thiid are available for the modernisation of major
wholesale horticultural markets; Covent Garden is being moved to a new site,
which is under construction, in south London.
Under the CAP a wide range of fresh horticultural produce and also cut
flowers and flowering bulbs are subject to common quality standards which,
with certain minor exceptions, apply at all stages of distribution. The Com¬
munity standards apply to all produce entering Britain. For British produce
sold on the domestic market they are being phased in over a two-year period
which began on 1st February 1973.
Community regulations prescribe grades consisting of a range of up to four
classes and specify requirements concerning colour, sizing, etc., and relating to
packing, presentation and labelling. All fruit and vegetables subject to the
standai ds which are exported from or imported into the Community must meet
the requirements of at least Class II.
Co-operation
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Lhe Central Council for Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation was
established to promote and develop co-operation in agriculture and horticul¬
ture and to administer a scheme of grants. The Agricultural and Horticultural
Co-operation Scheme 1971 provides grants for co-operative production and
marketing of agricultural and horticultural produce, including capital grants on
similar terms as are available to individual producers under the Horticulture
Improvement Scheme and Farm Capital Grant Scheme. The Federation of
Agricultural Co-operatives represents British co-operatives both in Britain
and in the Community.
The day-to-day work of treating animal disease is the responsibility of the
practising veterinary surgeon. Control of animal disease nationally in accord¬
ance with the Government’s policy is the responsibility of the State Veterinary
Service, centred on London and Edinburgh, which is incorporated in the uni¬
fied Agricultural Development and Advisory Service. The Veterinary Service
is also responsible for the administration of legislation providing for the welfare
of farm livestock.
For many years Britain has been free from many serious animal diseases
including rinderpest, contagious bovine pleuro pneumonia, sheep pox, sheep
scab, glanders and rabies, except for two isolated cases of rabies in imported
33°
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Plants
dogs in 1969-70. Sheep scab, eradicated in 1952, reappeared in 1973 m
Lancashire and Yorkshire. Steps were taken to ensure that it did not become
established. The campaign to eradicate swine fever was successfully completed
in 1966 and although three cases of the disease occurred in 1971 the infection
was quickly eliminated. An epidemic of a previously unknown swine vesicular
disease began in December 1972; it is being combated by a stringent slaughter
oolicv. A major epidemic of foot-and-mouth disease was experienced in
1067-68 but was successfully eradicated. In i960 the whole of Britain became
a bovine tuberculosis attested area. The incidence of the disease is now very
low; cattle (except for certain categories) are tested at regular intervals and
reactors to the test are slaughtered, compensation being paid to the owners.
Voluntary schemes for the eradication of brucellosis have been in operation
since 1967; compulsory eradication on an area basis began in 1972. New¬
castle Disease (fowl pest) which had declined considerably since 1963, re¬
appeared in serious epidemic proportions in a series of outbreaks in 1970 and
early 1971 in England and Wales and then declined to a low level.
The work of the service is backed by the extensive facilities of the Central
Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, Surrey, and those of its subsidiary
laboratory at Lasswade, near Edinburgh. In addition, there investiga¬
tion centres with well-equipped laboratories in England and Wales. These
centres perform work requiring specialist knowledge and give advice on disease
problems to private practitioners. In Scotland a similar service is provide y
the investigation centres of the three Scottish agricultural colleges
In Northern Ireland the veterinary services are organised similarly to those
in Great Britain but are administered separately by the Ministry of Agriculture
for Northern Ireland. Animal health control policies and the geographical
situation have kept the country free from nearly all the major epizootic
diseases, including swine vesicular disease. A Brucellosis Eradication Scheme
has been successfully carried out and in December 1971 Northern Ireland was
declared a brucellosis-free country. The full-time veterinary service is supple¬
mented by the central veterinary laboratory at Stormont, Belfast.
The plant health services, operated by the agricultural departments, are
responsible for statutory controls designed to limit the spread of plant pests
and diseases present in Britain and prevent the introduction of new ones from
abroad They also issue the health certificates required by other countries to
accompany plant material imported from Britain. Voluntary certification
schemes are operated to encourage the development of healthy vigorous and
true-to-type planting stocks. A statutory scheme for seed potatoes, based upon
Community standards, is expected to replace the present voluntary schemes in
1974. Other changes, concerning the statutory control of potato cyst, eelworm
and potato wart disease, took effect in 1973. The Plant Pathology Laboratory
at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, and the Agricultural Scientific Services Station,
East Craigs, Edinburgh, provide scientific and technical advice on which
statutory controls and certification schemes are based.
Pests and Storage The Ministry of Agriculture’s Pest Infestation Control Laboratory provides
Pests and ftorag .J technicai advice on harmful mammals and birds and on msects
mites and moulds associated with grain and other stored food products
laboratory’s headquarters is at Slough, Buckinghamshire, where storage
problems are studied; vertebrate pests are studied at Tolworth,^^
Worplesdon, Surrey. The laboratory works closely with Regional Pest Officers
who advise farmers, local authorities and others on control techniques.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Agricultural
Chemicals
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
Safety at Work
AGRICULTURAL
ADVISORY
SERVICE
331
Safeguards against the dangers which could arise from uncontrolled use of
pesticides have been devised and are operating successfully. Regulations pro¬
vide protection for workers using the more toxic chemicals. The voluntary
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme ensures that new pesticides intended for
use in agriculture and the home garden, forestry and food storage, or new
methods of using existing pesticides, are not introduced until enough experi¬
mental work has been done on their possible hazards (including those of users,
consumers of treated produce, livestock or domestic animals and wild life) to
allow the Government to make recommendations for their safe use. Products
cleared for safety under the Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme may then be
submitted through the Agricultural Chemicals Approval Scheme for efficiency
approval. The purpose of this scheme is to enable users and advisers to choose
efficient proprietary brands of agricultural chemicals.
A key role in the administration of the safety scheme is played by the
Government’s Advisory Committee on Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemicals
which also reports on topics of current concern. In 1969 it concluded that there
was no evidence that the use of certain persistent organochlorine pesticides
(including DDT, aldrin and dieldrin) had any adverse effects on human beings,
but it is recommended that certain uses of these chemicals for which adequate,
less persistent alternatives were available should cease in order to reduce
amounts of them in the environment. This recommendation was implemented
during 1971.
The Medicines Act 1968 provides through a system of licensing for the
control of the manufacture, sale and supply of both human and veterinary
medicinal products (including those used in animal feedingstuffs). These
controls are being brought into operation in stages. The licensing authority
(the British health and agricultural ministers) is advised by the Medicines
Commission, the Veterinary Products Committee, on the safety, quality and
efficacy of veterinary medicinal products, and by other expert licensing com¬
mittees. Until the Medicines Act is fully in operation, existing controls
restricting the use of certain antibiotics in animal husbandry and veterinary
medicine will be kept in force.
The Safety Inspectors of the agricultural departments advise farmers and
workers about safety, including their obligations under the Agriculture (Safety,
Health and Welfare Provisions) Act 1956 and regulations made under it; these
cover such matters as the guarding of field and stationary machinery, the safe¬
guarding of work-places, and the fitting of safety cabs to tractors.
In England and Wales technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural
matters is available through the Agricultural Development and Advisory
Service (ADAS) which operates mainly from the Ministry’s regional and
divisional offices. 1 he Service provides free and impartial advice to landowners,
farmers and growers, but charges are made for certain laboratory and other
services, such as drainage design work. When possible the ADAS concentrates
more on group than individual advice.
In Scotland the agricultural advisory service is provided by the three
regional independent colleges which are financed almost entirely by public
funds. The nature of service is similar to that provided by the ADAS and covers
all branches of advice.
Advisory work in Northern Ireland is under the direction of the Chief
Inspector of the Ministry of Agriculture and Advisory Centres are located in
332
RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION
Economic
and Market
Research
Agricultural
Education
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the main provincial towns. The resources of the agricultural colleges, the
research centres and the specialist divisions of the ministry are available to the
advisory service.
Agricultural research in Britain carried out by the Agricultural Research
Council (ARC) and the universities is mentioned on p. 403. The Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food carries out research and development at its
own laboratories and on the 22 experimental farms and horticulture stations
operated by ADAS, and has funds which are used to commission work from
the ARC, the National Environment Research Council and outside research
organisations. In England and Wales, research in agricultural economics is
undertaken by 12 university departments of agricultural economics. Fen ot
these conduct work on farm incomes and the economics of particular products
for the ministry (see p. 323). In Scotland, agricultural economists are on the
staff of the three agricultural colleges and the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland. . .
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture has an Economics and btatis-
tics Division and eight other research divisions.
Eleven universities in England and Wales, three in Scotland and one in
Northern Ireland provide degree and postgraduate courses in agriculture or
agricultural sciences. The National College of Agricultural Engineering at
Silsoe, Bedfordshire, offers degree and postgraduate courses. Sandwich courses
leading to a Higher National Diploma are available at eight agricultural
colleges in England and Wales and there are nearly 50 local authority and
other agricultural colleges providing full-time courses on different aspects of
agriculture, horticulture, forestry and farm management. In Scotland the three
agricultural colleges which provide the advisory services are also teaching
establishments, associated with the agricultural departments of the neig -
bouring universities. They mainly provide sandwich courses leading to Higher
and Ordinary National Diplomas, post-diploma courses and certain short
courses In Northern Ireland degree courses in agriculture and food science
are provided at Queen’s University, Belfast. Courses below this level are
provided at three residential colleges run by the Ministry of Agriculture.
Local education authorities throughout Britain provide short courses, block-
release day-release and other part-time classes for farmers, farm workers and
horticulturists, as well as an advisory service for domestic producers.
The Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board
provides a training advisory service and organises and arranges training
courses and a system of grant payments to employers providing training in
agriculture and horticulture. The principal grants are made for training new
entrants to the industry, for attendance at approved courses and for approved
schemes of training at places of work. The training board and the Northern
Ireland Training Scheme are financed indirectly by the farming industry
itself.
FISHERIES
The industry falls into three main divisions, concerned respectively with white
fish herring and shellfish. The major element of the catch (about 80 per cent
by weight) is white fish: the catches of herring and shellfish comprise about 15
per cent and 5 per cent respectively of the total catch. The principal white
fish (in terms of value) are demersal species which live near the sea bed, such
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Fishing Ports
Methods of
Sea Fishing
The Fishing
Fleet
333
as cod, haddock, plaice, coalfish (saithe), whiting, soles and skate. Herring is a
pelagic species which lives mainly in midwater or near the surface and which
constitutes a separate fishery. Shellfish include Crustacea (such as lobsters,
nephrops and crabs) and molluscs (such as escallops, mussels, cockles, clams
and oysters).
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three main groups: the
distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The distant
waters are those round Iceland, Greenland, Bear Island, the north coast of
Norway, the Barents Sea and in the west Atlantic; the middle water grounds
lie around the Faroe Islands and Rockall; and the near water grounds are those
in the North Sea, the Irish Sea and in the coastal areas around Britain. The
herring fishing grounds are mainly in Scottish waters. The inshore waters also
yield considerable quantities of shellfish.
British fishermen have the exclusive right of fishing in the coastal belt
around Britain out to the six-mile limit. Under the terms of the Treaty of
Accession to the European Community, vessels registered in member states
can fish within certain areas of the 6-12 mile (97-19-3 km) belt. A number of
European countries also enjoy ‘historic rights’, which allow them to fish for
designated species in those areas of the belt where they had traditionally
fished before 1964, when the limits for Britain were extended to 12 miles.
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleet-
wood, North Shields, Lowestoft and Milford Haven. In Scotland the chief
centres for white fish are Aberdeen, Granton, Peterhead, the Moray Firth, the
west coast and Shetland Islands; herring landings are made mainly at the east
coast port of Fraserburgh, the west coast ports of Stornoway, Ullapool,
Mallaig, Oban and Ayr and in the Shetland Islands. In Northern Ireland the
main fishing ports are Kilkeel, Portavogie and Ardglass.
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining and ring
netting. Trawling is carried out throughout the year in the distant and near
waters for all species of demersal fish. Seining is also used for catching demersal
fish all the year round, mainly in the North Sea, the Minches, the Firth of
Clyde and the Irish Sea. There are about 436 Scottish seiners, and about 200
operating from English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is summer fishing for herring based
on the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland and the north-east coast ports
of England. Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast of Scotland, in
the Isle of Man area and off southern Ireland.
The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and
methods of capture; in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs,
lobsters, shrimps, mussels, escallops, cockles and oysters, and, off Scotland,
north-east England and in the Irish Sea there are valuable catches of nephrops
(‘Norway lobsters’ or Dublin Bay prawns).
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and Fleet-
wood, number about 170. They are over 140 feet (42-5 metres) in length and
most of them make voyages lasting from 17 to 40 days to fishing grounds off
Iceland, in the Arctic Circle, Newfoundland, Labrador, Greenland and the
Norway coast. Freezer trawlers and factory ships, which spend from one to
three months at sea and freeze much or all of their catch, in some cases as
fillets, have become an important part of the distant water fleet in recent years
and number about 37. There are about 330 near and middle water vessels of
334
Supplies
Sea Fish
Processing
Freshwater
Fisheries
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
between 80 and 140 feet (24-5 and 42-5 metres) long and most of them work
nearer home, making voyages lasting from a few days up to more than two
weeks, although some of the larger vessels fish regularly off the Faroes and
seasonally as far afield as Iceland. Included in the near water group are vessels
engaged in fishing for herring which normally make daily landings. The in¬
shore group consists of some 1,900 vessels of over 40 feet (12-3 metres) and
nearly 4,000 smaller vessels, many of which do not fish regularly. The majority
are seldom at sea for longer than two or three days and more usually make
daily landings, often fishing within sight of land, although some seiners operate
for eight days or more.
In the British fishing industry in 1972 there were about 18,000 fishermen
in regular employment and some 4,000 occasionally employed; about two-
fifths of the former and one-third of the latter were from Scottish ports. In
Northern Ireland there are about 600 regular fishermen and 200 part-time.
In 1972 landings of all types of fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British
fishing vessels totalled 940,000 tons (662,000 tons of demersal fish, 219,000
tons of pelagic and 59,000 tons of shellfish), valued at £108-8 million. Cod
accounted for 47 per cent of the total value of demersal and pelagic fish landed
by British vessels; haddock (21 per cent) and plaice (8 per cent) were the other
most important sources of earnings to the industry.
Imports of all fresh, frozen and cured fish and shellfish totalled 115,000 tons
valued at over £43 million. Imports of canned and preserved fish and shell¬
fish amounted to nearly 78,000 tons valued at £52 million, making total fish
imports 193,000 tons, worth just over £95 million. Imports of fish meal
amounted to 354,000 tons, worth £31 million, and those offish oils to 228,000
tons, worth nearly £17 million. Exports of fish and fish products were worth
nearly £31 million. , „ , , , ,
Weekly disposals of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish and
imported canned fish) in Britain averaged about 15,000 tons landed weight
in 1972. Total fish consumption, which has declined slightly from its peak ot
28-7 lb. (13 kg.) per head in 1948 on an edible weight basis, is running at a
level of approximately 18-3 lb. (8-3 kg.) per head a year.
Processing and packaging of fish are the subject of continuing research and
development. The growth of quick-frozen fish production has altered radically
the structure of the industry. With the increase in quick-freezing (which now
processes just over a quarter of all white fish landings), new export outlets have
opened up for white fish, which account for almost half the total exports ot
fish and fish preparations.
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal tor
animal food and, to a much lesser extent, for fertilisers. Home production o
white fish meal and herring meal in 1972 was 87,000 tons.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in a wide area around the British Isles outside exclusive
fishery limits. Within the limits drift netting and certain other methods are
prohibited off the coast of Scotland but are permitted under licence off Eng¬
land Wales and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, where salmon fishing is a
private right, the main commercial methods are fixed nets on the coast out¬
side estuaries and sweep netting within estuaries and in rivers. River authority
licences are required for the limited amount of estuary and river netting carried
out in England and Wales. In England and Wales the landed value of the
Distribution
System
Promotion and
Regulation of
the Industry
Common Fisheries
Policy
The Herring
Industry Board
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 335
salmon catch is approximately £861,000 a year, in Scotland it amounts to
about £3 million, and in Northern Ireland to some £290,000. In Northern
Ireland, eels worth about £520,000 a year are captured by long lines and by
eel nets placed in river weirs.
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate
Market in London, which handles about 250 tons a day, but other large cities
also have central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is through
wholesalers, located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell to inland
wholesalers as well as directly to retail outlets; the port wholesalers prepare the
fish for onward shipment. Fish lorries, including insulated and refrigerated
vehicles, transport the catch daily from the ports to inland centres, although
rail transport is still used from some ports. Retail sales are handled by some
18,000 to 22,000 fishmongers and fish friers; the latter use about a third of the
landings of white fish.
Trawler-owning companies have entered into the marketing and distribu¬
tive system. This process has been encouraged by the growing popularity of
quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold mainly by other retail outlets,
such as grocers.
The government departments mainly reponsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
and the Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland. The safety and welfare
of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping generally
are provided for under the Merchant Shipping Acts administered by the
Department of Trade and Industry. Research is carried out by the fisheries
departments (see p. 403).
From 1 st February 1973 the provisions of the Common Fisheries Policy of
the European Community, based on the establishment of a common organisa¬
tion of the market and a common structural policy, applied in Britain. The
common organisation of the market aims at assisting in the adaptation of
supplies to marketing requirements while ensuring, as far as possible, a
reasonable return to producers, by means of the establishment of a common
grading and price system, and common rules on competition. The responsi¬
bility for market organisation is placed largely in the hands of the industry
itself through producers’ organisations established on the initiative of the
industry. Tariff adjustments for intra-Community trade in fish and trade with
third countries are to follow the general agricultural timetable (see p. 324).
The common structural policy covers measures aimed at promoting the
harmonious and balanced development of the fishing industry and the rational
exploitation of resources. It covers access to waters under the jurisdiction of
member states, conservation in coastal waters and common measures for the
financing of the improvement of the structure of the fishing industry and the
provision of an equitable standard of living for those engaged in it.
The Herring Industry Board was set up to reorganise, develop and regulate
the herring industry and consists of a chairman and two other members, all
part-time and independent of the industry, who are appointed jointly by the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the Secretaries of State for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The board, whose activities are
financed partly by levies and licence fees and partly by government grants
336
The White Fish
Authority
Operating
Subsidies
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and loans, is advised by the Herring Industry Advisory Council, consisting
of 32 members representing all sections of the industry and consumers.
The functions of the board include the promotion of sales of herring, both
at home and abroad, and the application of the benefits of technical progress
to the industry, including the adoption of new methods of catching, processing
and distributing herring. The board administers the government grant and
loan schemes which provide for assistance towards the purchase of new fishing
vessels, and the improvement of existing vessels. Fishermen may also obtain
loans from the board towards the purchase of second-hand vessels under
80 feet in length and towards the cost of new nets and gear. Up to 31st March
1973 LV1 in loans and j£3'3 in grants had been advanced.
The function of the White Fish Authority is to reorganise, develop and regulate
the white fish industry, and that of its Committee for Scotland and Northern
Ireland is to advise the authority about the exercise and performance of its
functions in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The authority is composed of a
chairman and six members, and the Scottish and Northern Ireland Committee
of five members and a chairman who is a member of the authority; member¬
ship is by appropriate ministerial appointment. The White Fish Industry
Advisory Council advises the authority about the exercise and performance of
its functions. It normally consists of 53 members representing the various
interests of the fishing industry.
The White Fish Authority administers government grant and loan schemes
for the purchase of new fishing vessels and engines and the improvement of
existing vessels. It also administers loans for the purchase of nets and gear and
processing plants. Up to 31st March 1973, about £377 million in loans and
£43 million in grants were approved. Its other activities are financed by levies
on first-hand sales of most white fish, and a government grant towards research
and development. In 1973 the Herring Industry Board and White Fish
Authority formed a unified administration in preparation for the expected
development of fisheries administration under the common fisheries policy.
Under the provision of the Sea Fish Industry Act 1970 subsidies have been
paid to the inshore fishing industry at rates based either on the length of vessel
and number of days spent at sea, or according to the weight and kind of fish
landed. Subsidies for white fish cost £1-35 million in 1972-73 and those for
herring £189,000. The operating subsidy for inshore white fish and herring
vessels came to an end in July 1973.
The White Fish Subsidy (Deep Sea Vessels) (United Kingdom) Scheme
came into operation in April 1968 for a period of three years and was renewed
for two years in August 1971. In August 1973, however, it was decided not to
extend the operating subsidy for deep sea vessels. . _
Subsidies payable up to 31st July 1971 were at a basic £2 million a year and
were adjusted by reference to the level of profitability of the industry. Payment
was related to the operating efficiency of vessels and not to their classification.
Subsidies cost £1*53 million in 1970-71, £0-5 million in 1971-72 and
million in 1972-73.
FORESTRY
The estimated total area of productive woodland in Great Britain is 379
million acres (1-51 million hectares), or nearly 7 per cent of the total land area;
nearly half of the area is in England, two-fifths in Scotland, the remainder in
Wales.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
The Forestry
Commission
and Forestry
Policy
337
The area of productive forest managed by the Forestry Commission, at
1-85 million acres (075 million hectares) represents 49 per cent of the total.
The annual rate of productive forest expansion is currently about 54,000 acres
(22,000 hectares) by the commission mainly in Scotland, and about 49,000
acres (20,000 hectares) by private woodland owners. The commission’s pro¬
gramme includes considerable planting in upland areas, and consists mainly
of conifers because of the difficult site conditions encountered and because
over 90 per cent of industrial demand which the commission is primarily
charged with supplying is for softwoods. The major species used are Sitka
spruce, Lodgepole pine, Scots pine and Norway spruce. In the older wood¬
lands and taking the country as a whole, the most common coniferous trees
are Scots pine, Sitka spruce, Norway spruce and the larches; among the
broadleaved, beech and oak occur widely.
Total employment in state and private forests was 25,000 in 1972 and a
further 11,000 were engaged in the transport and milling of home-grown
timber.
Except for the period of the two world wars, when much over-felling took
place, home woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribu¬
tion to the nation’s consumption of wood and wood products, as only some 25
per cent of the commission’s woodlands are yet in production. Britain imports
92 per cent of its needs by volume and a higher proportion still by value, the
total import cost of wood and wood products including pulp and paper being
over £864 million in 1972, of which ^253 million was for timber imports.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority charged with
promoting the interests of forestry, the development of afforestation and the
production and supply of timber in Great Britain. The commission consists of
a part-time chairman, a full-time director general, three full-time executive
commissioners and five part-time commissioners. The commissioners comply
with directions given by the forestry ministers, who are the Minister of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland has its own separate organisation (see p. 339). Following
a review of forestry policy the Government published, in June 1972, a con¬
sultative document and associated cost-benefit analysis as a basis for discus¬
sion and formulation of new policies for public and private forestry. For the
future, environmental and employment criteria will be the main objectives of
policy.
The commission’s total estate covers some 3 million acres (1-2 million
hectares) and includes 2-2 million acres (o-88 million hectares) of forest land,
of which nearly 1-9 million (075 million hectares) are under trees in 268 forests
distributed throughout England, Scotland and Wales. All these forests are
covered by management plans which provide for such work as planting, road
construction, thinning, fire protection and timber production, facilities for
public recreation, wildlife conservation and the landscaping of plantations.
Much of the Forestry Commission’s new planting in Scotland is in the
Highland counties, where poorer types of land, such as sour, peaty soil which
is unsuitable for agricultural purposes, are used, having become suitable for
forestry as a result of advances in such techniques as deep ploughing and
fertilisation.
As more of its coniferous woods reach the production stage the commission,
as managers of the National Forestry Enterprise, has assumed an increasingly
important role as a timber seller and has encouraged the setting up of some 20
major new timber-using industries since the mid-1960s.
338
Finance
Private
Forestry
Advisory
Bodies
Forestry
Education and
Research
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production of felled and thinned timber from commission woodlands
amounted to 1-59 million cubic metres in 1972-73. Some of this produce is
meeting traditional requirements of the coal mines but much is taken by the
paper pulp industry and by factories established to make chipboard, fibreboard
and wood wool.
The Forestry Fund was constituted under the 1919 Forestry Act; from it is
paid all the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid
amounts voted annually by Parliament, together with the commission’s
receipts from sales of produce, rentals and other sources. In the period ending
31st March 1972, drawings from funds voted by Parliament amounted to
£16 million, and receipts were £io-8 million.
Privately owned woods comprise nearly 60 per cent of the total forest area in
Great Britain and contain most of the mature and semi-mature timber. The
size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges from a few acres to several
thousand acres, and some 40 Per cent of the private woodland area is in small
ownerships—that is, owners of up to about 250 acres (100 hectares).
The effective management of private woodlands is encouraged by the pro¬
vision of grants under the Dedication of Woodlands Scheme. In addition,
there are the Approved Woodlands Scheme and the Small Woods Scheme.
In 1972, following the governmental review of forestry policy, the grant
systems with the exception of existing commitments were discontinued. An
interim planting grant scheme has, however, been introduced to cover
approved planting carried out since the suspension of the former schemes and
to be completed by the end of the 1973-74 planting season or the introduc¬
tion, if earlier, of new long-term arrangements. It is proposed that in future
once-for-all grants will be given for forests providing employment in certain
areas or satisfying environmental criteria in any area. Woodland owners are
represented, in their relations with the Forestry Commission, by the Forestry
Committee of Great Britain, which co-ordinates the work of two associations
of woodland owners: the Timber Growers’ Organisation (for owners in
England and Wales) and the Scottish Woodland Owners’ Association.
Under the Forestry Act 1967, the Forestry Commissioners have set up for
Great Britain the Home Grown Timber Advisory Committee (HGTAC) to
advise on certain statutory functions, including promoting the interests of
forestry and the production and supply of timber. The HGTAC includes
representatives of associations of woodland owners, timber merchants, pro¬
cessors, and other major timber users and the trade unions, under an inde¬
pendent chairman. The HGTAC maintains a technical sub-committee to
advise it on subjects such as harvesting, transport and utilisation of home
grown timber. . f
The Forestry Commissioners also maintain National Committees 101
England, Scotland and Wales, which act in an advisory capacity, particularly
on the social, recreational and amenity aspects of the commissioners’ activities
and relationships with other land users. The commissioners also maintain a
regional advisory committee for each conservancy and, because of its special
nature, a consultative panel for the New Forest.
Forestry education is the responsibility of the Education Departments.
Degree courses in forestry and associated studies are provided at four universi¬
ties (Aberdeen, Bangor, Edinburgh and Oxford) and supervisory level courses
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 339
are run at Newton Rigg, near Penrith in Cumberland. A number of centres
provide craft courses.
d he Forestry Training Council, whose membership is representative of
forestry employers (both commission and private) and the trade unions, the
education services, the forestry societies and the relevant industrial training
boards, makes recommendations to the industry for meeting requirements for
training and associated further education, and encourages co-operation at all
levels between the agencies and authorities concerned. The Furniture and
Timber Industry Training Board is concerned with training for private sector
employees in the home timber trade.
The commission’s Forest Research Station at Alice Holt Lodge in Surrey
was opened in 1946 and a new Northern Research Station near Edinburgh in
1970. Expenditure on research work in Great Britain amounted to ^1-3
million in 1971-72. This sum included grants for special forestry research work
to various institutions and to university departments including the Common¬
wealth Forestry Institute at Oxford, which is also financed by the university,
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and overseas governments. Research
into the qualities of home-grown timber is carried out by Princes Risborough
Laboratory (formerly the Forest Products Research Laboratory), and also by
grant-aided research associations.
The Ministry of Agriculture is the forest authority for Northern Ireland. It
can acquire and manage land, and give financial and technical assistance to
private planting. It has introduced measures for the protection of all woodlands
against destruction by over-cutting, fire or depredation by animals.
The state forest area has grown steadily since the end of the second world
war. By 1973 over 156,000 acres (63,000 hectares) had been acquired, of which
almost 108,000 acres (43,000 hectares) had been planted. A target of 300,000
acres (120,000 hectares) of state and private forest has been set for the end of
the century.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and from
receipts from forest produce and other sources. About 1,600 people are
employed in the state forests. There are also about 36,000 acres (15,000 hec¬
tares) of privately owned forests, and private planting is assisted by schemes
for the supply of young trees from the Ministry’s nurseries at a low cost, by
grants towards the cost of the establishment and maintenance of plantations
and by free technical advice.
16 Transport and
Communications
Inland and overseas transport and communications employed 7 per cent of the
total labour force in Great Britain in June 1972. Of the 1-5 million persons
so occupied, 31 per cent were engaged in road passenger transport and road
haulage contracting, 16 per cent in railways and 29 per cent in postal services
and telecommunications; sea and air transport each employed about 5 per cent;
port and inland water transport and miscellaneous transport services and
storage employed 14 per cent. Transport and communications contribute over
8 per cent of the gross national product and are responsible for a rather higher
proportion of the nation’s gross fixed capital formation.
SEA TRANSPORT
TING Of the world’s active sea-going tonnage of 100 gross tons1 and over, some n
per cent is registered in Britain, making the British merchant fleet, at 28 6
million gross tons, the third largest in active employment after those of Liberia
and Japan. The oil tanker fleet, at 137 million gross tons, is the world’s second
largest, and the ore and bulk carrier fleet at 5-6 million gross tons, the fourth
largest. . r
The British fleet has grown steadily, particularly over the last few years;
since 1968 it has increased by 31 per cent, much of the new tonnage consisting
of purpose-built container, tanker and bulk carrier vessels. British shipping
meets severe international competition and, with the fleets of other traditional
maritime nations, encounters difficulties from practices such as flag dis¬
crimination and the use of ‘flags of convenience .
ations with
Government
The Department of Trade and Industry is the government department respon¬
sible for most matters connected with merchant shipping. L nder the Merchant
Shipping Acts, it administers many regulations for marine safety and welfare,
for instance: certifying the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows that a ship is
not overloaded; ensuring that standards of safety are observed in ship con¬
struction; ensuring the provision of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and
radio equipment; and dealing with the discipline, professional standards,
health and accommodation of seamen. Most of the work which these respon¬
sibilities entail is carried out by the staff of the Marine Survey and Mercantile
Marine Offices at the ports. There is also a Registrar-General of Shipping and
Seamen, in whose office at Cardiff a complete record of all British ships is kept.
The Merchant Navy Establishment Administration records information on
British seafarers actively employed at sea. Overseas, certain parts of the Mer¬
chant Shipping Acts are administered by British Consuls and by officers of
Commonwealth Governments.   
1 One gross ton (g.t.) = 100 cubic feet (2 83 cubic metres). One deadweight ton (d.w.t )
= i long ton (2,240 lb. or 1,016 kilogrammes). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity
of the enclosed space on a ship. Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load *hich
a vessel can carry before submerging the load-line.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
THE MERCHANT
FLEET
EMPLOYMENT OF
SEAFARERS
Qualifications
Conditions of
Employment
34i
Much of the law relating to employment at sea is being brought up to date
under the Merchant Shipping Act 1970. Arrangements for welfare and safety
of seamen have been improved and disciplinary provisions revised.
In June 1972, 26-2 million gross tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons and
over were both owned and registered in Britain.1 These ships are usually
employed as follows: 5-9 million gross tons as foreign-going passenger and
cargo liners; 6-4 million gross tons as foreign-going tramps; 13-2 million gross
tons as foreign-going tankers; and 0-7 million gross tons in coasting and trade
with ports between the Elbe and Brest (home trades). Gross tonnage of ships
completed for British owners in 1972 is estimated at 3-3 million, about a
quarter of which was built in British yards. Rapid technological change in the
merchant fleet is reflected in the current composition. Vessels are becoming
obsolete over a shorter period and as they do so are being replaced by larger
ships, with generally lower building costs per ton; labour-saving devices,
greater speeds and faster turn-round facilities are reducing operating costs.
The tendency to greater average size has been the most marked in tankers and
dr}’ bulk cargo ships. Vessels are specially built to carry ore and various kinds of
chemicals. Many ships have been designed to carry fully loaded road vehicles,
pallets and containers and the use of these on door-to-door journeys can result
in speedier, safer and cheaper carriage of a wide range of goods.
There are some 89,000 seamen employed by the merchant fleet, according to a
census of seamen in 1971, of whom some 55,000 are United Kingdom
residents.
The Department of Trade and Industry holds examinations for, and issues
certificates of competency to, ship’s officers as master, first mate and second
mate of foreign-going ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as
first-class engineer and second-class engineer. Officers may not normally
serve on board ships in these grades unless they hold the appropriate, or a
higher, certificate.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of competency in radio¬
telegraphy issued by the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications on the
results of an open examination.
A seaman may not be rated as AB (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom
registered ships unless he holds a certificate of competency as AB granted by
the Department of Trade and Industry, or an equivalent certificate. To obtain
this certificate a seaman must, among other qualifications, have served three
years at sea on deck, have obtained a certificate of efficiency as lifeboatman and
have passed a qualifying examination. Seamen qualify by seniority and effi¬
ciency for promotion to the rating of petty officer. Service as a deck rating
qualifies for the purpose of admission to the examination for a second mate’s
certificate.
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies
of apprentices, cadets and ratings who are preparing for their examinations for
the various certificates of competency.
Wages and conditions of employment of the majority of seafarers are nego¬
tiated by the National Maritime Board. Minimum w'ages and holidays with
1 The remaining tonnage included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary craft, Ministry
of Defence vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carriage of
cargo, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in other Commonwealth countries.
342
SHIPOWNERS
SHIPPING
ORGANISATIONS
Lloyd’s Register
of Shipping
Shipowners*
and Shippers’
Organisations
Employers’
Organisations
The National
Maritime Board
Conferences
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pay are guaranteed for both officers and ratings. The Merchant Navy Estab¬
lished Service Scheme, introduced by the board in 1947, removed a great
deal of the uncertainty formerly associated with a seafaring life. Officers and
men can take contracts of at least one year’s duration, either with individual
shipping companies or with the Merchant Navy Establishment Administra¬
tion, and get special benefits between voyages in addition to the normal
unemployment insurance benefit. Other facilities provided for seamen by the
Established Service Scheme include an industrial pension scheme and a
redundancy payments scheme.
About 23 per cent of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom
consists of foreign-going cargo liners, including container ships, most of
which are operated by large groups. Many operate wide networks of scheduled
conventional or container services which, between them, cover every ocean.
The 6-4 million gross tons of foreign-going tramp ships are operated by a
large number of private owners, some having only a small number of ships
and some only one ship. The greater part of the total tanker fleet belongs to
the oil companies, although there are a few important independent British
tanker-owning companies.
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s, see
p. 225) which surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their safety
and operational efficiency. It accepts responsibility for surveying and giving
technical advice on vessels of all flags from the initial stages of building, at
regular intervals during their service, and after casualties. A satisfactory
Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an underwriter that he may accept the
risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between the Register and the
Society of Lloyd’s.
The representative body speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for
the most part, owners of fishing vessels) is the Chamber of Shipping of the
United Kingdom. There are a number of local associations of shipowners
centred around the main port areas. Other organisations represent companies
specialising in a particular trade or type of cargo.
The British Shippers’ Council, formed in 1955, represents the shipping
interests of exporters and importers in matters of both national and inter¬
national concern.
The British Shipping Federation Limited is the employers’ organisation
concerned with labour relations and the regulation of employment. It is
responsible for the administration of the Merchant Navy Established Service
Scheme, under which shipowners recruiting crews for ships of 200 gross tons
and above engage them through the Merchant Navy Establishment Adminis¬
tration unless they are prepared to offer company service contracts.
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representa¬
tives of the shipowners and seafarers’ unions and is responsible for negotiation
of wages and conditions of service.
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
The Baltic
Exchange
SAFETY AT SEA
Sea Rescue
Lighthouses
Pilotage
343
and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a
series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates,
and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle
of a conference is the establishment of a common tariff of freight rates or
passenger fares from each port of departure. Each conference meets from
time to time to review and revise existing rates, or to compile new ones. Some
of the conferences are connected by rate agreements, or have joined together
to form wider groupings. There are over 80 conferences dealing with trade to
and from the United Kingdom. The governments of 12 European countries
and of Japan have asked conferences serving their countries’ trade to adhere to
a code of conference practice; the eventual aim is the adoption of a world code.
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of
London’s seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world’s largest market
for the chartering of ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’
representatives meet there to arrange the chartering of dry-cargo tramp ships
for the carriage of goods to and from all parts of the world. In addition sale
and purchase of ships, chartering of aircraft and trade in certain commodities
are carried on there.
T he Department of Trade and Industry’s responsibilities for safety include
administration of the Coastguard Service, and certain administrative functions
concerning lighthouses and pilotage. The department makes regulations to
ensure safety of navigation and to prevent oil pollution, and conducts enquiries
into shipping casualties and accidents.
The Coastguard Service co-ordinates search and rescue measures for vessels in
distress off the coasts of Britain, and gives direct assistance where appropriate.
There are some 550 regular coastguards and about 7,000 part-time auxiliary
coastguards. Constant watch is maintained all the year round at certain main
stations and where necessary at a number of others. During the year ended
31st March 1973 life-saving action was taken on 4,460 occasions.
A Coastguard School was opened at Brixham, Devon, in 1971.
The Coastguard calls upon shipping, the lifeboats of the Royal National
Life-boat Institution, and Service aircraft to assist as necessary. It has at its
disposal a civilian rescue helicopter based at Mansion in Kent and may call
upon the services of long-range civilian helicopters based at Aberdeen in
Scotland. The Royal National Life-boat Institution is supported entirely by
voluntary contributions, and depends for its operation on voluntary workers.
From its foundation in 1824 to the end of 1972 it saved 96,559 lives. Lifeboats
were launched 2,379 times in 1972 and rescued 1,447 people.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel Islands
and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received its first
Royal Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a Board of ten
Elder Brethren, elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Navy. Light¬
houses in Scotland and Ireland are the responsibility respectively of the
Northern Lighthouse Board and the Commissioners of Irish Lights. These
authorities control about 180 lighthouses, many minor lights and buoys, and a
number of lightships, some of which are being replaced by unattended sea
marks or by light towers.
Trinity House is the chief pilotage authority, licensing some 700 pilots in
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
41 districts in England and Wales, including London, Southampton and
Milford Haven. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is the
pilotage authority. In Britain there are 47 pilotage authorities for the 92
pilotage districts and over 1,600 licensed pilots.
Traffic
Control
POLLUTION OF
THE SEA
PORTS
Every year there are some 140,000 vessel movements, including about 24,000
accounted for by cross-Channel ferries, in the Dover Strait, one of the most
congested stretches of water in the world. The first traffic separation scheme
adopted by the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation
(IMCO a United Nations agency with headquarters in London) was intro¬
duced in the Dover Strait on a voluntary basis in 1967. It was revised and
extended in 1972, and now stretches from the Greenwich meridian in the
Channel as far as other separation schemes operating in the southern North
Sea It consists of inshore traffic zones on each side of the Channel for coastal
shipping, and main traffic lanes in the centre. On the initiative of Britmn
IMCO recommended all states to enforce observance of IMCO s tramc
separation schemes on their own ships and this was done for British ships in
i972.
The discharge of oil into British territorial waters was first restricted in 1922.
Britain is a party to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of
the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. Under amend¬
ments made in 1962 and put into force in 1967 the nations ratifying this con¬
vention (now numbering 47 and representing 80 per cent of the world s tanker
tonnage) agreed to prohibit their national fleets from discharging persistent
oil or oily mixtures within 100 miles (161 kilometres) of any coast, or in some
cases more; ships of 20,000 gross tons and over, built after 18th May 1967,
were prohibited from discharging persistent oil or oily mixtures anywhere at
sea. Amendments agreed upon in 1969 and implemented by Britain in 1973
prohibit the discharge of persistent oil or mixtures containing any oil any¬
where at sea except at a rate which has been shown not to cause harm u
pollution; no oil whatever may be discharged from cargo spaces of tankers
within so miles (80 kilometres) of land. Britain enforces these restrictions on
ships registered in Britain through the Oil in Navigable Waters Acts of 1955,
1061 and 1971, consolidated in the Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1971. In
1060 Britain signed the International Convention Relating to Intervention on
the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, clarifying the rights of a
state to take action on the high seas to prevent pollution of its coast me by oil
from a damaged tanker, and the International Convention on Civil Liability
for Oil Pollution Damage, facilitating the obtaining of compensation for
damage by oil pollution. Britain is giving effect to the latter convention under
the Merchant Shipping (Oil Pollution) Act 1971. ^ 1971 Britain also signed
the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund
for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (designed to provide additional
Iif November 1972 an International Convention on the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping (representing a global agreement on genera
principles) was agreed in London. It is being supplemented by local agree¬
ments, such as the Oslo agreement, covering the North-East Atlantic and the
North Sea which Britain had signed in February 1972 and is implementing.
There are some 250 port authorities or public wharf operators in Britain, and
about 1,400 other undertakings engaged in various harbour operations, such as
National Ports
Council
Development
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 345
stevedoring, towage, warehousing and lighterage. Port authorities are of four
main types: nationalised bodies, public trusts, local authorities and private
companies.
Over a quarter of total port capacity is publicly owned; the majority of
these ports, including Southampton, Hull, Immingham, Newport, Cardiff
and Swansea, are owned by the British Transport Docks Board. In 1972
shipping arrivals and departures at the board’s docks totalled over 122 million
net registered tons (including fishing vessels) and total cargo handled was 83-6
million tonnes. The British Railways Board controls certain ports, which are
largely used for the cross-Channel services of the railways (for example,
Folkestone, Holyhead, Heysham, Stranraer and Parkeston Quay at Harwich)
while the British Waterways Board owns Sharpness (Gloucester) and Weston
Point (Manchester).
The constitutions of public trust port authorities vary considerably. Many
consist of representatives of shippers, importers, exporters, shipping com¬
panies, local authorities and trade unions. Examples of such public trusts are
the Port of London Authority, the Tees and Hartlepool Ports Authority, and
the Belfast Harbour Commissioners. Local authorities own about one-third
of Britain’s ports, including the major port of Bristol, and Preston and Sunder¬
land. Ports owned by private and limited liability companies include Man¬
chester, Liverpool and Felixstowe. Many private ports deal with the traffic
of individual industrial firms in commodities such as petroleum, china clay
and paper pulp.
Port authorities, in the main, operate with statutory powers and responsibili¬
ties set out in private Acts of Parliament. Most are members of the British
Ports Association, formerly the Dock and Harbour Authorities Association,
which aims to further the common interests of port authorities in their rela¬
tions with the Government, shipowners and traders.
The National Ports Council, set up as a statutory body under the Harbours
Act 1964, is financed by a levy on port authorities. It advises the Government
on major port developments and has various responsibilities in relation to
research, training, statistics and charges. It has encouraged the amalgamation
of harbour authorities in certain estuaries into single port authorities, as on the
Forth, Clyde and Tees, and is at present engaged in drawing up, in co-opera¬
tion with the port authorities, a programme of financial, commercial and
management improvements.
Large-scale modernisation of the port transport industry has been taking place
in recent years, as a result both of the increase in Britain’s trade, especially
with other European countries, and of technological changes affecting sea¬
going traffic. The growing size of tankers and bulk carriers has necessitated
more deep-water berths, while development of mechanical handling methods,
packaging of general cargo, containers and ‘roll-on, roll-off’ services has
created a demand for new types of port facilities. Capital investment in ports
amounted to some £52 million in 1972.
A major development at Tilbury, Port of London, costing £30 million over
a number of years, has provided 12 deep-water berths, including a riverside
grain terminal, four of them for container traffic. Another major scheme
has been the construction of the new ^50 million Seaforth docks at Liverpool
which provides ten deep-water berths including four container berths, a grain
terminal and refrigerated meat berth, and others to handle computer-con¬
trolled general cargo and packaged timber. Container facilities are being
BRITAIN 1974! AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
expanded at a cost of some £14 million for the Far East traffic at Southampton,
where a computer-linked harbour surveillance and shipping information
system has been installed to provide radar and VHF radio coverage over 20
miles (32 kilometres) of port area. Deep-sea container facilities have also been
constructed at Felixstowe, the Clyde, and Manchester. In addition over 50
specialised container roll-on berths have been constructed for the short-sea
trades with continental Europe, including Scandinavia and Ireland. A £20
million deep-water harbour at Port Talbot, south Wales, serves as an ore
terminal for the British Steel Corporation. Other ore terminals have been built
at Redcar and Immingham and another is planned at Hunterston on the Clyde.
The Maplin project (see p. 365) includes proposals for the construction of a
major seaport on the Thames Estuary with oil terminal and container facili¬
ties. The discovery of oil in the North Sea has resulted in major developments
at harbours on the east coast of Scotland and in the Shetland Islands to provide
facilities for vessels servicing the drilling rigs.
Labour
Port Traffic
Principal Ports
About 80,000 people are employed in Britain’s port transport industry ; of
these, 36,000 dockers, responsible for the physical and mechanical handling
of cargo, were registered with the National Dock Labour Board at the end of
T Q72
The system of casual labour common among dock workers in the past has
gradually been superseded. In 1947 the National Dock Labour Board was
established to administer a scheme under which registered dock workers
received a minimum wage for attendance even when no work was available.
In 1967 each registered dock worker was placed in employment on a per¬
manent basis with an employer licensed by the port authority, u^der 1 e
provisions of the Docks and Harbours Act 1966. In recent years there has been
a continuous decline in employment opportunities in the industry, due to
improvements in cargo-handling methods, and voluntary redundancy schemes
have been in operation since 1967 to encourage surplus workers to leave the
industry.
Nearly 350 million tonnes of cargo a year pass through the ports of Great
Britain. Of this total, coastal traffic accounts for 100 million tonnes consisting
mainly of petroleum and coal. Of nearly 200 million tonnes of imports from
overseas some 127 million tonnes consist of petroleum and petroleum pro¬
ducts. Manufactured goods form about two-fifths of exports.
A large proportion of the general cargo traffic through British ports is
handled by unitised transport methods in containers and roll-on goo s
vehicles, which carried 19 million tonnes of goods in 1971. British ports
handle more containers than the rest of northern European ports together and
account for the largest share of the container traffic across the North Atlantic.
London, with traffic rising by 12 per cent to 2-6 million tonnes was the
leading port for unit load traffic in 1972; Liverpool, Southampton, Dover and
Felixstowe also handled large amounts.
Britain’s largest port is that of London. In 1972 some 54 million tonnes of
goods were handled, including 27-5 million tonnes of petroleum and nearly
4 million tonnes of coal. . .
Liverpool is a very important export outlet, especially to deep-sea trad g
areas. Some 26 million tonnes of goods are handled annually, about one-half
consisting of dry cargo—grain, chemicals, iron and steel, and other manu¬
factures.
Tanker
Terminals
HOVERCRAFT
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 347
Southampton is the chief port for ocean passenger traffic, and has a growing
general cargo trade. In 1972 it handled 31-3 million tonnes of goods, including
petroleum, fruit and vegetables, cereals and manufactured goods. It has the
advantages of deep water and double tides. Bristol, with Avonmouth, has a
large traffic in grain imports, and is Britain’s main port for imports of animal
feedingstuffs. The south Wales ports, which in 1972 handled 217 million
tonnes of goods, import much of Britain’s requirements of iron ore, especially
through Port Talbot.
Swansea is important for the export of coal, iron and steel and tinplate and
oil. Milford Haven, handling over 46 million tonnes, is Britain’s major oil port.
The inland port of Manchester, reached from the Mersey via the 36-mile
(58-kilometre) Manchester Ship Canal, has at Eastham Britain’s largest oil
dock, covering 19 acres (8 hectares), and exports manufactured goods and
chemicals.
In Scotland the Clyde is the principal port, serving the central industrial
area and possessing a crude oil terminal at Finnart. On the Forth, Grange¬
mouth is associated with petroleum, petro-chemicals and timber.
Newcastle and other ports on the Tyne serve England’s industrial north¬
east, and the port of Tees and Hartlepool handles iron ore, steel and engineer¬
ing products, and chemicals, especially fertilisers. Hull and Grimsby on the
Humber handle about 36 per cent of the wet fish landed in Britain and are
among the largest white fish ports in the world. With Immingham they serve
the industrial areas of northern England and the Midlands, especially in trade
with Scandinavian and Baltic ports. Belfast is the principal port of Northern
Ireland and with Larne handles the main traffic across the Irish Sea.
Most of the oil tankers coming to Britain to discharge crude oil are berthed at
special tanker terminals owned and operated by the oil companies to serve
their own refineries.
British ports offer the deepest water access in Northern Europe for fully-
laden tankers to pipe crude oil direct to refineries. Milford Haven can accom¬
modate fully-laden vessels of 250,000 deadweight tons on all tides at four
private oil company terminals. Finnart on the Clyde will accept vessels of
325,000 deadweight tons and can be readily adapted to accept the half-million-
ton tankers of the future; it is frequently used in lightening operations to
allow part-laden vessels to proceed with shallower draft to other ports in
Northern Europe. At Tetney Haven off the mouth of the Humber, fully-laden
tankers discharge at Britain’s first offshore mooring monobuoy, a large buoy
anchored in deep water with a connecting pipeline to the shore.
Pipelines connect Finnart with the refinery at Grangemouth on the Firth
of Forth, Angle Bay with the refinery at Llandarcy (near Swansea) and Stan-
low (Merseyside) with the refinery at Heysham (Lancashire). A ^7 million
crude oil terminal to handle tankers of 250,000 deadweight tons is to be built
at Hound Point, near Edinburgh. Crude oil will be piped from the Forties
Field (see p. 275) to Cruden Bay and thence by land pipeline to Grangemouth.
The hovercraft, a vehicle invented in Britain which rides on a cushion of air
over both land and water surfaces, has been in regular public passenger service
around the coasts of Britain since 1965. Services are run by several privately
owned firms, these include Hoverlloyd Ltd., which has a purpose-built
hoverport at Pegwell Bay in connection with its car and passenger ferries
between Ramsgate and Calais, and Hovertravel Ltd., which operates across
the Solent to the Isle of Wight and has a subsidiary which does training and
348
BRITAIN 1974" OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
charter work. Two publicly owned bodies, the British Railways Board and the
Scottish Transport Group, have hovercraft interests. British Railways
subsidiary, British Rail Hovercraft Ltd. (‘Seaspeed’), was set up in 1966, and
is the world’s largest commercial hovercraft operator. It runs regular services
across the Channel between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover and Calais,
carrying passengers and accompanied cars. It also operates two services across
the Solent, and takes on charter work. During i973 a privately operated
hovercraft service was started on the Thames between Greenwich and West¬
minster. The service, which is primarily intended for commuters, is being
financially assisted by the Government and the Greater London Council.
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain is carried mainly by
road and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, pipelines and
inland waterways are important in carrying certain types of freight, particu¬
larly bulk goods. A small proportion of freight goes by air.
Part of the inland transport system of Great Britain is publicly owne .
the railways, a large proportion of road passenger and some road haulage
services, most of the inland waterways and some of the vessels on them. Road
haulage is largely, and coastal shipping almost entirely, in the hands of private
^Indie third quarter of 1972 there were 16-1 million vehicles licensed for
use on the roads. Of these 127 million were motor cars, 970,000 motor cycles
and i-6 million road goods vehicles; about two-thirds of the 77,000 pub ic
road passenger vehicles (excluding taxis) were publicly owned.
In 1972 about 64 per cent of freight, in terms of ton-mileage/ travelled by
road, 18 per cent by rail, 16 per cent by coastal shipping, and 2 per cent by
pipeline and inland waterway.
Since 1945 the rapid growth of private and commercial motor traffic, causing
congestion problems of increasing severity, especially in cities and towns, and
the changing pattern of demand for transport services have led successive
governments to undertake or commission fundamental studies of probab e
trends in transport and problems which may arise therefrom. The Buchanan
report, published in 1963, was the result of a study group set up to examine t e
problems of traffic in urban areas which proposed radical measures to rebuild
and adapt cities and roads to handle the growth of traffic. It is expected that
the number of vehicles on the roads will double by the year 2000
Total passenger mileage is expected to increase by about a third during the
next ten years with most of this increase being due to private transport To a
freight ton-mileage is expected to increase substantially, although fuel traffic
will fall as a result of structural and technological change.
Research is being carried out into new forms of inter-urban travel, such as
high-speed passenger trains, which incorporate new forms of suspension, and
vertical take-off aircraft. . . , , 1
The railway network has been reduced by over a third in the past decade
but it was decided in 1967 to fix a basic network of some 11,000 route-miles
(I7,70o route-kilometres) for modernisation and development.
RAILWAYS The railways first came under government direction during the first world
1 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual distance
it was transported.
Long-term
Trends in
Transport and
Traffic
Operations
Development
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 349
war, and afterwards some 130 private companies were amalgamated into four
large regional groups under the Railways Act 1921. Thereafter they suffered
from the prolonged industrial depression and growing competition from road
transport, and following the second world war the Transport Act 1947
brought the railways under public ownership as a single enterprise, British
Railways. Under the Transport Act 1962 the British Railways Board was set
up and came into existence in 1963 with sole responsibility for managing
railway affairs.
In spite of technical and operational advances the board’s financial position
remained unsatisfactory and, following a detailed review of railway policy,
the 1968 Transport Act made far-reaching changes. Capital debt was written
down from £1,627 million (of which £705 million had already been suspended
under the 1962 Act) to £365 million. Grants were introduced for loss-making
rail passenger services which it was considered desirable to maintain for social
or economic reasons; £68-1 million was so paid in 1972. Grants not exceeding
a total of £50 million were paid to the board on a gradually diminishing scale
during the years 1969 to 1973 towards the cost of maintaining surplus track
and signalling equipment pending their elimination; £8 million was paid in
1972. Deficit financing ceased and the board was then expected to pay its way.
During 1972 the board’s financial position again deteriorated following a
dispute with the railway workers, resulting in a substantial pay award, and a
miners’ strike which severely reduced carryings of coal. The Government has,
in this case, provided a substantial grant.
The process of rationalisation arising from changing public transport require¬
ments is reflected in the reduction of over 6,677 mdes (10,746 kilometres) to
11,537 miles (18,567 kilometres) of standard-gauge route since 1961. A total
of 754 million passenger journeys was made and 175 million tons of freight
traffic conveyed on the railways in 1972; total railway receipts amounted to
£632*4 million. The board made a loss of £26*2 million following interest
payments of £51*1 million. At the end of 1972 it employed 256,000 people.
In 1972 a subsidiary, British Transport Hotels Ltd., owned 33 hotels of
which it managed 31. It also managed the catering facilities on trains and in
station refreshment rooms.
A subsidiary, British Rail Hovercraft Ltd., runs regular hovercraft services
(see p. 348).
British Rail’s Shipping and International Services division, which carries
more sea-going passengers than any other fleet in the world, operated in 1972
a fleet of 60 vessels, providing passenger and freight services on most of the
important routes between Britain and the Irish Republic and on the short-sea
routes to the continent of Europe, as well as on some domestic routes. Owner¬
ship of domestic services in Scotland was transferred to the Scottish Transport
Group under the Transport Act 1968; its two shipping subsidiaries own some
32 vessels between them.
The board’s second five-year corporate plan was produced in 1972. Plans are
revised annually and provide a comprehensive analysis of the perform¬
ance and investment requirements of all sectors of the business. In recent
years the most important developments have been the replacement of steam
by diesel and electric traction completed in 1968; the improvement of inter¬
city passenger services with the emphasis on speed, reliability and comfort;
the introduction of express freight services (‘freightliners’) enabling freight
to be handled throughout transit in standard containers (the responsibility
35°
Passenger Services
Freight
Workshops and
Technical Centre
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of Freightliners Ltd., see p. 351); and increased mechanisation in the carrying
of coal and other bulk commodities. Capital expenditure in 1972 amounted to
/100 million. , . , • t
At the end of 1972 there were 3,683 diesel and 317 electric locomotives. In
addition there were 3,467 diesel and 7,071 electric passenger-carrying multiple
unit vehicles.
The board’s current programme includes the replacement of old passenger
coaches by new stock with improved amenities, and the construction of new
electric multiple unit stock to replace old vehicles. On certain sections of the
London-Bristol-south Wales line and of the London-Edinburgh line pass¬
enger trains are permitted to run up to 100 mph (161 kph). Similar speeds are
also in operation on the London Midland Region’s sendees on the electrified
line between London, Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool. This electri¬
fication scheme, costing some £160 million and completed m 1967, was the
largest individual capital investment project ever undertaken by the British
Railways Board and included station reconstruction, bridgeworks, a new
colour-light signalling system and new rolling stock. An approximate increase
of 150 per cent in numbers of passengers has followed. Electrification is being
extended by 235 route-miles (378 route-kilometres) to Glasgow at a cost of
/25 million; a £30-4 million route rationalisation and resignallmg scheme is
associated with it. A £10 million scheme, due for completion in 1974, is to
provide an extension to the Mersey underground railway in central Liverpool.
Motorail services (carrying both passengers and cars) have an annua
capacity of 100,000 cars on 31 services.
The efficiency of freight services is being improved as new vehicles come into
service and as facilities for concentrating traffic at fewer and better equipped
and sited marshalling yards and terminals are completed. The freighthner
services, the responsibility of Freighthners Ltd. (see p. 35i)> serve a network
of 28 main terminals. Services are operated throughout the country and to t re
continent of Europe. The first freightliner ran in 1965.
The London International Freight Terminal links the British Railways
Board container port of Harwich with the main freighthner network. New
terminals were opened in 1972 at the docks at Southampton, Barking (London)
and Felixstowe. The first fully cellular container ships built m a British yard
are being used in the board’s container services between Harwich and Zee-
brugge, opened in 1968.
The Total Operations Processing System, a computer system allowing
constant and close control of all freight trains, is to be introduced in south¬
west England in 1973 and extended to the whole of Great Britain by 1975.
The most important freight commodities are coal and steel. The long-haul
carriage of many products in bulk is increasing. Long-term contracts are m
operation for the carriage of cars, oil, china clay, milk, grain, newspapers, steel,
chemicals and other goods. Coal is fed direct from collieries to power stations
in ‘merry-go-round' trains, on which coal is loaded and discharged automati-
cally from high-capacity wagons.
British Railways Board’s subsidiary, British Rail Engineering Ltd., had in
1972 14 main workshops, employing some 35,300 people, mostly on repairs
and construction of rolling stock, locomotives and containers.
The Railway Technical Centre at Derby covers 20 acres (8 hectares) and
employs about 2,000 people. Work is proceeding on a large number of pro¬
jects, a major one being the development of a 155 mph (250 kph) advance
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
National Freight
Corporation
Freight
Integration
Council
Channel Tunnel
ROADS
Motorways and
Trunk Roads
351
passenger train’ to run over existing tracks. Like the associated train control
system and some smaller projects, it is being given government financial help.
The National Freight Corporation was set up under the 1968 Transport Act
to provide and promote the provision of integrated road and rail freight
services, making the maximum economic use of rail. The corporation took
over all the road haulage and most of the shipping interests of the Transport
Holding Company, disposing of its shipping interests in 1971, and from the
British Railways Board the depots, vehicles, warehouses, containers and other
equipment, though not the actual trains used, in the freightliners and sundries
sendees, and also the board’s road haulage vehicles. It has a capital of about
£110 million, and employs 52,000 people; annual turnover amounts to some
£203 million.
Freightliners Ltd., a company jointly owned by the Freight Corporation
and the British Railways Board (with 51 per cent and 49 per cent of the shares
respectively), is responsible for the marketing and management of freight-
liner sendees. The British Railways Board makes a charge for providing and
hauling the trains, and profits are divided between the board and the corpora¬
tion in proportion to their holdings.
A Freight Integration Council, set up under the 1968 Act, advises the Depart¬
ment of the Environment and the Secretary' of State for Scotland on the pro¬
vision of integrated freight services by publicly owned bodies. It consists of
several independent members with an independent chairman, the chairmen
of the Freight Corporation and the British Railways Board, and members
representing union interests.
Following completion of final studies into the financial and technical feasibility
of a bored rail tunnel under the Channel, the British Government announced
in September 1973 that it intended, subject to Parliamentary approval, to
proceed with the project in association with the French Government and an
international group of banking and other interests. The tunnel would provide
ferry7 train sendees for road vehicles in addition to through rail services.
A large and steadily expanding road-building programme has been in progress
since 1955. Public expenditure on the construction and improvement of roads
in Great Britain is estimated at over ^600 million in 1973-74.
Roads are classified according to their traffic value. Trunk roads provide
a national network of routes for through traffic; other roads are divided for
grant purposes into principal and non-principal roads. Motorways are roads
specially designed for high-speed traffic only.
In June 1973 Great Britain had nearly 211,000 miles (339,000 kilometres)
of public highway. There were 9,000 miles (15,000 kilometres) of trunk roads,
of which 1,059 miles (1,704 kilometres) were motorways; 20,000 miles (33,000
kilometres) of principal roads, of which some 34 miles (55 kilometres) were
motorways, and 181,000 miles (291,000 kilometres) of other roads, including
unsurfaced roads.
At the end of June 1973 in England 941 miles (1,514 kilometres) of motorways
had been opened for traffic and construction had started on a further 235 miles
(378 kilometres). Schemes for an additional 548 miles (882 kilometres) were
being prepared. In Wales 27 miles (43 kilometres) were in use. In Scotland
about 91 miles (146 kilometres) of motorway had been opened and construc¬
tion had started on a further 16 miles (26 kilometres), while schemes for an
MOTORWAYS AND MAJOR
TRUNK ROUTES
rDover
Folkestone
V
Penzance
Bridges and
Tunnels
Administration
Research
ROAD
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 353
additional 58 miles (93 kilometres) were being prepared. (See map on
P- 352-)
A government programme aims to complete by the early 1980s a comprehen¬
sive network of 3,500 miles (5,633 kilometres) of strategic trunk routes, in¬
cluding about 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of motorway, serving the major
ports, airports and industrial centres and linking remote regions to the motor¬
way network.
A large programme of bridge and tunnel building has been undertaken in
recent years. The bridges include the suspension bridge across the Firth of
Forth, the Severn Bridge incorporating major advances in suspension bridge
design, the 7,000-ft (2,134-metre) bridge across the Firth of Tay and the
3,200-ft (975-metre) Weaver Viaduct in Cheshire. The new ^5-5 million
London Bridge over the river Thames was officially opened in 1973. A £26
million bridge across the river Humber, with a span of 4,626 feet (1,410 metres)
—longer than any existing bridge span in the world—is to be completed in
1976-77.
Among several major tunnel schemes is a second Mersey crossing of which
the first of the twin tunnels was opened in 1971; the second is due for comple¬
tion in 1974. A second crossing of the Thames at Hartford, Kent, is also under
construction.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is the highway authority for
trunk roads in England and on these roads he administers expenditure, which
is provided wholly from central government sources, although for many pur¬
poses he employs local authorities as his agents. The Secretary of State for
Scotland has corresponding responsibilities for roads in Scotland and the
Secretary of State for Wales for roads in Wales. Work on major trunk road
schemes in England, including motorways, is controlled by regional road con¬
struction units, manned jointly by Department of the Environment and county
council staff. The highway authority for principal roads is, in general, the
council of the county or county borough in whose area the roads lie. The
Secretary of State makes specific grants towards approved expenditure on con¬
struction and major improvement of these roads and contributions from public
funds towards maintenance and other expenditure are made through grants to
local authorities. Roads other than trunk and principal roads are entirely the
responsibility of the local authority in whose area they lie.
Research on roads is carried out at the Transport and Road Research Labora¬
tory (see p. 395). The laboratory provides technical and scientific advice and
information to help in formulating, developing and implementing government
policies relating to roads and transport, including their interaction with urban
and regional planning. Work is concerned with planning, design, construction
and maintenance of roads and structures such as bridges and tunnels; safe,
efficient and convenient movement of people and goods, including road layout
and transport networks, control of traffic flow, study of road accidents and
methods of reducing their frequency and severity; assessment of existing and
projected passenger or freight transport systems and investigation of technical
developments and their environmental effects.
In 1972 there were 16-1 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great Britain’s
roads. Of these i-6 million were goods vehicles and 105,000 were public road
passenger vehicles (that is, buses and taxicabs).
354
Licensing
Publicly Owned
Road Haulage
Public
Passenger
Transport
by Road
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Road Traffic Act 19301 ended the licensing of public service vehicles
(that is, buses and coaches) by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas
each under the control of three traffic commissioners. The commissioners are
responsible for ensuring the fitness of vehicles used in public road passenger-
transport, and for licensing services in order to secure proper co-ordination
and to eliminate unnecessary competition; to this end they may fix routes,
timetables and fares.
The Road and Rail Traffic Act 1933 established a system of licensing for
road haulage vehicles designed to restrict vehicle operations to proved needs.
A new goods vehicle licensing system, aimed solely at improving safety, has
been introduced as provided under the i ransport Act 1968. I hose opeiating
vehicles of over 3^ tons gross weight now require an operator’s licence,
obtained on showing ability to maintain vehicles properly and control loading
and hours worked by drivers. It may also be necessary to demonstrate adequate
financial resources for compliance with these conditions. Licences are granted
by independent, quasi-judicial licensing authorities, and may be revoked,
suspended or curtailed if necessary. Regulations concerning the fitness and
loading of vehicles have become more stringent under recent legislation.
Holders of operators’ licences may carry their own or other people’s goods and
are free of statutory control over their charges. Over 900,000 goods vehicles
not exceeding 3^ tons gross laden weight are exempt from operators’ licensing.
European Community rules setting new requirements for drivers’ hours, rest
periods, records and daily distances applied in Britain from April 1973 to
commercial vehicles on international journeys. Journeys entirely within Great
Britain, regulated under the Transport Act 1968, will become subject to the
Community rules from 1st January 1976 with the exception of most bus
services. The European Community rules limit drivers in general to eight
hours’ driving a day.
From 1956 to 1963 the nationalised road haulage services were controlled by
British Road Services (BRS), a division of the British Transport Commission,
and operated through five companies, which together owned about 16,000
vehicles. Under the Transport Act 1962, these organisations operated com¬
panies incorporated under the Companies Act, with their own boards, and
were grouped together under the Transport Holding Company, responsible
to the then Minister of Transport. The road haulage interests of the Holding
Company have been transferred to the National Freight Corporation (see p.
351), which operates some 24,000 vehicles.
The 1968 Transport Act enables Passenger Transport Authorities (PTAs) to
be set up to control and co-ordinate the different forms of transport in any
particular area. Five PTAs have been set up in south-east Lancashire-north¬
east Cheshire, Merseyside, the west Midlands, Tyneside and Greater Glasgow.
The constituent local authorities appoint most of the members, but up to one-
seventh may be appointed by the Secretary of State for the Environment (or
by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales). Each appoints its own
chairman, with the relevant Secretary of State’s approval. The PTAs control
policy and finance, and appoint professional executives—Passenger Transport
Executives—to be responsible to them for day-to-day operations. The execu¬
tives may operate services themselves and enter into agreements with other
bodies, such as the British Railways Board or the National Bus Company, to
1 Consolidated in the Road Traffic Act i960.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Road Safety
355
operate others; they have taken over all the former municipal bus undertakings
in their areas. In 1972 the four English PTAs became responsible for local
rail services in their areas and have since reached agreement with the British
Railways Board on their future operation. The Greater Glasgow PTA will
eventually assume a similar responsibility. From April 1974 the role of the
PTAs will be assumed by the new metropolitan county councils in England
and two new PTAs will be set up for the metropolitan counties of South
Yorkshire and West Yorkshire.
The National Bus Company was formed to take over the former bus
operating and manufacturing subsidiaries of the Transport Holding Company
in England and Wales, and operates through locally based subsidiaries.
A separate Scottish Transport Group was set up to control bus and some
shipping services in Scotland, and took over the relevant interests of the
Transport Holding Company, operating through subsidiaries.
The National Bus Company and the Scottish Transport Group operate
some 20,000 and 4,500 vehicles respectively. The PTAs control some 6,250
vehicles and London Transport a further 6,000. In addition, there are 68
local authority undertakings operating 10,600 vehicles and 5,053 privately
owned fleets (of which 3,721 have five vehicles or less) comprising some
25,300 vehicles.
Capital grants may be made by the Government towards the cost of invest¬
ment in public transport, at rates of up to 75 per cent of approved cost. Eligible
schemes include improvements or extensions of railway lines, new fixed track
rail and bus systems, interchanges, stations, car parks, urban and suburban
railway rolling-stock, resignalling, train control systems and automatic fare
collection. Grants at the rate of 50 per cent are available towards the cost of
new buses complying with specifications approved by the Department of the
Environment. Local authorities may assist unremunerative bus services in
rural areas and where they do so the Government reimburses half their expen¬
diture. The Government also refunds part of the tax charged on fuel used on
local bus services, both urban and rural.
Britain has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the world but a rela¬
tively good accident record, the fatal accident rate per vehicle being lower
than that in most other European countries. In 1972, 7,800 people were killed
on the roads and about 91,000 seriously injured. Road accident statistics are
compiled and published by the Government Statistical Service from reports
made by the police.
Modern roads, designed for present-day traffic and segregating pedestrians
from vehicles, are safer than the roads they replace and surveys have shown
they result in a marked fall in casualties. Measures directed primarily towards
road safety include speed limits of 30 and 40 mph (48 and 64 kph) in built-up
areas and 50 mph (80 kph) on certain trunk and important classified roads in
rural areas; a 70 mph (113 kph) speed limit on all motorways and on all other
roads where no lower limit applies; the provision of pedestrian crossings; and
the system of road markings and traffic signs which are being replaced by
improved signs in accordance with general European practice. A centrally
controlled, computerised signalling system is being installed on motorways
to warn motorists of advisory speed limits in certain conditions and of lane
closures.
The design of vehicles, their use on the roads, and the maintenance of their
mechanical condition are controlled by regulations. The regulations are kept
under constant review, and amended whenever necessary in the interests of
0 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
safety or for control of pollution and noise. The fitting of seat belts to the front
seats is compulsory for cars first registered in or after 1965 and for light goods
vehicles first registered in or after 1967. Private cars and light vans which are
three or more years old must be tested annually at private garages authorised as
test stations. Heavy goods vehicles are tested annually at government test
stations. Public service vehicles must be specially approved before being
licensed to carry passengers, and are tested at regular intervals. Any vehicle
may be stopped on the road at any time by the police and examined.
All drivers of motor vehicles, unless they have either held a full British
licence or passed the driving test in the last ten years, are required to pass the
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Until they pass the test they
must obtain a ‘provisional’ licence which necessitates their displaying ‘L’
(Learner) plates on their vehicle. With the exception of solo motor-cycles and
motor-cycle combinations, where vehicles are constructed to carry passengers,
learner drivers must be accompanied by a qualified driver. (Newly arrived
residents of Britain may drive under their overseas driving licences for three
months before becoming subject to these rules.) A learner driver of a solo
motor-cycle is restricted, until he passes the driving test, to a machine not
exceeding 250 cc. Professional driving instructors must be approved by the
Department of the Environment. There is a scheme for special licensing and
testing of drivers of heavy goods vehicles.
The Road Traffic Acts, which embody the law relating to road users, are
enforced by the police and the courts. A person convicted of any of the 26
most serious offences is liable to be disqualified from driving for a period. The
standard of conduct for all road users and a summary of the requirements of
the law are set out in easily understandable form in the Highway Code. A failure
to observe the code does not of itself render a person liable to criminal pro¬
ceedings but may be taken into account in any such proceedings. The Road
Safety Act 1967 made it an offence to drive with more than a prescribed level
of alcohol in the blood, at present 80 milligrammes of alcohol per 100 milli¬
litres of blood. The wearing of safety helmets by all riders of motor-cycles,
scooters and mopeds was made compulsory in 1973.
National campaigns to persuade people to take greater care on the roads are
conducted by the Department of the Environment and the Royal Society for
the Prevention of Accidents with assistance from the local authorities, which
also help by arranging courses of instruction, especially courses for children.
Control of Traffic The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1967 empowers traffic authorities to make
orders regulating traffic and imposing parking control. With the exception of
trunk roads, which are the concern of the central Government, traffic is the
responsibility of local authorities. Extensive schemes are being undertaken
for the improvement of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion. These
include: ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads from cities; and traffic
management measures, including comprehensive control of street parking,
‘one-way’ systems, peak hour ‘clearways’ prohibiting waiting on busy roads,
the restriction of traffic in some streets to buses, taxis and delivery vehicles,
and ‘tidal flow’ arrangements. Lanes reserved for buses are being introduced
in many large towns. A Traffic Advisory Unit within the Department of the
Environment advises local authorities. In most town centres street parking is
permitted for limited periods only; in London and many other towns schemes
for payment at parking meters or residents’ parking spaces are under the
supervision of traffic wardens. Disc schemes providing free but limited parking
facilities are in operation in some towns, including Cheltenham, Devizes,
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
357
LONDON
TRANSPORT
The London
Transport
System
INLAND
WATERWAYS
Harrogate and Ripon. The Government is identifying and acquiring a national
network of long-distance lorry parks. A computer-controlled system to
regulate traffic was installed in west London in 1968. Similar systems are
operating in Glasgow and Liverpool. The Government is devising, in co¬
operation with local authorities, a system of advisory lorry routes. In the
interest of environmental improvement, long-distance and in particular heavy
goods traffic, is being diverted from many towns and villages; from October
1973 lorries of 40 feet (12 metres) and longer will be banned from travelling
into central London except for delivery purposes.
London is one of the world’s largest cities. The area known as Greater London,
within a radius of about 15 miles (24 kilometres) from Charing Cross, contains
7-3 million people.
The Greater London Council (GLC) is the transport planning authority for
London as a whole and has responsibility for the central bus and Underground
rail services. These services are managed and operated by the London Trans¬
port Executive, appointed by and responsible to the GLC. The buses serving
areas around London and the long-distance Green Line coach services are run
by London Country Bus Services Ltd., a subsidiary of the National Bus
Company.
The London Transport undertaking operates all road and rail passenger
transport services in the London area with the exception of the London lines
of the British Railways Board, the Green Line coach services, London Country
Bus Services and the taxicabs. Some 10,000 taxicabs that ply for hire in the
streets are privately operated by companies or owner-drivers and are licensed
annually by the Metropolitan Police. There are about 14,000 licensed cab
drivers. In addition, numerous car-hire firms are in operation.
London Transport’s railway network stretches over 20 miles (32 kilometres)
from north to south and 35 miles (56 kilometres) from east to west. In January
1973 the total length of the railway over which London Transport trains
operated was 252 miles (406 kilometres), of which 99 miles (159 kilometres)
were underground. London Transport trains serve 279 stations and its buses
travel over 1,722 miles (2,772 kilometres) of roads. To carry traffic over all this
area London Transport owns 4,357 railway cars and 6,342 buses. The total
staff employed is over 57,000.
Improvements being carried out by London Transport have included
extension and modernisation of parts of the Underground system, and the
introduction of automatic fare collection and automatic trains. One-man
operation of buses is being steadily extended over a period of years. The
first one-man-operated double decker buses were introduced in 1969; there
are to be some 1,500 of these by 1975. Experimental ‘minibus’ services are in
operation.
Work on a 14-mile (23-kilometre) underground railway—the Victoria
Line—between Walthamstow in north-east London and Brixton in south
London was completed in 1971 and work begun on a scheme to link Heathrow
airport with the Underground railway system. Construction of the first stage
of the new Fleet Line began early in 1972.
London Transport operates an international advisory service for city trans¬
port.
Since 1963 control of the majority of inland waterways has been vested in the
British Waterways Board. Under the Transport Act 1968 a grant-in-aid is
358
The System
Development
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
being paid primarily to enable the board to maintain an extensive network of
amenity waterways; in 1972 £3 million was paid and a further £1 million for
improving bridges.
There are about 2,500 miles (4,023 kilometres) of navigable inland waterways
in Great Britain, some 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of which belong to
the British Waterways Board; the remainder are mainly in the hands of local
authorities or private companies. Many of the board’s canals are narrow water¬
ways which can generally be used only by boats not exceeding 7 ft (2-13 metres)
in width; the remainder are broad waterways and canalised rivers, some of
which can be used by craft of up to about 750 tons capacity. The Caledonian
and Crinan Canals in Scotland are broad waterways. Of the inland waterways
under the control of the British Waterways Board some 340 miles (547
kilometres) are commercial waterways, which are mainly canalised river
navigations. A substantial additional mileage (1,100 miles—1,770 kilometres—
known as cruising waterways) is being maintained for recreational purposes; a
statutory Inland Waterways Amenity Advisory Council advises the Secretary
of State for the Environment and the British Waterways Board.
Engineering, commercial and estate work is directed from the board’s head¬
quarters in London. There are also principal offices at Leeds and Gloucester.
In Scotland the Caledonian Canal and the other Scottish canals are, for en¬
gineering and estate purposes, under the control of the board s office in
Glasgow, with direction as a whole from London.
In 1972 traffic on the board’s waterways amounted to just over 4-9 million
tons, of which i*8 million tons were coal, 1*4 million tons liquids in bulk and
1 *7 million tons general cargo. Some 96 per cent of the traffic is carried on the
commercial waterways.
Although the British Waterways Board is the largest single carrying operator,
most of the traffic is handled by independent carriers or by traders in their
own craft. The board at the end of 1972 owned 460 freight-carrying craft
(including tugs) with a carrying capacity of 20,300 tons. It operates 3 docks
and 19 warehousing depots.
In Northern Ireland, the only inland waterway which is still used tor com¬
mercial transport purposes is the Lower Bann Navigation.
The British Waterways Board is developing its cruising waterways for purposes
of recreation and amenity. Among the most popular are the Llangollen branch
of the Shropshire Union Canal, the Oxford Canal, and the Leeds and Liver¬
pool Canal. The principal commercial waterways are the river navigations and
broad canals in the Yorkshire-Humberside area, the Trent Navigation, and the
Gloucester and Sharpness Canal. Freight traffic is declining, but some im¬
provements to facilities are being carried out. The board has devised and is
already operating on some of its commercial waterways a specially designe
interlocking modular barge system. A European consortium is building a
ship capable of carrying the barges between Britain and the rest of Europe.
The total turnover of the British Waterways Board in 1972 amounted to
fc-q million, of which £0-2 million arose from the board’s own freight¬
carrying activities, £1-4 million from warehousing and terminal services, and
/i-2 million from the docks. The sale of water for industrial and agricultural
purposes brought in nearly £1 million. Receipts from pleasure boating were
£246,700. The number of pleasure craft licensed or registered in 1972 was
18,025.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
359
PUBLIC
TRANSPORT
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
Roads
The operation of the railway service and Government-owned bus service in
Northern Ireland is the responsibility of the Northern Ireland Transport
Holding Company. The Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd., a subsi¬
diary of the Holding Company, operates the railway service. Improvements to
the rail system under a modernisation scheme involve the re-opening of several
stretches of line closed in earlier years and the introduction of new rolling
stock.
Ulsterbus Ltd., another subsidiary of the Holding Company, provides all
public road passenger services, apart from those of the City of Belfast. A new
company, Citybus Ltd., has been set up in Belfast combining the city opera¬
tions of the bus services of Ulsterbus and Belfast Corporation. A number of
privately owned bus companies now operate in addition.
There is a licensing system for road haulage operation. About 1,600 operators
and 3,600 vehicles are licensed, the biggest single operator being Northern
Ireland Carriers Ltd., owned jointly by the Northern Ireland Transport
Holding Company and the British National Freight Corporation.
On 31st March 1973 there were 14,189 miles (22,835 kilometres) of public
roads in Northern Ireland, comprising 317 miles (510 kilometres) of trunk
roads, 1,026 miles (1,651 kilometres) of Class I roads, 1,737 miles (2,795
kilometres) of Class II roads, 2,887 miles (4,646 kilometres) of Class III roads
and 8,222 miles (13,232 kilometres) of unclassified roads.
The Ministry of Development is directly responsible for the trunk road
system and bears the entire cost of maintenance and construction work on
these roads. From October 1973 the Ministry will also be responsible for the
other roads, at present the responsibility of the local authorities; its Road
Executive will have local offices throughout the Province.
In addition to major construction schemes on trunk roads, an extensive
system of motorways is planned including an urban motorway system in
Belfast. About 60 miles (97 kilometres) of motorway were in use by September
1973. The most recently opened length of motorway is a 2^-mile (4-kilometre)
section, constructed mainly on land reclaimed from the Belfast lough fore¬
shore; it has a dual four-lane carriageway, the widest motorway in Europe.
The estimated gross capital expenditure on all roads in the financial year to
31st March 1972 was £12 million, and expenditure on maintenance and minor
improvements was about £8 million. Gross capital expenditure in the five-year
period 1970-74 is expected to be about £100 million, compared with about £62
million in the five-year period to 31st March 1969. Expenditure on main¬
tenance and minor improvements in the five-year period to 31st March 1972
was ^40-4 million.
CIVIL AVIATION
In April 1924 four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited and this company pioneered the commercial development of inter¬
continental air routes. By 1929 there was a through service from England to
India. The first passenger service to Australia started in 1935.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), a public corporation,
took over the undertakings of Imperial Airways Limited and British Airways
Limited in 1940. British European Airways (BEA) was established under the
Civil Aviation Act 1946 as a separate public corporation to cover the United
Kingdom and Europe.
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BOAC and BEA have become divisions of British Airways (see p. 362) follow¬
ing a major reorganisation of the control of British civil aviation through the
Civil Aviation Act 1971. Under this Act were created the Civil Aviation
Authority (CAA) and the British Airways Board (BAB—to run British
Airways—see p. 362). The new bodies became fully operative on 1st April
1972.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry is responsible for international
matters (including negotiation of air service agreements with other countries,
the licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain by over¬
seas operators and British participation in the activities of the International
Civil Aviation Organisation and other international aviation bodies), amenity
matters such as aircraft noise, and investigation of accidents. The Secretary
of State appoints the chairman and other members of the CAA, and is
empowered to give written guidances on the general policies to be followed. The
guidances must be approved by both Houses of Parliament, and the CAA is
then bound by them.
The Secretary of State may also give directions, after consultations, to the
CAA, concerning Britain’s relations with other countries, membership of
international organisations or adherence to international agreements, or to
deal with problems of noise, vibration, pollution or other disturbances arising
from the activities of civil aviation. He may also give directions, after consulta¬
tion, to the BAB concerning matters affecting the public interest. He has
powers to make funds available to the BAB, with the approval of the Treasury
and within limits laid down by Parliament (see p. 362).
The Civil Aviation Authority is separate from and largely independent of the
Government, and responsible for the economic, technical and operational
regulation of the industry, the provision of air navigation services and the
operation of Aberdeen Airport and the Scottish Highlands and Islands aero¬
dromes. It issues licences and certificates to airlines, aircraft, aerodromes and
personnel, including pilots, air traffic controllers and maintenance engineers.
The CAA has been given the objective of recovering, by 1977-78, the whole
of its costs and a reasonable return on capital from the users of its services.
Because it does not itself fix charges for navigation services and because inter¬
national agreement is necessary on charges for navigation services made during
the course of a journey it will take some time to reach this objective, meanwhile
the Government is to pay a diminishing grant to meet its deficit on revenue
account, to be assessed annually in advance; it amounted to some £29 million
in the first year.
The Civil Aviation Authority operates an air services licensing system, within
which British operators, both state-owned and independent, apply on an equal
footing for licences for scheduled and charter services, or for revocation or
variation of existing licences. It determines categories of licence, content of
applications, and conditions and tariff provisions of licences. It also has power
to exempt particular flights or categories of flights from licence requirements.
In issuing licences the CAA must consider the applicants’ financial resources,
staffing and organisation, the need for the proposed services, their adequacy
and possible effect on existing services, and any representations made by
interested parties. Appeals may be made to the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry. A new CAA scheme for licensing air travel organisers came into
operation in May 1973*
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Safety
Air Operators'
Certificates
Flight Crew
Qualifications
Training
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Technical
Provisions
361
The CAA is responsible for ensuring the safe operation of civil aircraft, and
initiating relevant preventive measures and research. Its Airworthiness Divi¬
sion is responsible for the code, British Civil Airworthiness Requirements,
with which all aircraft built in Britain must comply. Continued airworthiness
is ensured by regular inspection and by requiring aircraft to be maintained in
accordance with a schedule approved by the CAA. The authority is advised by
an Airworthiness Requirements Board representing the users.
Every operator of aircraft above a certain weight used for public transport
must possess an Air Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the CAA when
it is satisfied that the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of his
aircraft. It is advised by the flight operations inspectors (who are experienced
airline pilots). In addition to British Airways 55 independent air transport
operators hold an Air Operator’s Certificate.
Each member of a flight crew must hold the appropriate official licence. Flight
operations inspectors check the standards maintained by the operators, which
must be adequate for purposes of the Air Operator’s Certificate.
In order to increase the supply of well-trained pilots for civil airlines, the
College of Air Training was set up at Hamble in i960. It is now sponsored by
the Government and British Airways. Commercial pilots must attend a course
of training approved by the Civil Aviation Authority. Such courses have been
approved at the training schools at Carlisle, Oxford and Perth, in addition to
Hamble. An engineering apprentice school was set up at Cranebank, near
Heathrow, in 1970.
An Air Transport and Travel Industry Training Board has been established
under the Industrial Training Act 1964.
Responsibility for policy planning and execution of both civil and military
air traffic control over the United Kingdom and the surrounding seas rests
with the National Air Traffic Services, under the joint control of the Civil
Aviation Authority and the Secretary of State for Defence.
In 1950 a system of airways covering the main traffic routes with control zones
around the major airports was introduced. Subsequently, the airway system
has been revised and extended to meet traffic requirements, employing
principally very high frequency omnirange beacons as the primary navigation
aid. There are three main air traffic control centres: at London for southern
England, at Preston for the north of England and Wales, and at Prestwick for
Scotland and the Atlantic Ocean to 3o°W.
A variety of radar installations and other equipment provide the means by
which the system can accept the increasingly heavy load of air traffic. Britain
was the first country to use radar for the control of civil air traffic. During
the next few years, under a scheme which will eventually cost over £50 million,
virtually the whole of the airspace over Britain above 5,000 feet (1,500 metres)
will be brought under surveillance by the latest types of primary and secondary
radar equipment, which will provide data to be used in two air traffic control
centres, located at West Drayton (near London) and Prestwick. The first
stage was introduced in 1971. A subsidiary centre will be located at Manchester
to deal with traffic in the Manchester terminal control area. Extensive use will
be made in these centres of automatic data processing and other advanced
electronic techniques.
Britain has pioneered the development of all-weather landing systems, based
on an improved version of the standard instrument landing system used at all
362
Eurocontrol
Noise Control
British Airways
Board
British Airways
Overseas Division
British Airways
European Division
British Airways
Regional Division
Other Divisions
BRITAIN 1974c AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
major airports. The Blind Landing Experimental Unit of the Royal Aircraft
Establishment at Bedford and private industry have worked towards fully
automatic landing. Both VCios and Tridents now make regular automatic
landings on scheduled flights.
Britain is a member of Eurocontrol, a European international agency concerned
with the traffic control problems arising from the increasing use of high-flying,
high-speed jet aircraft. Set up in 1963 it provides control at the higher flight
levels for civil aircraft and for military aircraft operating according to civil
procedures.
Since 1971 all new types of subsonic aircraft using British airports have been
required to hold a ‘certificate of quietness’. The noise standards laid down in
the certificate follow the recommendations of the special meeting held by the
International Civil Aviation Organisation in Montreal in 1969.
Noise abatement measures in force at various airports include limitations
on noise levels at take-off, route restrictions, procedures designed to lessen
noise on the ground, and limits on the number of jet movements during
summer nights.
The British Airways Board (BAB) controls the activities of the seven divisions
of British Airways—British Airways Overseas Division, British Airways
European Division, British Airways Regional Division, British Airways
Associated Companies Ltd., British Airways Helicopters Ltd., British Air¬
ways Engine Overhaul Ltd. and International Aeradio Ltd. The chairman
and members of the BAB are appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry. Its total borrowing and investment limit is fixed at £56° million; it
may be increased up to £700 million by statutory order. During the year
!972-73 the board earned ^539 million revenue and made a net profit of £5
million. British Airways has the largest route network in the world, almost
500,000 miles (800,000 kilometres), covering 200 destinations in 88 countries.
The Overseas Division is engaged on long-haul operations. Its scheduled ser¬
vices link Britain with continental Europe, the Middle East, the Far East,
Australasia, Africa and North and South America, and also provide complete
round-the-world services. The capacity offered on the division’s total services
reached 2,922 million capacity-ton-miles in the year ended March i973>
some 49 per cent of which was on the western routes to North and South
America. It has a charter subsidiary, BOA Charter Ltd.
The European Division operates on short-haul and medium-haul services in
Britain and the rest of Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. It also
operates BEA Airtours Ltd., a charter subsidiary.
The Regional Division is responsible for the secondary domestic services and
for a network of services to Europe operated by Cambrian Airways, Northeast
Airlines, Scottish Airways and Channel Islands Airways. Its services in Britain
include a number which meet a vital social need, mainly the services to and
from the Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
British Airways Associated Companies Ltd. is responsible for the group’s
investments in some 40 hotel companies and ten airlines in different parts of
the world. The helicopter division—British Airways Helicopters Ltd.—
operates a scheduled service between Penzance, Cornwall, and the Isles of
Scilly, undertakes charter work and provides links between oil rigs in the
North Sea and the mainland. Engine overhaul work for British Airways and
Aircraft
The
Independent
Airline
Companies
Growth of Air
Services
Air Freight
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 363
other airlines is carried out by British Airways Engine Overhaul Ltd. Inter¬
national Aeradio Ltd. plans, installs, operates and maintains airport technical
services and general communications and manufactures specialised equipment
for use in these services.
The British Airways fleet of some 220 aircraft in May 1973 is the world’s
largest passenger fleet operating international services. Aircraft in the Overseas
Division consist of Super VCios (16), VCios (11), Boeing yoy-436?, (11),
Boeing 707-3363 (11), and 13 Boeing 747s. The European Division contains
BAC One-Elevens (18), Trident Threes (26), Trident Twos (15), Trident Ones
(20), Vanguard g^is (1) and Vanguard g^gs (5). BEA Airtours have Boeing
707-4363 (7) and 3 Comet 4BS. British Airways is converting the Vanguard air¬
craft into the Merchantman used solely for freight and 9 are now in service. The
Regional Division’s fleet consists of BAC One-Elevens (4), Viscounts (35),
Trident Ones (4) and Sky liners (2). Helicopters in the helicopter division
include Sikorsky 6iNs (7), Bell Jet Rangers (1) and Bell212s (1). Orders include
five Concorde supersonic aircraft and two Boeing 747s for the Overseas Division
and six Lockheed TriStars for the European Division.
Although the public sector had a statutory monopoly up to 1961 there has been
a significant expansion in recent years not only of the number of passengers
and volume of freight carried but also in the diversity of services operated by
the independent operators. The independent companies compete with British
Airways over several domestic routes, including the busiest internal route in
Europe, from London to Glasgow. In 1972 they carried some 4 million
passengers on scheduled services. British Caledonian Airways, the ‘second
force’ airline, has a fleet of some 32 aircraft, used on chartered and scheduled
passenger and freight services, and carries about one million scheduled service
passengers a year. It was formed in 1970 by a merger of British United Air¬
ways and Caledonian Airways. The Government intends British Caledonian
to continue as the principal independent scheduled airline, and the CAx\ is
required in exercising its licensing functions to provide it with adequate
opportunities to build up its route networks. In April 1973 British Caledonian
began operating scheduled services from London to New York and Los
Angeles.
In addition to the public transport operators there are a large number of
companies engaged in miscellaneous aviation activities such as crop-spraying,
aerial survey and photography, and flying instruction. About 30 companies
carry out air-taxi operations.
Total capacity-ton-miles offered on all services by British airlines rose by 18
per cent in 1972 to reach 5,650 million capacity-ton-miles. In 1955, 2-5
million passengers entered or left Britain by air, compared with 5-7 million
who arrived or departed by sea; in 1962 there were for the first time more air
than sea passengers, and by 1972 the figures were 28-1 million by air and 12
million by sea.
Freight traffic in 1972 amounted to some 649,000 tonnes, 22 per cent higher
than in 1971. This growth is reflected in the figures showing the proportion
of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air. In 1956, 1-7 per cent of imports and
2-9 per cent of exports (by value) were carried by air. In 1972 the corresponding
percentages were 14 for imports and 16 for exports, and the total value of
exports, imports and re-exports by air was £3,132 million. The chief export
364
Private Flying
Aerodromes
Development
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
items are expensive machinery and parts, aircraft and vehicle parts, and
electrical and electronic products; furs and skins account for a large proportion
of the total value of re-exports.
The estimated number of aircraft on the United Kingdom register used for
business and private purposes is 1,828 while approximately 734 are owned by
clubs, groups and training schools. About 16,800 private pilots hold licences.
About 85 companies use corporate aircraft and 62 companies are members of
the Business Aircraft Users’ Association. There are some 9,000 glider pilots.
The Civil Aviation Authority has a general responsibility for licensing civil
aerodromes. It controls directly Aberdeen and eight small aerodromes in the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland. Aerodromes which are municipally or
privately owned and which are used for the public transport of passengers and/
or flying instruction are subject to licensing, inspection and regulation by the
authority, which is also responsible for navigation facilities at a number of
main municipal airports.
The British Airports Authority (BAA), an independent statutory body
operating on a commercial basis, took over in 1966 the ownership and manage¬
ment of London’s two major airports (Heathrow and Gatwick), Prestwick in
Scotland and Stansted in Essex. In April 1971 it took over Edinburgh airport.
At these airports the Civil Aviation Authority is responsible for the provision of
navigation services; the Department of Trade and Industry directs the BAA to
take measures to control noise and vibration.
There are approximately 140 civil aerodromes in Britain; in addition, 50
Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those under civil control include
9 directly controlled by the Civil Aviation Authority, 3 Channel
Islands and 1 in the Isle of Man administered by the local island governments,
and 41 aerodromes licensed for public use, of which 22 are owned by munici¬
palities. Most of the remainder are owned privately. Two of the CAA s
aerodromes and 32 others are designated customs airports; limited customs
facilities are available at a further 36 aerodromes.
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal airports have risen very
markedly in recent years, and in 1972 Britain’s civil airports handled 40
million passengers. The number of movements of aircraft engaged on com¬
mercial transport operations was 670,000.
For international scheduled services Heathrow and Gatwick are the mam
airports, and Heathrow is the busiest centre of international travel in the
world. The number of passengers handled at Heathrow, 14 miles (22 kilo¬
metres) west of central London, has increased from 5*4 million in i960 to
187 million in 1972 of whom most were international passengers. To accom¬
modate the rapid expansion expected in freight movements, £25 million has
been invested in a cargo terminal and associated developments, which came
into use in 1969. Facilities costing some 3^13 million have been provided for
handling Boeing 747 (jumbo jet) aircraft, which began to use the airport early
in 1970. Work is proceeding on the extension of London s Underground rail¬
way to Heathrow. The London Airport Cargo Electronic-data-processing
scheme (LACES) came into full operation at Heathrow in 1971, making Britain
the first country to control incoming cargo by computer. A £7 million computer
system to replace the European and Overseas Divisions’ computer systems is to
be installed by British Airways by 1974-75*The new system will be designed to
accommodate the forecast passenger traffic growth over the next ten years.
Organisation
Finance
Postal Services
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 365
The airport at Gatwick, 28 miles (45 kilometres) south of London, was
opened in 1958 as the second airport for the London area. Built alongside the
main London to Brighton railway and the A23 road, Gatwick airport was the
first in the world to contain road, rail and air transport in one unit. In 1972 it
handled 5*4 million passengers.
It is planned to open the third London airport, to be built at Maplin, Essex,
in 1982. The Maplin project includes reclamation of land from the sea, con¬
struction of an airport and seaport, road and rail access routes and a new town.
A Maplin Development Authority is to be set up to reclaim land and to make it
available for the airport and seaport.
A privately owned helicopter terminal (or ‘heliport’) is in operation at
Battersea on the south bank of the Thames.
Prestwick airport in Scotland has been developed to accommodate large
jet aircraft. Already one of the best equipped freight airports in the world, a
new cargo terminal is being built there. The airport at Abbotsinch, owned and
run by the Glasgow Corporation, handled 1*9 million passengers in 1972. A
new main runway and passenger terminal are planned for Edinburgh. Luton
airport handled 3*1 million and Manchester airport handled 2-5 million
passengers in 1972; while Belfast handled over a million passengers. Birming¬
ham, Edinburgh, Prestwick, Liverpool and Newcastle each handled over
500,000.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office, founded in 1657, provides postal, public telecommunications,
data processing and Giro services. It was set up as a public authority under the
Post Office Act 1969, having previously been a government department.
The Post Office is headed by a chairman and board, appointed by and respon¬
sible to the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications. It has some 420,000
employees and over 24,000 post offices. The postal, telecommunications and
data processing services are now managed separately.
The Post Office has authority to borrow up to £3,800 million with provision
for an increase to £4,800 million, if necessary. At 31st March 1973 it had
borrowed £2,789 million. Over 90 per cent of total expenditure on fixed
assets is accounted for by telecommunications. The Post Office plans to invest
some £4,000 million in the period 1973-77.
Some 10,800 million items of correspondence and about 194 million parcels
are carried annually by the inland postal services. An increasing amount of
correspondence is sent by air, reaching 425 million items in 1972-73; 2-5
million parcels were sent by air in that year.
New highly mechanised sorting office buildings are being opened in Britain.
Letter segregating and facing machines have been installed at some 39 centres.
Postal address coding (postcode) is in operation for almost the whole country
—postcodes have been allocated to over 95 per cent of addresses. Some £50
million is being invested in an improved parcels service.
‘Datapost’, a package collection and delivery service for computer data and
important packages, introduced in 1970, provides over 10,000 services each
week.
The British Postal Consultancy Service offers professional advice on all
aspects of postal business to overseas administrators and to business organisa¬
tions. Subjects covered include management methods and systems, postal
366
Counter
Services
Telegraph
Services
Telex Service
Datel
Services
Telephone
Services
BRITAIN 1974' AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
circulation systems, containerisation, planning of buildings and mechanisation.
Work was done in 1972-73 for 12 overseas postal administrations.
At the post office counter, besides making use of its postal and telegraph
facilities, a person can draw a pension or a family allowance, buy a licence for
his dog, a licence for his television receiving set, renew a car licence, buy
national insurance stamps, use the savings and investments facilities (see p.
222) and the money transmission services of the National Giro. In much of its
counter service the Post Office acts as agent for government departments and
local authorities.
Britain has one of the most up-to-date telegraph systems in the world and is
directly connected to most of the principal overseas telegraph offices. With the
exception of those offered by the small number of foreign telegraph companies
licensed to operate in Britain, all international telegraph services from Britain
are operated through the provincial and London offices of the Post Office
International Telegraph Service. Direct connection via the Centex system
between these British offices and the larger towns in Belgium, France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy and Nor¬
way minimises delivery delay. In addition, the Post Office has been well to the
fore in the development of telegram retransmission techniques and is planning
to open a computer-based telegram retransmission centre in 1974.
The Telex Service combines the speed of the telephone with the accuracy of
the printed word. Calls may be made direct between the rapidly increasing
number of telex users in Britain (estimated at 46,000 by the end of 1973) and
also to well over 500,000 subscribers throughout the world. Britain is linked to
over 161 countries by telex. The British telex service is fully automatic.
Connection is made by direct dialling to any subscriber within the country,
and about 97 per cent of international calls are also directly dialled. These
include calls to virtually the whole of Europe. Calls to countries not available
through the automatic service are connected through the International Telex
Exchange in London. International telex traffic increased by 15-5 per cent in
1972-73; P°st Office planning for a system of about 100,000 United
Kingdom subscribers by 1980. A radioteleprinter service extends the use of
telex to ships at sea (see p. 368).
The demand for facilities enabling digital data for computers to be transmitted
over telephone and telegraph lines has greatly increased; to meet it the Post
Office has developed a range of datel services providing for transmission at
speeds of up to no bits per second over telegraph-type circuits and up to
2,400 bits per second over speech-type circuits. Speeds of 48,000 bits per
second can be accommodated by special arrangement. Most of the datel
facilities are available internationally and over telegraph or speech-type circuits.
In the year ended March 1973 the number of British Post Office datel terminals
amounted to some 24,450.
At the end of March 1973 there were 6,499 local telephone exchanges and
17-6 million telephones. During 1972-73, 0-9 million new lines were installed.
All London’s exchanges are now automatic. Trunk dialling by subscribers
(STD) began in Bristol in 1958; by March 1973 the facility had been extended
t° 4,359 exchanges, serving 96 per cent of subscribers, all of whom should
have STD by 1974.
Hull Corporation is the only municipality to exercise its option of operating
Special Telephone
Services
Private
Telecom¬
munications
Services
Submarine
Cables
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 367
its own service under licence from the Post Office; this service is connected to
the Post Office trunk network.
The first operational electronic exchange in Europe was opened at Amber-
gate, Derbyshire, in 1966. There are now over 400 such exchanges in Britain.
Large electronic exchanges with capacities of up to 40,000 lines are due to come
into service in major cities by the mid-1970s. Mobile electronic exchanges
were introduced in May 1973.
Pulse code modulation systems are being used to increase the circuit capacity
of lines on short-distance routes between exchanges. Over 2,300 should be
installed by the end of 1973. A new time-division electronic switching system
for interconnecting routes equipped with pulse code modulation systems has
been used experimentally. Research is proceeding into a new digital trans¬
mission and waveguide system to increase capacity.
International subscriber dialling operates from London and other major
cities to most of western Europe, the United States and Canada. Britain has
two automatic international telephone exchanges in use and a third under
construction. It is expected that by 1978 callers will be able to dial international
calls from 80 per cent of telephones, compared with 61 per cent in 1972.
Operator-connected calls are handled at London international exchanges,
which are connected to over 3,500 direct telephone circuits to European
countries. Direct links via transatlantic and Commonwealth cable networks,
communications satellites and high frequency radio provide service to over 50
countries outside Europe. Almost every country can be reached from the
international exchanges, via intermediate points where necessary.
A radio tower, 620 feet (189 metres) high, in London provides microwave
radio links for carrying long-distance telephone and television circuits. There
are over 100 Post Office communications masts and towers in use, including a
tower of 500 feet (152 metres) in Birmingham.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the ‘999’
emergency dialling service enabling subscribers to be connected as quickly
as possible, and free of charge, to the police, ambulance or fire brigade services.
A public radiotelephone service operating in London and south Lancashire
enables users of vehicles fitted with suitable equipment to make or receive calls
to or from any telephone in the United Kingdom network. Recorded informa¬
tion services include: the speaking clock, weather forecasts, motoring informa¬
tion, recipes, ‘Test match’ cricket scores, Financial Times share index and
business news summary, and ‘Dial a Disc’. In London a recorded service
provides details in five languages of events taking place, and a similar service,
in English only, is provided in Edinburgh during the summer.
There are over 158,000 private circuit stations not connected with the public
exchange networks. These are associated with circuits rented for private use
for telephone conversations, teleprinter connections, photo-telegraphy, tele¬
vision, music, or for the transmission of signals which represent data for
computers or operate other devices.
There are some 42 submarine cable links between Britain and the rest of the
world, covering about 14,000 miles (22,800 kilometres). Cable systems using
transistors in place of thermionic valves have been developed by British manu¬
facturers in consultation with the Post Office Research Station and are used
in many new systems. A comprehensive Commonwealth telephone cable plan
was agreed upon in 1958 and carried out by Cable and Wireless Ltd. in
368
Satellite
Communica¬
tions
Radio
Communica¬
tions with
Ships at Sea
Data
Processing
Service
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
co-operation with the Post Office. The plan covered the construction of three
long-distance telephone cable systems: CANTAT 1 (2,100 nautical miles),
from Scotland to Canada, was opened in 1961; COMPAC (8,130 nautical
miles), connecting Canada, Hawaii, Fiji, New Zealand and Australia, opened
in 1963; and SEACOM (7,070 nautical miles), connecting Australia, New
Guinea, Guam, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore, was completed in
stages from 1965 to 1967. The submarine cables are linked overland across
Canada and Australia by radio microwave systems. CANTAT 1 was the first
single-cable ocean telephone system to use the new lightweight cable and rigid
two-way repeaters, both developed by the Post Office.
Since CANTAT 1 was laid between Britain and Canada telephone calls
have risen substantially. CANTAT 2, which will enter service in 1974, will
double telephone links across the Atlantic, with its 1,840 circuits. It will cover
2,700 nautical miles between Cornwall and Nova Scotia.
The Goonhilly satellite communication earth station in Cornwall was brought
into operation in 1962, and took part in the first experiments in satellite
communications using the Telstar and Relay satellites. A second aerial was
introduced in 1968 and a third was brought into use in 1972. The three aerials
provide commercial telephone and television circuits via high-capacity, geo¬
stationary satellites positioned over the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. At the
end of 1972 Britain operated some 640 satellite telephone circuits to 30
countries. The satellites used in the global communications systems are pro¬
vided by the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (see
p. 407) of which Britain is the second largest shareholder.
In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post
Office has n coast radio stations in the United Kingdom which provide
radiotelegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea at ranges
of up to some 500 miles (805 kilometres) and 250 miles (402 kilometres)
respectively. There is also the long-distance radiotelegraph and radio¬
telephone station, Portishead Radio, which communicates with ships in all
parts of the world. Traffic handling capacity is being increased under a six-
year modernisation programme due for completion in 1974.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with
safety of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radio¬
telegraph and radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or
aircraft and take immediate action to obtain assistance for any vessel in distress.
During 1972-73 the stations handled 488 urgency and distress calls.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange
radiotelegrams with ships and connect radiotelephone calls between telephone
subscribers ashore and suitably equipped ships; they also broadcast naviga¬
tional warnings and weather bulletins.
The stations operate a free medical advice service whereby the master of a
ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropriate medical authorities
on the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard ship. During
1972-73, 563 medical cases were dealt with in this service.
Since the Post Office in 1957 set up an installation to process payroll, pensions
and statistical work, it has become one of the largest users of automatic data
processing equipment and techniques in Britain. Its computer organisation is
divided into two parts: the Post Office Data Processing Service for its own
‘Confravision’
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 369
internal services, and the National Data Processing Service for services to
business firms and other external users.
In addition to stock control and telephone billing, computer systems are
used for large-scale document and information retrieval systems, the Giro
system, scheduling of mail vans in London, the LACES import-handling
system at Heathrow airport (see p. 364), and control of revenue collection from
television licences. In its 13 regional computer centres the Post Office Data
Processing Service operates 26 computers and is processing over 150 projects.
Techniques and equipment employed by the staff of over 4,000, of whom some
700 are systems analysts and programmers, include optical and magnetic ink
character reader/sorters; direct keying of data on to discs and magnetic tapes;
and the direct recording of data from magnetic tapes to micro-film.
The world’s first purpose-built system of conferences by television, ‘Confra¬
vision’, was introduced by the Post Office in September 1971. Using Post
Office video circuits the service allows private communication between studios
in London, Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, and Manchester.
The Post Office is spending over £20 million a year on research and develop¬
ment, in collaboration with industry and the universities. A new £8 million
research centre is being built at Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, to replace
eventually the laboratories at Dollis Hill.
Research
17 Employment
Growth in
Working
Population
Deployment of
Manpower
The Department of Employment is principally responsible for industrial
relations, pay policy, employment, training and related manpower questions
in Great Britain (see p. 51). In Northern Ireland employment matters are
among the responsibilities of the Ministry of Health and Social Services.
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at the middle of June 1972 was
24-6 million, about 45 per cent of the total population, and included some 72
per cent of people of normal working age (151 to 59 years for women, 15 to 64
years for men). About 90 per cent of the men of working age are today in or
seeking gainful work. The remaining 10 per cent consist mainly of those con¬
tinuing their education, of the severely disabled and of some people of private
means. The proportion of women of working age in or seeking gainful work
is much lower, about 53 per cent, as many housewives do not undertake paid
employment outside the home; however, a substantial and increasing propor¬
tion, some 64 per cent, of the women at work are married. Besides those of
normal working age, there are over a million older men and women still at
work. The great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary,
but about i-8 million are employers or self-employed.
Northern Ireland, which has 2-8 per cent of the total population of the
United Kingdom, has 2-4 per cent of its working population (see p. 372).
Farmers and smallholders working their own holdings account for about
one-twelfth of the working population.
The working population increased slowly until 1966, and has since fallen
(see Table 33) mainly because of the lower demand for labour and the increased
numbers in full-time education. Because of demographic factors and the
rising demand for higher education, the working population is unlikely to
increase much above the 1966 levels before the mid-1970s, even if the demand
for labour were as high as in 1966.
Though successful development policies in the less prosperous regions may
raise the working population above the levels forecast, any increasing demand
for labour must in general be met by better deployment of manpower, im¬
proved productivity and more training. Non-cmployed married women form
the only substantial reserve.
The industrial distribution of employees is shown in Table 34. Of all employees
about 37 per cent are employed in the manufacturing and mining industries
and under 2 per cent in agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Well over half of
those in manufacturing are in the metal, engineering, vehicles and chemicals
groups of industries.
Most industries employ women as well as men though not always for the
same types of work; for example, few women are managers and few personal
1 The school-leaving age was raised from 15 t° ^ in September 1972-
EMPLOYMENT
371
Thousands'1
TABLE 33
Manpower in
Great Britain
1963-72
Manpower
Research and
Planning
Unemployment
Year
Numbers in
civil
employment6
Unemployed
Armed
Forces0
Total
working
population0
At June:
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
197U
1972'*
24,250
24,527
24,770
24,914
24,519
24,346
24,373
24,187
23,439
23,441
461
317
270
253
466
506
483
524
687
767
427
424
423
417
417
400
380
372
368
371
25,138
25,268
25,463
25,584
25,402
25,253
25,236
25,082
24,495
24,579
Source: Department of Employment.
0 Figures may not add up to the totals shown because of rounding.
6 Part-time workers are counted as units.
c The working population figures and the Forces figures include ex-Service personnel
on leave after completing their service.
d Estimates before 1971 are based primarily on counts of national insurance cards;
estimates for 1971 and 1972 are based on censuses of employment.
secretaries are men. It is illegal to employ women in certain jobs, such as
underground work in coal mines. Women are chiefly employed in the food,
drink and tobacco industries; the manufacture of electrical goods, textiles and
clothing; the distributive trades; the financial, professional, scientific and
miscellaneous services; and public administration.
The numbers given in Table 34 as working in an industry or service include
those engaged on administrative, technical and clerical work, so that the totals
given for the production industries are greater than the numbers on productive
processes. It is estimated that in April 1973 in manufacturing industries in
Great Britain 27 per cent were administrative, technical and clerical em¬
ployees (the ratio ranged according to industry from 13 per cent in clothing
and footwear to 40 per cent in chemicals and allied industries).
As an aid to government manpower policies the Department of Employment
maintains a continuing study of manpower resources and requirements for
both the whole economy and for some particular industries and occupations.
The Department of Employment also co-operates with industrial training
boards (see p. 377) on technical problems connected with industrial and man¬
power planning, recruitment, training and careers advice.
The general unemployment rate in Britain as a whole was among the lowest in
the world during the 20 years prior to 1967—usually between 1 and 2 per cent
—but has been rising since then. It has been relatively low in the south-east of
England, and consistently higher in those parts of the country which have the
greatest dependence on shipbuilding, coalmining, and certain branches of the
heavy engineering and metal manufacturing industries, notably parts of Scot¬
land and Wales, and north-east England and Merseyside. These areas have
been the subject of a series of measures of selective assistance to stimulate
industrial expansion; and counter-measures have been taken to limit expansion
in areas of manpower shortage (see p. 266). The general unemployment rate in
372
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Thousands1
TABLE 34
Analysis of Civil
Employment in
Great Britain
mid-1972
Northern
Ireland
Industry or Service
Males
Employees
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Mining and quarrying . .
Manufacturing industries:
Chemicals and allied industries
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing and footwear
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures
Total: manufacturing industries
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Professional, financial, scientific and
miscellaneous services6
National government service . .
Local government service
Total: employees
Employers and self-employed persons (all
industries and services) ..
Total in Civil Employment
315
362
341
3,094
299
108
441
1,075
5,359
1.172
288
1,266
1.173
2,395
352
635
13,319
1,430
14,749
Females
101
15
125
826
259
318
289
438
2,254
86
60
254
1,415
3,621
228
299
8,331
361
Total
8,692
416
377
466
3,921
558
426
730
1,513
7,613
1,258
347
1,520
2,588
6,015
580
934
21,650
1,791
23,441
Source: Department of Employment.
0 Figures may not add up to the totals shown because of rounding.
6 Excludes private domestic service.
Great Britain in July 1973 was 2-4 per cent; the areas with the highest rates
were Wales and Scotland and the North and North-West regions.
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed but excluding certain unpaid helpers—was about 607,500 in
September 1972 (394,700 males and 212,800 females). The number of insured
employees was 535’5^‘ The largest productive industries are agriculture,
engineering, textiles and clothing. Most of the agricultural work in Northern
Ireland is done without hired help.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in
other parts of the United Kingdom. In July 1973 it was 6-6 per cent of insured
employees. The Northern Ireland Ministry of Commerce has wide powers
(similar to those in Great Britain) to assist the development and diversification
of industry. It is using these powers vigorously in an attempt to improve the
situation (see p. 268).
EMPLOYMENT SERVICES
The main government employment services are provided in Great Britain
EMPLOYMENT
373
Manpower
Services
Commission
Employment
Offices
through the country-wide network of local employment offices of the Depart¬
ment of Employment. The services in Northern Ireland are run on similar
lines by the Ministry of Health and Social Services but there are some varia¬
tions related to the much smaller area of administration. Wide ranging changes
are being made in the organisation of these services in Great Britain.
The Employment and Training Act 1973 provides for a new Manpower
Services Commission (MSC) to be set up to manage the Government’s
employment and training services. It will do so through two agencies, the
Employment Service Agency (ESA), already operating within the Depart¬
ment, and the Training Services Agency (TSA) being set up within the
Department. The main object of the change is to transfer direct control from
the Government to representatives of employers and workers and of local
government and educational interests. The members of the MSC will be
appointed by the Secretary of State for Employment, after consultation with
interested parties. The MSC is expected to start operating during 1974.
The main duty of the MSC will be to make such arrangements as it con¬
siders appropriate for assisting people to select, train for, obtain and retain
employment, and for assisting employers to obtain suitable employees. Its
responsibilities will include running the offices of the employment service,
the Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) and the Occupational
Guidance Service, operating the Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS),
co-ordinating the activities of the Industrial Training Boards, and carrying
out certain functions relating to the careers service to be run by the local
education authorities.
The MSC will carry out its functions within a general policy framework
agreed upon with the Secretary of State, and will be responsible for expendi¬
ture in excess of ^ioo million a year. Most of its activities will be financed
from public funds, and it will receive an annual grant.
While many of the current functions of the Secretary of State will be trans¬
ferred to the MSC, he will retain responsibility for general manpower policy,
manpower aspects of regional policy and regional economic planning, and for
the Department’s unit for manpower studies, the race relations employment
advisory service, certain executive duties under the Race Relations Act 1968
(see p. 153), certain functions in relation to redundancy payments, the issue
of work permits to immigrants and international aspects of employment and
training matters, the conciliation and advisory service, and the wages inspec¬
torate. Management of unemployment benefit is to be separated from that of
the employment services before they are transferred to the MSC and will be
administered under a regional benefit manager at each of the Department’s
regional offices.
Employment offices provide a comprehensive service for employers needing
staff and for people, whether or not already in employment, seeking jobs.
Information and advice on any employment problem is available to all. Use
of the service is voluntary. Employers and individuals alike remain free to use
general or specialised fee-charging private employment agencies and direct
recruitment by advertisement or personal introduction. There are some 1,000
local offices, which find jobs for 1-5 million people a year (some 20 per cent of
the job changes in Britain).
The employment offices handle the full range of occupations and deal with
full-time, part-time and temporary vacancies. Details of unfilled vacancies (or
of people seeking jobs) can be circulated quickly in the ‘travel to work’ area,
374
‘Job centres1
Specialised
Employment
Services
Professional and
Executive
Recruitment
Occupational
Guidance
Service
Youth
Employment
Service
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
or more widely if necessary. Local employment committees, on which em¬
ployers, workers and other local interests are represented, are attached to the
employment office network as advisory bodies to secure the full benefit of local
knowledge and the close co-operation of employers and workers.
The employment office service is in the process of modernisation. New ‘job-
centres’, providing ‘self-service’ facilities and freed from the task of dis¬
tributing unemployment benefit (see p. 373), are replacing the employment
offices. The first ‘jobcentre’ was opened in Reading in May 1973, and a
network of 800 is to be in operation by the end of the 1970s.
A commercial employment service (office and shop work) is available at all
employment offices and also at a number of commercial employment offices. In
the hotel and catering industry a specialist service is based on the Hotel and
Catering Trades Exchange in London, and 20 hotel and catering trades
sections elsewhere.
The Regular Forces Resettlement Service, in which the Department of
Employment collaborates with the Ministry of Defence and the voluntary
organisations concerned with ex-regulars, helps members of the Forces to
achieve a satisfactory transition to civilian life.
In areas where there are large groups of hospitals, there are specially trained
officers in the employment service to deal with the employment problems of
nurses, midwives and those in related occupations or who wish to enter those
professions. Elsewhere nursing employment work is done as part of the general
employment service.
Special teams of Department of Employment officials plan the redeploy¬
ment of large groups of redundant workers to new jobs.
Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) is a service finding employ¬
ment for people employed in a professional, managerial, scientific or technical
capacity in industry and commerce. It operates through 40 offices in the main
centres of population. PER has been restyled to provide a computer-assisted
matching and selection service for speedy identification of jobs and candidates
from nationally based registers. Fees were charged to employers from 1st June
1973, and the service is expected to be financially self-supporting within three
years (it is free to candidates).
The Occupational Guidance Service is available in 44 centres of population. It
is available free to anybody over the age of 18 who has left school and who
wishes to take expert advice before choosing or changing his occupation.
The Youth Employment Service in Great Britain is available to all young
people up to the age of 18, or older if they are still at school. Its main functions
are to work with careers teachers in schools in providing young people and
their parents with information on educational and employment opportunities;
to give vocational guidance to young people in their later years at school, to
help young people to find suitable employment and employers to find suitable
workers; and to follow up the progress of young people in employment and
give them any further help or advice they may need.
Until 1 st April 1974 in England and Wales and 16th May 1975 in Scotland
local education authorities have the option of operating the service themselves
in their own areas in which case 75 per cent of the expenses are reimbursed by
the Government. Otherwise the Department of Employment operates the
service. Following local government reorganisation (see p. 67) local authorities
EMPLOYMENT
375
themselves will be required to operate a careers service in all areas with
support from central funds supplementing finance from local rates. The
service will then be extended to provide vocational guidance and placing
facilities for all those in educational institutions.
In Northern Ireland the functions of the Youth Employment Service are
similar to those in Great Britain but its organisation is different in that the
service is operated by a statutory board composed of representatives of local
education authorities and other educational and industrial interests.
Disablement
Resettlement
Service
Mobility of
Labour
Regional
Employment
Incentives
The Disablement Resettlement Service is designed to help disabled people
to get and keep suitable work. It is available to anyone over school-leaving age
who is substantially handicapped. Until the service is taken over by the MSC
(see p. 373) and run through the Employment Service Agency, it is operated
by the Department of Employment.
Vocational guidance and help in finding jobs is given at employment offices
by specialised disablement resettlement officers (DROs) who, where necessary,
arrange for a course of industrial rehabilitation or training or both. A Register
of Disabled Persons is maintained and all employers of 20 or more persons are
required to employ a quota (at present 3 per cent for all industries, except
shipping in respect of the manning of ships) of registered disabled persons; the
scheme is under review.
Industrial rehabilitation is provided at 25 units (including one combined
medical/industrial rehabilitation unit). Attendance at a unit is voluntary and
maintenance allowances are paid. Financial assistance is given to eight volun¬
tary and other organisations operating nine rehabilitation centres.
There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government
Training Centres (see p. 377), educational institutions and employers’ estab¬
lishments. For the more seriously disabled there are special residential training
colleges run by voluntary organisations with the help of the Department of
Employment. Grants are available to disabled people qualified to undertake
study or training for professional or comparable employment.
Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making company, partly supported by public
funds, provides sheltered employment for about 8,000 registered severely dis¬
abled people who are unlikely to obtain work except under special conditions.
The Department of Employment helps local authorities and voluntary
organisations with the cost of providing facilities for sheltered employment for
3,165 severely disabled sighted workers and for 2,560 blind workers.
As part of the policy of assisting geographical mobility of labour within
Britain to balance resources and demands, the department also makes grants
and allowances to help with costs of fares, temporary lodging and acquisition
of and removal to a new home, in specified instances. They are available to
unemployed workers moving away from home to take up employment; to key
workers transferred by a firm into a development or intermediate area to
inaugurate a new plant; and to local unemployed workers recruited to new
plants in areas of high unemployment and sent to the parent works for pre¬
liminary training.
The Government offers incentives specifically to encourage industrial expan¬
sion and thereby increase employment in the assisted areas (see p. 266). The
incentives include grants towards the cost of new buildings and equipment and
wages and salary costs; help with training (see p. 268); and a regional employ¬
ment subsidy (it is planned to phase this out from September 1974).
3?6
Immigrant
Workers
BRITAIN 1974I AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In general, people coming to Britain for employment (including Common¬
wealth citizens who do not have the right of abode, see p. 12, but excluding
nationals of European Community countries) need a work permit issued by
the Department of Employment. This must be obtained by the prospective
employer and issued for a specific job and for a fixed initial period not exceed¬
ing 12 months in the first instance. People admitted may change their jobs
with the approval of the department and normally their stay is extended if they
remain in approved employment. After four years’ approved employment the
time limit may be removed and a worker may change employment without
restriction. The issue of work permits is controlled by the department in the
light of the availability of suitable manpower from the resident population
and subject to certain conditions regarding wages.
Nationals of the European Community countries do not require permits
(see below) but for other foreign men permits are issued only for skilled work
in industry and commerce. Subject to an annual quota for men, unskilled and
semi-skilled as well as skilled workers may, however, be admitted for work in
the hotel and catering industry. Single men, women, and married men coming
for joint employment with their wives, are admitted for resident work but
permits are not issued to those known to have dependants. Foreign nationals
may also enter Britain as student employees on a short-term basis to enable
them to improve their English and widen their experience.
In general permits will be issued only for work requiring a professional
qualification, skill or experience, where the department is satisfied that the
worker is necessary, where suitable resident labour is not available to fill the
post offered, and where the wages and conditions are not less favourable than
those generally available in the area for similar work. Commonwealth citizens
and aliens (other than nationals of European Community countries) will
generally be eligible for permits on the same terms. Commonwealth citi¬
zens are also admitted for limited periods (fixed in advance) for in-service
In Northern Ireland employment permits are required for non-Northern
Ireland workers. Legislation defines Northern Ireland workers and makes
certain occupations exempt. „ . .
The European Community regulations now enforced in Great Untain,
establish the rights of workers to move freely between member states for the
purposes of employment. In Northern Ireland there is a transitional period
of about five years before this applies. Workers entering another member state
are entitled to be treated in the same way as nationals of that state as regards
facilities of the national employment services, pay and working conditions,
trade union rights, vocational training and retraining facilities, access to
housing and property, and insurance and industrial injuries benefits. Workers
coming to Britain need residence permits if working there for six months or
more, and these are valid for five years and automatically renewable unless the
employment is stipulated to be of under 12 months at the time of issue.
Britain, as a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, participates with 13 European countries m the arrangements tor
assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain employment in other
member countries.
Race Relations
Race relations employment advisers, based in the Department of Employ¬
ment’s regional offices, provide advice and information to employers, trade
unions, and other organisations with the aim of improving employmen
opportunities for immigrant workers.
EMPLOYMENT
377
INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
Most industrial and commercial training has always been carried out by indivi¬
dual employers, but in recent years the Government has taken a number of
measures based on the economic need to provide trained manpower to sustain
future economic growth and the social need to offer to teach a trade to workers
who missed the chance of an apprenticeship when they left school.
Government training services are to be reorganised under the new Manpower
Services Commission (MSC) operating through its Training Services Agency.
The Central Training Council which advises the Secretary of State for
Employment is to be abolished, and its functions performed by the MSC.
The MSC will co-ordinate the work of the Industrial Training Boards.
Industrial Under the Industrial Training Act 1964 some 27 industrial training boards have
Training Act been appointed to be responsible for the quantity and quality of industrial
training in the industry concerned; 14 million employees or about 80 per cent
of those in industry and commerce to whom the Act applies are covered.
From 1st August 1974 boards will be required to settle their plans and
budgets with the MSC each year. The system of levies and grants currently
operating will be modified, boards in future having a power though not a duty
to raise levies from industry to make grants to firms running approved
training schemes. Boards may also provide their own training courses or
arrange for other organisations to provide them. There will be a limit on levies
of 1 per cent of payroll. Small firms will be exempt from levy, and boards
may also exempt firms training their workers adequately. The boards’ ad¬
ministrative expenses will be paid from the MSC’s grant-in-aid, which may
also be used to encourage day training activities.
The Industrial Training Service (ITS) is an independent non-profit-
making body sponsored by the Government. It helps companies, employers’
associations and industrial training boards in any industry in the identification
of training needs, the formulation of training policy, job analysis for any
occupational categories, training programme design and the assessment of
training effectiveness.
Government
Training
Opportunities
Scheme
The Government Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS; to be operated by
the MSC, see p. 373) intended to meet the training needs of both employers
and individuals. Training is carried out at 52 Government Training Centres
(GTCs) which are within easy reach of the main industrial areas of the
country. Courses are available in over 50 different trades. Most courses last for
six months but a few are longer. Training under the scheme is also provided in
colleges and employers’ establishments. For severely disabled people training
is provided at four residential training colleges run by voluntary organisations
with government financial assistance. Trainees are paid allowances which vary
according to the number of their dependants and their former earnings.
Allowances are substantially higher than unemployment benefit.
The Government is expanding the scheme substantially. Some 38,000
people are being trained under TOPS in 1973-74, and it is hoped to train
70,000 to 75,000 in 1976.
Other
Training
Services
The Government also offers industry a wide range of training facilities outside
the scope of the TOPS. The Training Within Industry Scheme (TWI) is in¬
tended to develop the skills of supervisors in instructing and communicating,
378
Training Aids in
Assisted Areas
BRITAIN 1974. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in improving methods and in preventing accidents. Special courses are avail¬
able for supervisors employed in offices, retail distribution and hospitals, and
also an in-plant training development service to aid selection and further the
training of operatives as instructors. Training officers of the Department of
Employment either give these courses or train employers’ nominees to enable
them to run TWI courses in their own concerns. Other Department of Em¬
ployment training services for employers include courses for operators and
clerks on how to train new employees and training in export office procedures.
In addition, two-week and one-week courses in basic and advanced instruc¬
tional techniques for the training of individual instructors are available to
outside firms (as well as GTC staff) at the Department of Employment s two
Instructor Training Colleges (one in England and one in Scotland), and at six
Instructor Training Units attached to GTCs. Where the number of instructors
to be trained warrants it, these courses may be conducted on the employer s
premises. In 1972 about 21,000 people received training under the Department
of Employment schemes for industry.
Vocational training services at GTCs, TWI courses, and courses at n-
structor Training Colleges are available to trainees from overseas under
approved schemes (for instance, those of the International Labour Organisa¬
tion or technical assistance provided jointly by the Department of Employmen
and the Overseas Development Administration of the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office).
he A number of special training grants to employers in assisted areas are to b
abolished by March 1974 and the funds devoted to the TOPS (see p. 377).
Other training services, previously available free to firms expanding in assisted
areas are available to all firms in these areas from October 1973; these services
comprise the training of firms’ own instructors, training of experienced workers
in instructional techniques, provision of mobile instructors to tram peop e
in employers’ own premises, and training of supervisors.
Legislation and
Conventions
PERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS
rhough Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation
or the safety, health and welfare of employees and in providing certain ega
mmunities for trade unions, until recently there were relatively few legal
-estrictions on the right of an employer to hire an employee on any terms which
ie would accept and to dismiss him at will. The employee in general looke
0 his trade union to protect him. The determination by statute of minimum
wages, holidays and holiday pay was in principle confined to those trades and
industries where the organisation of employers or workers, or both, was inade¬
quate to negotiate collective agreements and to ensure their observance (see p.
'182) However, both the 1971 Industrial Relations Act (see below) and other
recent legislation provide considerable safeguards for the employee in his terms
of employment as well as working conditions. The Terms and Conditions
of Employment Act 1959, as amended under the 1971 Industrial Relations
Act, provides machinery for enforcing on an employer the observance of terms
or conditions established by collective agreement in his industry. The Con¬
tracts of Employment Act 1972 requires an employer to give an employee
comprehensive information on terms and conditions of employment, including
information about his statutory rights in relation to trade union members ip
and the procedure available to him where he has a grievance about his employ¬
ment; it also lays down the right of both employers and employees to minimum
periods of notice when employment is to be terminated. Under the Redundancy
EMPLOYMENT
Pay Board
Wage Rates
and Earnings
379
Payments Acts 1965 and 1969 employees with a minimum period of service
of two years are entitled to lump sum payments if their jobs cease to exist (for
example, because of technological improvements or because of a fall in
demand) and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the cost
being partly met from a fund subscribed to by industry as a whole. The 1971
Industrial Relations Act gives protection against unfair dismissal by providing
machinery under which an employee may bring an action against an employer
for unfair dismissal, and seek re-engagement or compensation; gives new
legal support to the right to trade union organisation by requiring an employer
to recognise a registered trade union in certain circumstances, and by making
it an unfair industrial practice (see p. 383) to refuse to employ, or to discrimi¬
nate against, a person because he is or is not a member of a registered trade
union or other organisation of workers; and lays down that written collective
agreements between trade unions or other organisations of workers on the one
hand, and employers or organisations of employers on the other, are presumed
to be intended to be legally binding unless they contain express provisions to
the contrary. The Race Relations Act 1968 (see p. 153) makes it illegal for an
employer to discriminate on the grounds of race, colour or ethnic or national
origin in the engagement, dismissal or employment of workers.
Other legislation prescribes minimum standards of safety, health and welfare
in most places of employment (see pp. 388-92). However, it is recognised that
the causes of many accidents are not amenable to statutory control. Therefore,
voluntary action taken by employer organisations, often in association with
trade unions, is encouraged.
The industrial relations code of practice, which came into effect in February
1972 (see p. 383), interprets industrial relations in the widest sense, offering
guidance not only on procedural matters such as collective agreements and
negotiating machinery but also on good human relations and policies directly
affecting the individual in the performance of his job.
An account of government measures to counter inflation is given on p. 200.
These measures included the setting-up of a Pay Board on 30th March 1973
to ensure that no pay awards exceeded the Pay Board limit set under the Price
and Pay Code imposed by the Government under the Counter-Inflation Act
1973, and to advise on pay problems generally. During the second stage of the
counter-inflation policies, which was expected to last until the end of October
1973, settlements of all but the smallest firms had to be notified to the board.
The largest firms must notify proposed increases before they may be imple¬
mented. The board might make orders, or serve notices, on individual em¬
ployers to prevent pay increases which did not accord with the code.
Minimum or standard time rates for the lowest-rated manual workers, as
determined by agreements or by statutory orders, vary between ^0*32 and
^0*67 an hour for men and between £0*25 and j£o‘58 for women, although
many employers pay higher rates. Higher rates are also usually paid for shift¬
work and overtime, and weekly earnings may be further increased by piece¬
work rates and other incentive schemes. Piecework rates are of declining
importance in a number of industries, where methods of production tend to
dictate the output of a worker.
On the basis of the latest survey in a series conducted regularly by the
Department of Employment into earnings and hours of work in manufacturing
industries and some non-manufacturing industries throughout Britain, the
average earnings of full-time male adult manual workers in October 1972 were
38°
Salaries and
Fees
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EARNINGS, WAGE RATES, RETAIL PRICES,
WAGES AND SALARIES 1963-73
Average 1963 — 100
- Average earnings
- Weekly rates of wages
- Retail prices
-- Wages and salaries per
unit of output
W63' '19'64 1965 Wee' l^' Wes' 'l^' Wto' W/l 1972 1973
So-So an hour and £35-82 a week. Full-time women manual workers at the
same date earned an average of £0-48 an hour and £18-30 a week.
Minimum time rates for women manual workers tend to be lower than t e
corresponding male rate, though the gap is gradually closing. Women s earn¬
ings are markedly lower than those of men, partly because on average they
work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates, but also because
a smaller proportion of women do skilled work. The Equal Pay Act 1970
provides that from 29th December 1975 a woman doing the same or broadly
similar work to a man will qualify for equal pay and conditions of employment.
Between October 1962 and October 1972 average weekly wage rates in¬
creased by 115 per cent and the average weekly earnings of manual workers,
before tax and national insurance deductions, by 133 per cent. Part of the in¬
crease has been offset by a rise in prices of about 66 per cent and by larger
national insurance contributions and income tax. The trends of earnings, wage
rates, retail prices, wages and salaries per unit of output from 1963 to 1972 are
shown in the diagram above.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary, often on a scale carrying annual increases, and such careers
EMPLOYMENT
381
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay and Bank
Holidays
generally afford opportunities for promotion to posts with higher remunera¬
tion. Starting salaries may be in the range of £1,200-^1,500 (lower for trainees
in their teens and higher for some graduates entering industry). The average
weekly earnings of full-time non-manual adult workers in April 1972 were
about £43"5° f°r men and £22-20 for women. On average, salaries doubled
between 1962 and 1972.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
are in the range of £5,000 to £12,000 a year. The posts with salaries in the
range of £15,000 to £25,000 a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, top-
ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in government depart¬
ments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers,
some persons outstanding in their professions and in the higher managerial
posts in industry, commerce and banking. A few persons in business draw
still higher salaries, while the earnings of star entertainers and certain other
very successful people exceed £50,000 a year.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices,
administrative posts and professions. As civil servants, Ministers of the Crown,
Members of Parliament, salaried magistrates and solicitors, and in journalism,
broadcasting and architecture they are paid the same salary as men for doing
the same kind of work. Women in independent professions are not expected
the charge lower fees than men. Equal pay as between men and women will be
enforced in all occupations from the end of 1975 (see p. 380).
The normal working week in Britain is in the range 39-40 hours for manual
work and 37-38 f°r non-manual work; a five-day week is usually worked.
Actual hours worked by men in manual occupations are usually somewhat
longer than their normal hours, on account of overtime; in October 1972 they
were 45 compared with 38 for women. Men and women in non-manual
occupations generally work little or no overtime, although senior salaried staff
may from time to time be required to work substantial (unpaid) overtime.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for women
and young people in a number of industries or trades—the maximum, with
limited exceptions, being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a day (9 hours a day for
6-day-week workers) in premises covered by the Factories Act (see p. 389) for
adult women over 18 and young people between 16 and 18. The employment
of women and young people at night is prohibited in industrial undertakings,
except for young men over 16 working in some continuous-process industries
(subject to certain conditions). The Department of Employment can make
exemptions from these restrictions on grounds of public interest. In general
the hours of work of adult men are not restricted by statute.
With few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in indus¬
tries covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays
of at least two weeks and over three-quarters have basic entitlements of at least
three weeks, in addition to public holidays. Non-manual workers generally
have higher entitlements than manual workers. Some agreements, particularly
in the non-manual sector, provide for extended holidays related to length of
service, or status, or both.
Payment is made for public holidays, which are as follows: in addition to
Good Friday and Christmas Day there are public holidays in England and
Wales on Easter Monday, the last Monday in May or first in June, the last
Monday in August or first in September and the first weekday after Christmas
(Boxing Day); and in Scotland on New Year’s Day, the last Monday in May or
BRITAIN 1974; AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
first in June and the last Monday in August or first in September. Northern
Ireland observes all the English holidays and, in addition, has a holiday on St.
Patrick’s Day (17th March) and on 12th July; the Tuesday after Easter is also
a customary holiday for industry and trade.
‘Fringe’
Benefits
Office of
Manpower
Economics
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
A variety of additional benefits exist in varying degree. It has been estimated
that at the end of 1971 ii’i million employees were covered by occupational
pension schemes. Many employees are also covered by occupational sick pay
schemes (additional or complementary to the State schemes, see p. A
smaller number are covered by schemes for redundancy payments above the
statutory minimum (see p. 378). Such benefits are more usual among clerical
and professional employees receiving a standard salary than among manual
workers with a chance to earn overtime and other additions to their pay.
Senior members of firms may use a company car and some firms provide
profit-sharing schemes.
The Office of Manpower Economics was established in 1971 as an independent
non-statutory body, with three functions: to act as secretariat for the three
review bodies set up to advise on the remuneration of certain groups in the
public sector for which negotiating machinery is not appropriate, such as
Members of Parliament, the judiciary, the armed forces, and doctors and
dentists; to service enquiries on particular pay structures and related problems;
and to carry out research on more general matters affecting pay and manpower,
either at the request or with the approval of ministers.
The structure of labour relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis, and the extensive changes enacted in 1971 are designed to
retain the voluntary principle while modernising the conditions in which it
operates. The system rests mainly on the organisation of employers and
workers into employers’ associations and trade unions. These organisations
discuss and negotiate terms and conditions of employment and other matters
affecting the workpeople at their work. In the past the emphasis has been on
detailed industry-wide agreements supplemented as necessary by local agree¬
ments in firms or factories, but a gradual change of attitudes and structure
has led to more emphasis being placed on formal agreements at firm an
factory level. In some industries, firms and factories, negotiations are con¬
ducted simply by meetings of employers’ and employees’ representatives,
which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary joint councils or com¬
mittees have been established on a permanent basis. The scope of the various
joint bodies-from the national joint industrial councils for whole industries
to the works councils and committees in individual workplaces varies wi e y.
Some of them only negotiate. Others discuss a wide range of topics. But the
scope of the bodies is tending to widen and the distinction between discussion
and negotiation to become blurred. Normally these arrangements for collective
bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is some¬
times made for matters not so settled to be referred for settlement to indepen¬
dent arbitration. Standing arrangements exist for consultation at national level
between the Government, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) (see
p. 384), the Trades Union Congress (TUC) (see p. 386) and the nationalised
industries through the National Economic Development Council on matters in
which employers and workers have a common interest. The operation of
collective bargaining has occasionally been restricted in the national interest
Wages Councils
New Legal
Framework
EMPLOYMENT 383
by government policies to combat inflation; this was the case in 1973 (see pp.
200 and 256).
Both official and voluntary organisations are concerned with promoting
better human relationships in industry. The Government has sought to extend
by research the available knowledge of the factors influencing human relations
in industry and human efficiency. Such research is sponsored or conducted by
the Social Science Research Council (see p. 408) and the Medical Research
Council (see p. 402). Voluntary organisations include bodies which deal with
management problems and provide a service to subscribing firms; professional
associations, linking individuals with a common interest in particular functions
of management; and bodies providing specialist services, usually on a fee¬
paying basis.
In a number of industries and trades where the organisation of employers or
employees or both is not strong enough to provide a basis for successful
voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regulating bodies, known
as wages councils. These are composed of equal numbers of representatives of
employers and workers in the respective sectors of industry, with three
independent members. Wages councils may submit proposals for fixing mini¬
mum remuneration and holidays with pay first to the Pay Board (see p. 379)
and if the board approves to the Secretary of State who must then make
orders giving statutory force to such proposals, subject only to his right to
return them as a whole for further consideration by the councils. The Depart¬
ment of Employment’s Wages Inspectorate helps employers and workers to
interpret the provisions of wage regulation orders and sees that they are
complied with. Over 3 million workers are covered by such arrangements.
Agricultural wages boards (there are separate boards for England and Wales
and for Scotland) perform similar functions in relation to employment in
agriculture.
The 1971 Industrial Relations Act provides a new legal framework for industrial
relations. The main provisions include the right of an individual to choose
whether or not to be a member of a registered trade union or of other organisa¬
tion of workers; protection against unfair dismissal; the presumption that
written collective agreements are intended to be legally binding unless other¬
wise specified; the granting of new and existing legal privileges to those trade
unions and employers’ associations whose rules and conduct meet the stan¬
dards laid down by legislation and who voluntarily register themselves with
the Registrar of Trade Unions and Employers’ Associations; the setting-up of
a new system of expert and informal industrial relations courts to hear com¬
plaints about and adjudicate on unfair industrial practices, with the power to
award compensation and to make restraining orders; the enlarging of the
functions of the Commission on Industrial Relations (see p. 388), particularly
in disputes over procedure agreements and bargaining agents; and the creation
of new emergency powers which enable the Government to apply to the
National Industrial Relations Court for an order to impose a cooling-off
period of up to 60 days or for a secret ballot of workers in disputes where
industrial action is taken or threatened which could cause an emergency situa¬
tion. In addition, under the Act the Government has drawn up an industrial
relations code of practice which gives guidance on the conduct of industrial
relations. The code is not enforceable, but its relevant provisions must be
taken into account in any proceedings under the Act. The TUC (see p. 386)
has declined to participate in the operation of the Act, preferring a voluntary
384
Employers’
Associations
The Confederation
of British
Industry
Trade Unions
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
approach to industrial relations problems. It has suspended from membership
a number of unions which have registered under the Act.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations wholly
or partly concerned with labour questions. The primary aims of such organisa¬
tions are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of employment,
including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety, health and
welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient use of
manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may arise.
Employers’ organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis. A few are purely local in character or deal with a section
of an industry; others are national in scope and are concerned with the whole
of a particular industry. In some of the chief industries there are local or
regional organisations combined into national federations, while in others,
within which different firms are engaged in making different principal pro¬
ducts there is a complex structure with national and regional federations for
these different sections of the industry as well as for the industry as a whole.
Although there are some 1,400 employers’ organisations dealing with labour
matters, most of these are local branches of national organisations. There are
over 100 of these, most of which belong to the CBI and they negotiate the
national collective agreements for their industry with the trade unions
concerned. . . , .
The final authority of a local or small national organisation may be a meeting
where all member firms are directly represented; but in larger organisations
some form of indirect representation is necessary, either through local organisa¬
tions or through regions or sections into which these are grouped
The representatives thus chosen, together with a number of office ho ers,
form a general council or central committee, which meets perhaps once a
quarter, mainly to make major policy decisions, to elect committees and to
ratify their work. A paid staff under a director or secretary carries out the
organisation’s day-to-day work. There is usually a small working group
consisting of senior officials and committee chairmen, which meets to deal
with urgent questions and co-ordinate the work of committees.
Under the Industrial Relations Act, employers’ associations may seek regis¬
tration (see p. 383).
The principal organisation representing employers is the CBI, which deals
with all matters (not only labour relations) affecting the interests of organise
employers and represents them nationally to the Government and the public
and also internationally, for instance, in the International Labour Organisation
and from 1973, in the various institutions of the European Communities. e
majority of national employers’ organisations and nationalised industries and a
large number of individual companies are affiliated to the CBI. Its representa¬
tives sit on various government advisory committees, on other statutory bodies
and on voluntary bodies concerned with labour matters.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over a great many years and consequently, their
form and organisation vary considerably as do their traditions and attitudes.
Trade unions started more than two hundred years ago among t e s 1 e
craftsmen and spread later to the general labouring and unskilled classes Mor
recently trade unionism has increased among clerical, supervisory, technical
EMPLOYMENT
385
and administrative workers. The qualification for membership of some unions
is occupational (for instance, they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever
employed), while in others the qualification is industrial (that is, they seek to
recruit all employees in an industry, whatever their occupation). In a number
of unions recruitment is based on a combination of these principles.
At the end of 1971 the total membership of British trade unions was about
11 million. There were 469 unions, but over 77 per cent of all trade unionists
were in the 23 largest unions each with a membership of 100,000 or over,
while under 1 per cent were in the 250 smaller unions with under 1,000
members each.
Any organisation of workers, whether representing manual, white-collar or
professional workers in one or many enterprises, may apply for registration as
a trade union under the Industrial Relations Act (see p. 383). To be registered
it must show that one of its principal objects is to negotiate with management
on pay and conditions of employment; that it has full control over its own
rules and funds; and that it is an independent organisation of workers. In
addition, an organisation of workers which does not have as one of its principal
formal objects the regulation of worker/employer relations, and which is pre¬
vented in law from formally adopting this as one of its principal objects
because it has received a Royal Charter or is registered as a limited company,
is eligible for entry on a Special Register set up under the Act, provided that it
controls its own rules and funds and is independent. Most organisations on the
Special Register are in practice associations of professional workers formed
primarily for the preservation and improvement of professional standards.
The TUC (see p. 386) has refused to co-operate in the working of the Act and
its affiliated unions have agreed on a policy of non-registration. The number of
trade unionists has increased during the last decade but the number of unions
has gone down owing to amalgamations. In Northern Ireland some 80 per
cent of trade unionists are members of unions with headquarters in Great
Britain.
The central organisation of most large unions consists of a national executive
council, usually elected by and responsible to annual conferences of delegates
from local branches. Between conferences, councils are the highest authority
of unions, and carry out policy decisions made by conference delegates. Most
unions also have regional and district organisations. At the level of the indivi¬
dual member there are local branches, covering one or more factories. Members
may attend branch meetings, make suggestions about terms and conditions
of employment, discuss the work of the union, and take part in the election of
the union’s officers. The branch takes action on certain matters considered to
be entirely, or mainly, of local interest and forwards its views on wider issues
for action by the union’s national or regional bodies. The organising of
members in individual places of work, and the negotiation of local factory/plant
pay agreements with managements, may be done by full-time district officials
of the union or, increasingly, by ‘shop stewards’, who are chosen by their
fellow members in the place of work to represent them. Trade unions vary in
the degree to which shop stewards are integrated into their organisation.
Where two or more unions have members in the same workplace, shop
stewards committees may be formed to discuss matters of common concern.
Unions generally provide dispute benefit (‘strike pay’) for members in¬
volved in official industrial action. They also provide legal advice for members
who suffer injury or contract diseases at work, and may pay members’ legal
costs where a case for compensation goes to court. Some unions pay benefits
in case of illness, accident, death and retirement (additional to those payable
386
Trades Union
Congress
Scottish Trades
Union Congress
State Provision
for Conciliation,
Arbitration and
Investigation
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
under the national insurance scheme) financed out of membership contribu¬
tions. Many trade unions support the Labour Party financially.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the TUC, which
celebrated its centenary in 1968. The TUC’s objects are to promote the
interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and social
conditions of the workers. Its membership comprises 132 organisations, some
of which are themselves federations of smaller organisations. Together they
represent about 10 million workpeople. The TUC deals with all general
questions which concern trade unions both nationally and internationally and
gives assistance on questions relating to particular trades or industries.
The Congress, which constitutes the TUC proper, meets for a week every
year to discuss matters of concern to trade unionists and to employees generally.
It elects annually a General Council which represents it during the remaining
51 weeks of the year. This is responsible for carrying out Congress decisions,
for watching economic and social developments, for providing educational and
advisory services to unions, and for presenting to the Government the trade
union viewpoint on economic, social and industrial issues. It is also empowered
to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain circumstances and its activities in
this sphere were enlarged following a special Congress in June 1969 and subse¬
quent agreement with the Government. The General Council undertook to use
its authority to deal with unauthorised and unconstitutional stoppages of work,
as well as the inter-union and official disputes with which it had dealt pre¬
viously. . , . . . r
Both the TUC and many unions conduct extensive educational services tor
members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade unionism and
industrial relations principles and practice.
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local
trades council, which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common
interest and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year.
There are just under 500 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped
together in 22 federations. The TUC has 12 regional advisory committees in
England and Wales, composed of full-time trade union officers.
Affiliation to the TUC is open to all trade unions anywhere in the United
Kingdom, but Scottish trade unionists have their own national centre, the
Scottish Trades Union Congress, similar in its objects to the TUC. The
Scottish TUC, to which trade unions may affiliate in respect of their member¬
ship in Scotland (a number of unions are affiliated to both bodies), also accepts
affiliation from trades councils and has an affiliated membership of about
830,000. It holds an annual congress and has consultations with the Govern¬
ment on issues affecting Scottish trade unionists.
Under authority mainly derived from the Conciliation Act 1896 and the
Industrial Courts Act 1919 the Secretary of State has powers to provide
independent conciliation and arbitration as a means of assisting industry to
settle unresolved disputes. These powers are intended to supplement and not
to supersede the industry’s own machinery, and there is no legal obligation
on the parties to an unresolved dispute to notify the dispute to the Secretary
of State for settlement by these means. However, when a dispute is reported,
the Department of Employment may assist the parties to reach a settlement
through conciliation. Its Conciliation and Advisory Service keeps in constant
touch with the course of relations between employers and workers at all levels.
It is also enjoined, under the Industrial Relations Act, in certain cases, to offer
EMPLOYMENT 387
assistance in promoting settlements. It has a general duty to give guidance on
all aspects of industrial relations and use of manpower.
Where both parties agree, disputes may be referred to voluntary arbitration,
either by a single arbitrator, by an ad hoc board of arbitration, or by the
Industrial Arbitration Board, a permanent tribunal established under the
Industrial Courts Act 1919. The board is presided over by an independent
person appointed by the Secretary of State, normally assisted by one member
representing employers and one representing workpeople.
Under the Terms and Conditions of Employment Act 1959, claims that a
particular employer is not observing the recognised terms or conditions of
employment in his trade or industry may be made to the Secretary of State by
trade unions or employers’ associations registered under the Industrial
Relations Act 1971 which are parties to the relevant agreement or award. If
a claim is not otherwise settled, the Secretary of State must refer it to the
Industrial Arbitration Board which, after hearing the case, may make an
award requiring the employer to observe the recognised terms or conditions.
Such an award becomes an implied term of the contract of employment of
individual employees.
The Secretary of State is also empowered to appoint a court of inquiry or
committee of investigation into a dispute, whether existing or apprehended.
These procedures are primarily means of informing public opinion of the
facts of a dispute (the report of a court of inquiry has to be laid before Parlia¬
ment). Although the recommendations contained in the reports of such bodies
are not binding on the parties, they often provide the basis for further negotia¬
tions leading to a settlement.
Labour While industrial relations in government service and in the nationalised indus-
Relations of tries are, in general, organised on the same principle as in private industry,
Public Authorities there are some special features.
Central and Local
Government
Non-industrial employees in central Government service, where salaries and
conditions of service are dealt with by the Civil Service Department (see p.
49), are permitted and encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service trade
unions and there is a highly developed system of negotiation and joint consul¬
tation by means of the National and Departmental Whitley Councils (see p.
65). If there is failure to reach agreement by negotiation a department or asso¬
ciation may, subject to certain limitations, report the dispute to the Secretary
of State for reference to the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal, an independent
body appointed by the Secretary of State by powers under the Industrial
Courts Act 1919. Government industrial employees are similarly encouraged to
belong to trade unions and machinery exists for joint consultation. There are
four Trades Joint Councils on which representatives of the Government and
the trade unions sit to consider pay and conditions of employment affecting
individual grades and certain other limited matters. A Joint Co-ordinating
Committee, on which the Government and Trades Joint Councils are repre¬
sented, deals with national pay negotiations, conditions of service and other
matters of general application. In the main employing departments there
are departmental joint councils for the discussion of domestic matters. Dis¬
putes on wages or conditions of employment that cannot be resolved by the
existing machinery can be referred to the Industrial Arbitration Board (see
above).
In local government service there are separate National Joint Councils
for the main grades of employees (such as manual, clerical and technical
388
Nationalised
Industries
Commission on
Industrial
Relations
Industrial
Disputes
Northern
Ireland
SAFETY
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
employees) which deal with wages and conditions of service as well as other
matters. There are corresponding regional and district councils.
The major nationalised industries have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory
arrangements for collective bargaining in their industries and for joint con¬
sultation with their employees; in carrying out these duties they are free to
choose suitable arrangements. The main difference from private industry is
that the corporations are not usually members of employers’ associations
(although the majority are ‘public sector members’ of the CBI). In some indus¬
tries they are sole or main employers, but even where part of the industry is in
private hands, as for example in road transport, the corporations are separately
and directly represented on wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally
settled by negotiation between representatives of management and trade
unions at the national level; in most cases there are also regional and local
bodies, similarly representative, to deal with local implications but not nor¬
mally to negotiate separate local agreements. Most of the industries use the
facilities for arbitration offered to industry generally by the Department of
Employment (see p. 51), but coalmining and rail transport have their own
special arrangements. Consultations at all levels, including the workplace, have
been arranged in all the nationalised industries.
The Commission on Industrial Relations (CIR) was set up as a Royal Com¬
mission in 1969. Under the 1971 Industrial Relations Act (see p. 383) it be¬
came a statutory body and its functions were extended. The CIR deals with
references from the Secretary of State for Employment on any question
relating to industrial relations generally or in any particular industry or under¬
taking. It also deals with matters referred to it by the National Industrial
Relations Court (see p. 383), such as the establishment or discontinuance of
agency shops; examination of applications for approved closed shops; reme¬
dial action in cases of defective or non-existent industrial procedures; deter¬
mination of bargaining units and bargaining agents; and ballots of employees.
It examines proposals to establish, abolish or vary the scope of Wages Councils
(see p. 383) and advises the Secretary of State on draft amendments to the
Industrial Relations Code of Practice (see p. 383).
As in many other countries time lost through industrial disputes has risen in
Britain in recent years, though it is still very much less than time lost through
sickness, accidents and absenteeism. In 1972, when major disputes occurred
in coalmining, docks, engineering and building, nearly 24 million working
days were lost, involving some 17 million workers including those indirectly
concerned at the same establishments.
Northern Ireland has its own system of industrial relations under which
certain powers and responsibilities devolve upon the Labour Affairs Depart¬
ment of the Ministry of Health and Social Services.
Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their em¬
ployees and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a duty of
care towards each other. In addition, minimum required standards of safety in
certain kinds of workplaces or work are laid down under a number of statutes;
some of these also deal with health and welfare.
Proposals for legislation to reorganise the system under which safety and
health at work are safeguarded and to extend it to cover virtually everyone at
EMPLOYMENT
Regulations
Other Measures
389
work and to protect the general public from industrial hazards were put for¬
ward by the Government in June 1973. A Safety and Health Commission is to
be set up, with members representing employers, trade unions and local
authorities, to take over responsibility for the existing inspectorates operating
within various government departments (see below) and to develop and carry
out policy on safety and health matters.
About 250,000 industrial premises (factories, warehouses, shipyards, docks and
construction sites) come under the Factories Act 1961 (consolidating earlier
legislation), which is administered by the Department of Employment and
enforced by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Factories, which forms part of the
Department of Employment. About 750,000 premises are subject to the
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, which is also administered by
the Department of Employment; enforcement is shared by Her Majesty’s
Inspectorates of Factories and of Mines and Quarries, and local authorities.
The Acts and regulations made under them are designed to secure the health,
safety and welfare of employees, and deal with such matters as the fencing of
machinery; precautions against fire and special risks; the safe condition of the
premises; and cleanliness, lighting, temperature and ventilation. Anyone in¬
tending to employ other people in industrial or commercial premises to which
the Acts apply has to notify the enforcing authority of his intention before he
begins to employ people and every fatal accident and every accident causing
more than three days’ incapacity must be reported. The Factories Act includes
provisions for the compulsory notification and investigation of certain danger¬
ous occurrences, for precautions against dangerous substances and about the
employment of women and young people.
Comparable provision with appropriate variations covers mines and quarries
under the Mines and Quarries Act 1954; two statutes are concerned with
agriculture—the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act 1952 and the Agri¬
culture (Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions) Act 1956; and specialised
statutes and delegated legislation are concerned with transport—the Railway
Employment (Prevention of Accidents) Act 1900, the Merchant Shipping
Acts, the Road Traffic Acts and the Air Navigation Order and Regulations.
As with the Factories Act these other provisions are, with some exceptions,
enforced through inspectorates—the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate (part
of the Department of Trade and Industry, which is responsible for safety
in mines and quarries), the Agricultural Inspectorate of the agricultural
departments, and, for railways, the Railway Employment Inspectorate of the
Department of the Environment. The Department of Trade and Industry is
responsible for administering the Merchant Shipping Acts and for safety in
air transport (most of the powers in respect of airworthiness are delegated to
the Civil Aviation Authority, see p. 360), and the Department of the Environ¬
ment is responsible for road and rail transport safety matters. Safety require¬
ments in hotels, places of entertainment or educational establishments are
covered by the 1971 Fire Precautions Act or (in respect of their offices and
shops) by the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act. The Department of
Employment has no statutory responsibility in regard to safety in workshops
or laboratories in educational establishments, though it keeps in touch with
university authorities and the education departments.
Transport operators and ministries concerned with road and air travel give
high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every effort is
made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic densities by
39°
The Promotion
of Safety
Measures
Training and
Research in
Safety
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
improving the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment, by traffic
regulation and control of standards of maintenance and by training crews in
competency and safety awareness.
To safeguard the many interests which might be adversely affected by the
use of chemicals in agriculture and food storage, a voluntary scheme is operated
by the Government with the help of an advisory committee and with the full
co-operation of the chemical industry.
The National Coal Board has its own safety organisation—a Standing Com¬
mittee on Safety, a chief safety engineer, and safety engineers at divisions,
areas and the largest collieries.
The Department of Employment encourages the development of voluntary
central organisation within each industry at national level for the consideration
of safety matters and the formulation of policy and accident prevention. Its
Factory Inspectorate, besides enquiring into notified accidents and safety
aspects of machine design and specification, circulates expert advice by per¬
sonal exhortation, lectures and literature, and encourages the appointment of
safety officers and the formation of works safety committees, and maintains an
industrial health and safety centre in London, at which various types of
machinery demonstrating the effectiveness of guards are displayed, as well as a
wide range of protective clothing and equipment.
Organisations in industry participate also in joint standing and advisory
committees appointed by the Secretary of State. Representatives of the Trades
Union Congress, the Confederation of British Industry, the nationalised
industries and other interests meet on the Industrial Safety Advisory Council
under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State. The Royal Society for the
Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) and the British Safety Council are two major
national bodies concerned with accident prevention. A number of local acci¬
dent prevention groups are affiliated to either RoSPA or the British Safety
Council. These groups serve as forums where questions of industrial safety
can be examined and knowledge of accident prevention exchanged.
Training is important in accident prevention and the Department of Employ¬
ment provides a safety course in its TWI scheme and the industrial training
boards include specific provisions for safety training in their general training
recommendations (see p. 377).
RoSPA provides a variety of safety courses for special needs mainly at its
Industrial Safety Training Centre in Birmingham and also helps the accident
prevention movement by providing publicity and organising conferences, its
regional industrial safety officers work to promote safety activity among top-
level managers. The British Safety Council also offers safety training courses.
Other courses are organised by local accident prevention groups and organisa¬
tions such as the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors.
A substantial amount of research is being done by industry, universities and
other academic bodies, and government research organisations into problems
of guarding machines, ergonomics, safe handling, electrical hazards, protective
personal equipment, construction methods, fires and explosions, psychological
factors and causes of accidents, both generally and in particular sectors of
industry. A register of research into industrial health and safety matters has
been compiled by the Department of Employment to give an indication of the
scale and nature of research being undertaken. Industrial research associations
include among their more purely economic research projects the improvement
of working conditions and the reduction of hazards.
EMPLOYMENT
391
HEALTH AND
WELFARE
The National Coal Board conducts courses of safety training for workmen
and officials. Its research programme includes a number of projects with a
direct bearing on safety. In addition, the Department of Trade and Industry
has a statutory responsibility for research concerning the safety and health of
coal miners. This responsibility is largely exercised through its Safety in Mines
Research Establishment.
The University of Aston has established a Chair in Safety and Hygiene to
help meet the need for academically trained safety officers and engineers whose
careers will be concerned with the technical aspects of insurance and forensic
work.
Local authorities have power, under the Public Health Acts, to regulate the
provision of suitable sanitary accommodation at places of work and to treat
workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded as nuisances
the abatement of which can be enforced. Factories, certain other industrial
premises, offices, shops and railway premises must comply with the health and
welfare requirements of the Factories Act or the Offices, Shops and Railway
Premises Act. These include: the cleanliness of workrooms, adequate ventila¬
tion and suitable temperature and lighting, the avoidance of overcrowding and
the provision of sanitary accommodation, and the protection of workers
against inhaling harmful dust or fumes; and the provision of washing facilities,
lockers or other accommodation for outdoor clothing, drinking water, first aid
and seats.
Legislation, besides forbidding employment of children under 13 years of
age, forbids the employment of children who have not reached the statutory
minimum school-leaving age (see p. 159) in any industrial undertaking; of
women and young people underground in mines and in certain other danger¬
ous occupations (for example, certain processes connected with lead manufac¬
ture) ; and of women in factories and workshops within four weeks after child¬
birth. It also limits and defines the permissible hours of employment for
women and young people (see p. 381). Local authorities, moreover, have wide
powers under the Children and Young Persons Acts 1933-63 as well as the
Education Acts 1944-48, to regulate hours and conditions of employment of
children within their areas.
There are special arrangements for the medical care of people at work. The
former Appointed Factory Doctor Service of the Department of Employment,
which dealt mainly with the periodic medical examination of young people in
industrial establishments and of workers in certain hazardous occupations,
was replaced in February 1973 by the department’s Employment Medical
Advisory Service (EMAS), under the Employment Medical Advisory Service
Act 1972. EMAS provides a nation-wide service of advice on the medical
aspects of employment problems to employers, employees, trade unions,
doctors and others. In particular it carries out the periodic medical examina¬
tion of workers in hazardous occupations as required under factories legisla¬
tion, and in conjunction with school medical officers and careers officers
advises young people who are starting work and whose school medical records
reveal a need for special care in choice of employment.
The service, headed by a Chief Employment Medical Adviser, will even¬
tually have 110 employment medical advisers who will be based in the country’s
main industrial centres. An EMAS committee has been set up to advise the
department on the development of the service. Its members are nominated by
the Confederation of British Industry, the Trades Union Congress, and other
interested organisations.
392
Health Services
in Industry
Advice and
Research
Other
Amenities
Safety, Health
and Welfare
in Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Many employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees over
and above the statutory requirements. It is estimated that there are about 400
factories with doctors providing full-time medical cover and about 4,000
factories with part-time medical cover. In addition several thousand nurses are
employed in industry. The big employers, including the State and the boards
of nationalised industries, have taken the lead but a number of smaller factories
also provide medical services and in a few cases have joined together in group
medical services. The Secretary of State is advised on measures to further the
development of health services in workplaces covered by the Factories Act by
the Industrial Health Advisory Committee, which includes members nomi¬
nated by the Confederation of British Industry, the Trades Union Congress,
the nationalised industries, the British Medical Association, the Royal College
of Nursing and other organisations closely concerned with the promotion of
industrial health.
The Factory Inspectorate gives advice on occupational hygiene problems and
has an industrial hygiene unit, with laboratory facilities. There are some six
centres in Great Britain (including the TUC’s Institute of Occupational
Health) which undertake studies of particular problems or health risks and also
carry out routine physical, chemical and biological tests for industry.
Research facilities are provided by government agencies such as the Medical
Research Council; by university faculties of industrial health and social
medicine; and by the research departments of various industries and large
industrial concerns. Field investigations are carried out by the Factory
Inspectorate, which has specialised technical branches.
An increasing number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facili¬
ties. Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes.
The provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become
usual in large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices
and shops which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have
adopted luncheon voucher schemes.
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been
the subject of legislation which, with some exceptions, is similar to that in
Great Britain and is embodied in the Factories Act (Northern Ireland) 1965
and the Office and Shop Premises Act (Northern Ireland) 1966. A number of
firms voluntarily employ safety officers, and industrial safety groups, sup¬
ported by representatives of industry, insurance companies and public
authorities, make a valuable contribution to industrial accident prevention.
18 Promotion of the
Sciences
The Government is the main source of funds for scientific research and
development as a whole though private industry contributes a larger propor¬
tion of funds for civil research and development. Considerable sums are also
provided by public corporations, independent trusts and foundations, and
learned societies. The Government keeps under review facilities for training
scientists and ensures that adequate research is directed to matters of national
interest.
THE GOVERN¬
MENT AND
SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
The Pattern of
Expenditure
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development in 1969-70
amounted to £1,082 million compared with £658 million in 1961-62. The
proportion this represented of the gross domestic product remained steady
throughout the 1960s at between 27 and 2-8 per cent. There were, however,
divergent trends in some of the components. The share of defence almost
halved during the period whereas that for civil purposes was rising. Civil
research and development financed from non-government funds represented
an increased share of the total claim on resources in 1966-67 compared with
earlier years, but has remained fairly constant since. The Government con¬
tinues to finance just over half the research and development and to carry out
about a quarter in its own establishments. Expenditure by the research councils
on research and development is estimated as about £122 million in 1972-73
according to Research and Development Expenditure (see Bibliography p. 482).
Central Advisory
Council for
Science and
Technology
The Central Advisory Council for Science and Technology was established in
January 1967, under the chairmanship of the Chief Scientific Adviser to the
Government, to advise the Government on the most effective national strategy
for the use and development of the country’s scientific and technological
resources. Its membership includes representatives of the Royal Society (see
p. 398), and independent members.
Under the Science and Technology Act 1965 central responsibility for basic
and applied civil science rests with the Secretary of State for Education
and Science, who is advised by the Advisory Board for the Research Councils
(see p. 394). Responsibility for technology rests mainly with the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry. Other government departments are responsible
for research and development related to their executive responsibilities.
New Framework for In July 1972 the Government announced its decision (published in Cmnd 5046:
Government see Bibliography, p. 482) to extend the customer-contractor approach to all its
Research and applied research and development, as recommended in a report by Lord
Development Rothschild, head of the Central Policy Review Staff (see p. 49). This approach
means that government departments, as customers, define their requirements;
contractors (the research councils or others) advise on the feasibility of meeting
the requirements and undertake the work; and the arrangements between them
must ensure that the objectives remain attainable within reasonable costs. This
decision involves organisational and financial changes affecting departments
394
The Department
of Education
and Science
The Advisory
Board for the
Research Councils
The Department
of the
Environment
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the research councils (see below). Departments concerned have appointed
Chief Scientific Advisers to co-ordinate their research needs. Part of the
increased financial provision for three of the research councils (Agricultural,
Medical, and Natural Environment) has become the responsibility of customer
departments to help meet their needs for commissioned research. During the
three-year period 1973-74 to 1975-76, funds, rising from ^13-5 million to
£26-34 million (at 1972 prices), are to be transferred to their budgets from the
science budget of the Department of Education and Science. These sums
include provision for the establishment of the new Nature Conservancy
Council (see p. 395) and certain research undertaken by the Soil Survey of
England and Wales.
The Government announced at the same time a new programme of training
and career development to equip scientists and other specialists for posts
primarily concerned with general policy and management.
The Department of Education and Science (see also p. 51) is responsible,
among other things, for government policy regarding the universities and for
promoting civil science throughout Great Britain. The department’s relations
with the universities are conducted through the University Grants Committee
(see p. 165); and its responsibilities for basic and applied civil science are
discharged mainly through the five research councils: the Science Research
Council (see p. 400), the Medical Research Council (see p. 402), the Agricul¬
tural Research Council (see p. 403), the Natural Environment Research
Council (see p. 408), and the Social Science Research Council (see p. 408).
This remains the broad pattern despite the changes described above. Others
may be established under the terms of the Science and Technology Act. The
department also has, in consultation with other departments, general govern¬
mental responsibility for Britain’s scientific space research programme, which
is co-ordinated by the Science Research Council. The department is responsible
for some aspects of international scientific relations (see p. 410), and for
government policy regarding libraries and information systems, including the
Office for Scientific and Technical Information.
The Council for Scientific Policy set up in 1965 was replaced in 1972 by a new
body known as the Advisory Board for the Research Councils to advise the
Secretary of State on responsibilities for civil science with special reference to
the research council system, the support of postgraduate students and the
proper balance between international and national scientific activities, and on
the allocation of the science budget between research councils and other
bodies; and to promote close liaison between the councils and users of their
research. Its membership includes the chairman or secretary of each of the
five research councils, the chairman of the University Grants Committee,
senior scientists from departments with a major interest in the work of the
research councils, a representative of the Chief Scientific Adviser to the
Government, and independent members drawn from the universities, industry
and the Royal Society of London. One of the independent members is
appointed part-time chairman.
The Department of the Environment is concerned with research and develop¬
ment for a whole range of functions which affect the environment (see p. 52).
The department’s research programme, which is the responsibility of the
Directorate General of Research, is carried out or controlled by its four
research establishments, the Building Research Establishment (BRE), the
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 395
Transport and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL), the Hydraulics Research
Station (HRS) and the Water Pollution Research Laboratory (WPRL). A
substantial part of the total programme is undertaken by outside agencies.
The Building Research Establishment, which comprises the former Build¬
ing Research Station, Fire Research Station and Forest Products Research
Laboratory, is concerned with research into all building materials, the tech¬
niques of building design and construction, and the organisation, productivity
and economics of building work. The BRE also conducts research into all
aspects of fire and the danger it represents to life and property.
The Transport and Road Research Laboratory provides technical and
scientific advice and information to help in formulating, developing, and
implementing government policies relating to roads and transport, including
their interaction with urban and regional planning. The TRRL’s main
activities are highway engineering, traffic engineering and safety, and transport
systems.
The main function of the Hydraulics Research Station is to predict the
performance of hydraulic civil engineering works and their consequences to
the environment. It is concerned with the flow of water in open channels,
including the hydraulics of rivers, estuaries, harbours and coasts.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory studies the effects of pollution
on natural waters and the development or improvement of methods for treating
sewage and trade waste waters and for the reclamation of water from sewage
effluents.
The department gives grants in aid of a number of organisations working in
research, which include: the Centre for Environmental Studies (see p. 179);
four industrial research associations (see p. 401); the Operational Research
Unit of the Royal Institute of Public Administration; and the Royal Society,
to meet costs it incurs as British representative on the International Institute of
Applied Systems Analysis.
A Nature Conservancy Council has been appointed by the Secretary of State
for the Environment under the Nature Conservancy Council Act 1973 t0
responsible, from November 1973, for the conservancy aspects of the former
Nature Conservancy, a committee of the Natural Environment Research
Council (NERC). The research functions will remain with the NERC.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) (see also p. 57) carries out
research concerned with its main functions in support of British industry. It
is responsible for: the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) (see
p. 405); the National Research Development Corporation (see p. 410) and
most of the non-aviation functions of the former Ministry of Technology;
civil aviation; and for the sponsorship of most industries (excluding aircraft)
in both the public and private sectors.
Among matters affecting a number of industries the DTI has responsibility
for engineering standards and weights and measures, for the British Standards
Institution (see p. 264) and for the Metrication Board set up in 1969
facilitate the transition to the metric system of weights and measures in
Britain by 1975 (see p. 463). It has direct control of a number of research
establishments (see p. 401); it also aids with grants autonomous industrial
research associations.
In accordance with the Government’s customer-contractor principle, the
DTI has set up six requirements boards to determine the objectives and
balance of its research and development programmes. They cover ship and
marine technology; mechanical engineering and machine tools; engineering
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
materials; computers, systems and electronics; chemical and mineral pro¬
cesses and plant; and standards and metrology. They are responsible to the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and include representatives from
industry and bodies in the public sector.
According to the first of a new series of reports (see Bibliography p. 482)
the DTI spent more than £57 million on research and development in 1972-73
and expects to increase this to more than £66 million in 1973-74.
Ministry of The Procurement Executive, Ministry of Defence, engages in research for
Defence defence purposes at its research and development establishments and through
contracts placed with industry and universities. It also undertakes certain
research for civil purposes, including civil aviation, medical research and
space research. For defence aspects see p. 125.
Other
Government-
sponsored
Research
Botany
Communications
Branches of research for which government departments are responsible
include:
The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (founded in 1759), together with its 400-
acre estate at Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, Sussex, is administered by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and has the largest collection
of living plants in the world. Its research departments are: the herbarium,
concerned primarily with the classification and accurate determination of
plants; and the Jodrell Laboratory, for the study of plant anatomy and plant
physiology, cytology and genetics. There is a seed bank and seed testing unit,
a biochemistry unit under the Agricultural Research Council and a cell
physiology laboratory which has a transmission electron microscope for
investigating reproductive physiology and the behaviour of certain glandular
cells. A scanning electron microscope for studies of the surface structures of
plants and pollen is housed in the Jodrell Laboratory. Three museums are
concerned with public exhibitions and the care of reference collections of
economic plant products. The library, in the same building as the herbarium,
was founded in 1852; it consists of more than 100,000 botanical books, about
140,000 reprints and separately issued items and a collection of over 160,000
drawings and paintings of plants.
The Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh (founded in 1670), has, since 1969,
been administered by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
Together with the associated Logan Botanic Garden at Ardwell near Stranraer,
and the Younger Botanic Garden at Benmore near Dunoon, it maintains large
collections of living plants used for research into plant classification. Glass¬
houses at Edinburgh make possible the cultivation of and research into many
tropical groups. The herbarium and library—the finest outside London—are
used for research in taxonomy, cytology, anatomy, mycology and other subjects.
A transmission electron microscope is used for the study of fine detail of plant
structures. An exhibition hall was opened on the occasion of the tercentenary
of the garden in 1970. The Scottish Gallery of Modern Art is situated within
the Garden.
The Post Office undertakes research and development on many aspects of the
science and engineering of communications, both in its own laboratories and
in close association with industry, the universities and government depart¬
ments. The main research station is at Dollis Hill, London, and there are
laboratories at Backwell, near Bristol, at Castleton, near Cardiff, and also at
a new research station at Martlesham, near Ipswich.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
397
Environmental
Pollution
Radiological
Protection
Fuel and Power
Meteorology
Transport
Equipment
Select
Committee
on Science
and
Technology
The Department of the Environment, under its Secretary of State, is res¬
ponsible for the total strategic approach to environmental management, pro¬
tection and improvement. Other government departments have certain specific
responsibilities for pollution control (for example, the Department of Trade
and Industry is responsible for oil pollution at sea and the Ministry of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food for pollution from pesticides). The Department
of the Environment has a small central pollution unit to co-ordinate the work
of all government departments on the control of environmental pollution and
the British contribution to international discussions on the subject.
In 1970 an independent standing Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution was set up to advise the Government on national and international
matters concerning the pollution of the environment; on the adequacy of
research; and the future possibilities of danger to the environment. The com¬
mission has so far published three reports (see Bibliography, p. 482). A Clean
Air Council was set up in 1956 and an Advisory Council on Noise in 1970.
A National Radiological Protection Board was established under the Radio¬
logical Protection Act 1970 to provide an authoritative point of reference for
the United Kingdom on radiological protection. The board, which carries out
research, makes public and occupational health assessments and provides
services, has assumed the functions of the former Radioactive Substances
Advisory Committee, the Radiological Protection Service—hitherto provided
jointly by the Medical Research Council (MRC) and the Health Departments
—and part of the activities carried on by the central Health and Safety Branch
of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (AEA). The board is
financed by Parliament through the Secretary of State for Social Services and
by the AEA, MRC and income from services.
The Department of Trade and Industry is responsible for research into safety
and health of mineworkers. The coal, electricity and gas industries are required
to settle their general programmes of research in consultation with the Secretary
of State, who is assisted by an Advisory Council on Research and Develop¬
ment. Similar provisions apply to the British Steel Corporation’s general
programme of research and technological development.
The Ministry of Defence finances the Meteorological Office, which is respon¬
sible for research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly for civil purposes.
The headquarters of the Office and most of its research sections are at
Bracknell, Berkshire. The Ministry of Defence also makes grants for funda¬
mental meteorological research carried out under the auspices of the Royal
Society (see below) or in university departments.
The Procurement Executive of the Ministry of Defence undertakes research
on civil aircraft, engines and equipment on behalf of the Department of Trade
and Industry. Research on marine nuclear propulsion is undertaken by the
Atomic Energy Authority. The Civil Aviation Research and Development
Board is responsible to the Department of Trade and Industry for co-ordinat¬
ing research and development work for civil aviation equipment other than
aircraft and engines.
The sessional Select Committee of the House of Commons on Science and
Technology is one of the specialist committees established to give back-bench
members the opportunity to investigate the policies and administration of the
Government and to participate in the formation of policy (see p. 40). The
members of the committee (not more than 15 in number) are nominated by
398
The
Parliamentary
and Scientific
Committee
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the House. The committee has power to call witnesses, generally takes
evidence in public, and reports its findings to the House from time to time.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee, founded in 1939, provides for a
regular exchange of information between members of Parliament and scientists.
Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in both Houses,
and also to nominated representatives of such non-profit-making scientific
and technological organisations as may be affiliated under its constitution.
Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the learned
societies have retained their traditional function of facilitating the spread of
knowledge. The most eminent of those concerned with science in its broadest
aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised interests and activities)
are the Royal Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal Institution and British
Association.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for Improving
Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in the country’s
scientific affairs and is equivalent to national academies of sciences in other
countries. Election to it is regarded by scientists as a high honour. The Queen
is Patron. There are today three main categories of Fellowship: Royal Fellows,
including the Queen Mother and two Royal Dukes; Foreign Members, of
whom there are about 70; and the main body of Fellows numbering about 760.
Election to the Fellowship, which is for life, was for many years restricted to
25 persons a year and the foreign membership to four a year but in 1965 the
former was increased to 32 with the intention of awarding some of the new
places to applied scientists in both the physical and biological sciences. The
society is governed by a council of 21 members.
Its activities include the holding of scientific meetings; publication of
research work, mainly in the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings’,
the presentation of medals; the giving of endowed lectures; and the award of
research appointments and grants. Among its research appointments are the
Foulerton, Wolfson and Henry Dale Research Professorships and 12 other
research professorships supported by parliamentary grant-in-aid. The highest
medal awarded is the Copley Medal, for which scientists from all countries
are eligible; there are also three Royal Medals, and the Rumford, Darwin,
Buchanan, Sylvester, Hughes, Leverhulme and Mullard Medals. There are
six lectureships: the Croonian (biology); the Bakerian (physical sciences); the
Ferrier (nervous system); the Wilkins (history of science); the Leeuwenhoek
(microbiology); and the Bernal (social functions of science). The society has
set up committees, some of them jointly with other bodies, to promote im¬
provements in education in science and to emphasise the importance of
applied sciences, especially engineering.
Although an independent private corporation, the society has always had
a special relationship with the Government, which makes grants for certain of
its activities. The President of the Society is consulted on scientific appoint¬
ments to research councils and Fellows serve on most governmental advisory
councils and committees concerned with research.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. It represents
the United Kingdom in the international unions comprising the International
Council of Scientific Unions and appoints national committees for each of
them. It also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes such
as the International Biological Programme, and promotes exchange visits
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
British
Association
Professional
Institutions
International
Prizes
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 399
of scientists with many academies throughout the world. Its International
Fellowship Scheme to foster relations with scientists of Western European
and many other countries receives financial support from the Government
and other sources.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement
of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific,
artistic, technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754, one
of the society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress and
application to useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils this
purpose chiefly by disseminating new scientific knowledge. The society
regularly holds lectures, and publishes a monthly Journal, thus providing
effective media for the exposition and assessment by leading authorities of
developments which have a public as well as a specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating
the introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving
arts and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’.
Its character, however, was largely determined by the work of Sir Humphry
Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of research. Today,
the Royal Institution has extensive research laboratories, and lectures are
given on recent developments in science and other branches of knowledge. Its
library includes many early scientific works and manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831
to promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the annual meeting, attended by many young students as well as
by eminent scientists. In addition the association plans special lectures,
exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publica¬
tion of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the appointment of study
groups and liaison with the Press and with sound and television broadcasting
services. The association has area committees and three lectureships for
young scientists—the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lectureships, dealing
respectively with the physical, biological and sociological sciences—to en¬
courage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The
British Association has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific
bodies and learned societies. It has also made an important contribution to the
development of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles
to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
of which are playing a distinguished part in promoting their own disciplines
or are interested in the education and professional well-being of their members.
The Council of Engineering Institutions, the federal body for the chartered
engineering institutions established in 1965, promotes the co-ordination of the
engineering profession. The Council of Science and Technology Institutes—
a federal body with five member institutes representing biologists, chemists,
mathematicians, metallurgists and physicists—was formed in 1969.
Major international prizes for science were endowed in 1972 by the late Lord
Rank, founder of the Rank Organisation. The fund of million will be used
400
THE UNIVER¬
SITIES AND
INSTITUTIONS
OF UNIVERSITY
STATUS
Statistics of
Qualified
Manpower
SCIENCE
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to reward outstanding contributions to nutrition and crop husbandry; and
to opto-electronics.
Of total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the academic
year 1971-72 (over £125 million), the largest government contribution (over
£80 million) was through the University Grants Committee (see p. 165).
Scientific research in the universities is also supported through the research
councils. This support takes two forms. First, about half the postgraduate
students in science and technology in the universities receive maintenance
awards from the research councils, through postgraduate scholarships, student¬
ships or fellowships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up to
three years of training in research work and in others for shorter periods for
advanced studies. The cost of these awards is currently about £13 "4 million
a year. Second, grants are given to the universities by the research councils
for specific projects, particularly in new or developing fields of research. In
recent years the research councils, in addition to making grants of this kind,
have made funds available for expensive items of university equipment
required for specific programmes of research. The research councils’ support
for research in the universities, excluding expenditure by the Medical Research
Council and the Agricultural Research Council on their own research units
within the universities (which remain under the control of, and are wholly
financed by, the councils), amounted in 1972-73 to £25 million.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations. The contributions from sources other than the
University Grants Committee amount to about a third of the total university
expenditure on research.
Universities in industrial centres have tended to acquire outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale
close relationships are fostered between the universities, industries and the
Government in numerous joint projects.
According to estimates in a survey published in 1971 (see Bibliography, p. 482)
there were in 1968 just over 400,000 persons with qualifications in engineering,
technology and science in Great Britain, of whom one-half were qualified
in science and one-half in engineering. Of those economically active (350,000),
53 per cent (185,000) held engineering qualifications, i-2 per cent (4,140) were
out of employment, and 35 per cent employed in manufacturing. Education
employed over 20 per cent and over the years 1959 t0 t9^^ there was a rapid
increase in the service sectors (commerce and consultancy). Within manu¬
facturing the largest increase was in electrical and electronics industries (6 per
cent a year). Over the period 1959 to 1968 there was a net gain of scientists
from migration and a net loss of engineers and technologists.
The Science Research Council (SRC), which came into formal existence in
1965 and consists of a chairman and up to 15 other members, covers all
branches of fundamental science other than those for which the other research
councils are responsible. Provision is made for it to carry out research and
development in science and technology through its own establishments, to
encourage and support similar research by any other person or body; to
provide and operate equipment for common use by universities, polytechnics,
technical colleges and similar institutions; to make grants for postgraduate
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
401
INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Department of
the Environment
Research
Associations
studies; and to disseminate knowledge of science and technology. Its establish¬
ments are the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herstmonceux, the Royal
Observatory, Edinburgh, the Radio and Space Research Station, the Ruther¬
ford High Energy Laboratory, the Daresbury Nuclear Physics Laboratory,
and the Atlas Computer Laboratory. The SRC also co-ordinates the British
scientific space research programme (see p. 406) and provides the United
Kingdom contribution to the European Organisation for Nuclear Research
(CERN), the civil science programme of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisa¬
tion (NATO) and part of the UK contribution to the European Space Research
Organisation (ESRO).
The greater part of industrial research in Britain is undertaken in the research
organisations of the larger firms and in government research establishments.
Other main agencies are universities and technical colleges, industrial research
associations, independent institutes for sponsored research and consultant
laboratories.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has direct control of five
industrial research establishments. These are the National Engineering
Laboratory (which includes the Birniehill Institute), the National Physical
Laboratory, Warren Spring Laboratory, the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist and the Safety in Mines Research Establishment. It is planned to
group the Computer Aided Design Centre with these establishments.
Besides research and development for industry the industrial research
establishments are engaged on the application of new techniques and dis¬
coveries to design, production, quality control and distribution. The DTI also
sponsors research by grants-in-aid to research associations and by extra-mural
contracts with industry and universities.
The Department of the Environment is responsible for the Transport and
Road Research Laboratory, the Water Pollution Research Laboratory, the
Hydraulics Research Station, and the Building Research Establishment.
The scheme by which the Government gives financial help to firms with
similar interests to form organisations known as research associations, to carry
out industrial research co-operatively, was started in 1917. There are now 29
such associations whose grants are administered by the DTI. In addition there
are four (Water; Construction; Heating and Ventilating; and Timber) whose
grants since January 1971 have been administered by the Department of
the Environment, and four (Flour Milling and Baking; Fruit and Vegetable
Preservation; British Food Manufacturing Industries; and British Industrial
Biological Research) whose grants since April 1971 have been administered
by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Suitably specialised
associations are now available for about 50 per cent of British industry. They
accounted in 1972 for about 1-5 per cent of national research and development
expenditure. The largest are those dealing with production engineering, ships,
welding, electrical manufacturing, cotton and man-made fibres, non-ferrous
metals and scientific instruments. (See also Chapter 14.) The amounts of the
government grants are related to the contributions made by the industries
concerned; the grants are now being reduced, each industry bearing an increas¬
ing proportion of the cost of its associations. A Conference of Industrial
Research Associations was set up in 1969.
402
Public
Corporations
Private
Industry
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Medical
Research
Council
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Some of the public corporations which run the nationalised industries have
their own research organisations (see Chapter 14), in particular those con¬
cerned with fuel and power, steel and transport. They also give support to
organisations concerned with research on matters of interest to them.
According to Research and Development Expenditure (see Bibliography p. 482),
expenditure on research and development carried out within or financed by
private industry in 1969-70 was £710-8 million of which £227-7 million came
from government funds. Expenditure in individual industries, including funds
from government sources, was as follows (in £ million): aerospace 171-3;
electronics (including computers) 146-7; other electrical engineering 40-3;
petroleum products 11-7; other chemical products 96; mechanical engineering
6i-i ; motor vehicles 49-1; scientific instruments 17-4; food, drink and tobacco
22-8; textiles 15-7. Firms in science-based industries commit large private
funds to research and development in the course of business.
A number of institutes for sponsored research have been established to
extend the facilities for private research for industrial firms by studying
problems which are not within the scope of the average industrial laboratory.
In these institutes research for private firms is carried out confidentially, the
results remaining the property of the sponsor.
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the
research funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act 1911. In
1920 the committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council
(MRC), established under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-in-aid
provided by Parliament, now through the Secretary of State for Education and
Science. The MRC was granted a new charter in 1966.
In addition to financing the MRC, the Government gives substantial sup¬
port to medical research through block grants to universities distributed
through the Department of Education and Science and the University Grants
Committee; and to clinical research through the Department of Health and
Social Security and the National Health Service. Certain government-financed
research for defence purposes, for example, at the Microbiological Establish¬
ment at Porton, Wiltshire, has civil applications related to medical science.
Important contributions to the support of research in particular subjects
are made by industry, especially the pharmaceutical industry, and by private
charities or voluntary organisations, such as the Nuffield Foundation and the
Cancer Research Campaign.
The Medical Research Council is responsible to the Secretary of State for
Education and Science and consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman, and
from 10 to 14 other members. Not less than three-quarters must be scientific¬
ally qualified, representative of the different branches of medical knowledge
and actively engaged in research. All members are appointed by the Secretary
of State, the scientific members after consultation with the President of the
Royal Society and the existing council; and the chairman and deputy chair¬
man after consultation with the council.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote research into all aspects of health
and disease. In planning and carrying out its research programme the council
is assisted by bodies specially appointed to advise on particular subjects. Three
of the more important of these are the Clinical Research Board, set up in con¬
sultation with the health departments to assist the development of clinical
research; the Tropical Medicine Research Board, appointed in consultation
AGRICULTURAL
AND FISHERIES
RESEARCH
Agricultural
Research
Council
Government
Agricultural
Departments
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 4°3
with the Overseas Development Administration to advise on the promotion
and co-ordination of research in this field; and the Biological Research Board,
which advises on the promotion of research in the non-clinical field. In
addition, the MRC is advised by committees concerned with particular aspects
of its work and with the award of research grants. The MRC’s arrangements
for the support of research fall under four main headings: (i) investigations by
members of its scientific staff, mostly working in its own establishments;
(2) short-term grants to wrorkers in universities and elsewhere; (3) long-term
grants in support of specific research programmes in university departments
(‘programme grants’ and ‘research groups’); and (4) fellowships and scholar¬
ships tenable both at home and abroad. The research undertaken ranges from
basic biological research at the molecular level and the extensive laboratory
work that forms the scientific basis of the practice of medicine to the study of
patients and epidemiological and population surveys carried out in the field.
The MRC’s main research establishments are the National Institute for
Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead, London, and the Clinical
Research Centre at Northwick Park in north-west London which forms an
integral part of the new district hospital for the North West Metropolitan
Regional Hospital Board. In addition the council has over 70 smaller establish¬
ments, known as research units, which are in most cases located in university
departments, medical schools and hospitals in Britain.
The MRC also undertakes work overseas and, with additional support from
the Overseas Development Administration (see p. 411), maintains laboratories
in The Gambia and units in Uganda and Jamaica.
Agricultural research is carried out by the Agricultural Research Council, the
government agricultural departments and by private industry. Fisheries re¬
search is carried out by the government fisheries departments, the White Fish
Authority, the Natural Environment Research Council, the Marine Biological
Association, the Scottish Marine Biological Association and the Freshwater
Biological Association.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC), established in 1931, consists of not
less than 19 and not more than 22 members. In addition to distinguished
scientists the membership includes people with practical farming experience
and certain appointments made by the ministers of the agricultural depart¬
ments. The ARC is under the general oversight of the Secretary of State for
Education and Science.
The ARC is responsible for 14 independent state-aided agricultural research
institutes and also has eight institutes under its direct control and 11 units
which it has established under distinguished scientists associated with uni¬
versities. Also there are eight independent institutes in Scotland financed by
the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland with advice from
the ARC on their scientific programmes, staffing and equipment.
The ARC makes special research grants to support promising new lines of
work in university departments. It makes a limited number of postgraduate
training awards.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food does both applied and basic
research. At its Central Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, research and
laboratory investigations are carried out into the causes, pathology, epi-
zootiology and control of diseases of farm livestock, including poultry; the
diagnosis of animal and poultry diseases (other than foot-and-mouth disease);
404 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the making and supplying of certain biological products. The laboratory
is, by appointment of the World Health Organisation (WHO), the third
international laboratory for biological standards. There is a related Ministry
Veterinary Laboratory at Lasswade, Midlothian. The Plant Pathology
Laboratory at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, is concerned with plant quarantine
matters, the standards for improved crop planting material, pest and disease
assessment work, the clearance of pesticides for safety and their official
approval for biological efficiency. The Pest Infestation Control Laboratory at
Slough, Buckinghamshire (with stations at Tolworth and Worplesdon, Surrey),
engages in research work on insect pests affecting food storage and on harmful
mammals and birds. It provides the scientific basis for advisory work on their
detection and control and acts as an instruction and liaison centre for home and
overseas work.
With the guidance of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food), the Food Science
Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible for
formulating the ministry’s general policy on the acquisition and dissemination
of scientific and technical information about food and the food handling and
processing industry; for furnishing scientific advice to the other divisions of
the ministry; and for sponsoring or carrying out experimental work. The
division has its own experimental laboratories in London and Norwich: in
addition, four food industrial research associations are grant-aided by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
In Scotland research work at East Craigs, Edinburgh, by the Agricultural
Scientific Services of the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries is mainly
concerned with the problems of cultivar taxonomy, seed testing, healthy seed
potato production, plant pathology, and the ecology of birds, mammals and
insects harmful to agriculture and stored products. In Northern Ireland the
Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for promotion of research in food pro¬
duced by agriculture and in veterinary sciences with the aim of improving
efficiency of production, marketability of foods and the health of plants and
animals. The ministry is also responsible for work on forest science, ecology of
freshwater and marine fish as well as on the biology of freshwater resources.
The ARC, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Depart¬
ment of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland have set up a joint consultative
organisation to advise on the programmes and priorities for government-
financed research and development in food and agriculture. The organisation
consists of five boards—three commodity boards, covering animals, arable
crops and forage, and horticulture; and two special subject boards for food
science and technology, and engineering and buildings, supported by com¬
mittees to deal with individual commodities and subjects.
Government The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food maintains five laboratories
Fisheries for marine fisheries and shellfish research, two for salmon and freshwater
Departments fisheries research and one concerned with the landing and preservation of the
fish catch and with studies of fish as food. There are four sea-going research
ships and several smaller vessels for inshore and estuarine work. The Depart¬
ment of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland maintains a marine research
laboratory and six research ships at Aberdeen, and a freshwater fisheries
research laboratory at Pitlochry.
A Fisheries Research and Development Board representing government
departments concerned was set up in January 1973 to advise fisheries ministers
on research programmes. A Controller of Fisheries Research and Develop¬
ment, responsible jointly to the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
4°5
FORESTRY
NUCLEAR
ENERGY
the Secretary of State for Scotland, was appointed to supervise the programmes
of the research laboratories and stations. Responsibility for the Torry Research
Station (which is concerned with the handling and preservation of the fish
catch and with studies of fish as food) was transferred from the DTI to the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in April 1972.
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to silvi¬
cultural and allied problems (see p. 337). By means of grants, it also aids forest
research work undertaken by various universities and other institutions,
including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), set up under the
Atomic Energy Authority Act 1954, is responsible for research and develop¬
ment in nuclear energy. It is answerable to the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry, who is responsible under the Atomic Energy Act 1946 for
promoting and controlling the development of nuclear energy and ensuring
that the proper degrees of importance are attached to its various applications. As
an essential part of the British Government’s nuclear power programme, the
AEA has carried out research and developed new types of nuclear power
stations for the generation of electric power on a commercial scale and for this
purpose it builds and operates experimental and prototype nuclear reactors.
Construction of commercial nuclear power stations is carried out by industry
to the order of the electricity generating boards which operate them. A single
British nuclear reactor construction company, the National Nuclear Corpora¬
tion, has been formed to replace the two consortia set up in 1968 to design and
construct nuclear power stations (see p. 280). Under the Science and Techno¬
logy Act 1965 the functions of the AEA have been extended so that the Govern¬
ment may, after consultation, require it to undertake research and development
outside nuclear energy. Non-nuclear work is absorbing a rising proportion of
the AEA’s research and development resources.
The Atomic Energy Authority Act 1971 provided for the transfer to two
new companies (British Nuclear Fuels Limited and The Radiochemical Centre
Limited) of the assets and liabilities of the AEA’s trading fund. The establish¬
ments transferred to British Nuclear Fuels Limited include those at Spring-
fields, Capenhurst, Chapelcross and the Windscale and Calder Works. Those
transferred to The Radiochemical Centre Limited include the Radio¬
chemical Centre, Amersham, and its facilities at Harwell. The Reactor Group
Laboratories at Springfields and Windscale and the Advanced Gas-cooled
Reactor (AGR) at Windscale remain with the AEA.
The Secretary of State for Defence became responsible for the development
and production of nuclear weapons for the Services in 1966; in practice,
however, the AEA produced the explosive nuclear material and assemblies for
nuclear weapons under contract and carried out weapons research. Under the
Atomic Energy Authority (Weapons Group) Act 1973 the activities of the
AEA’s Weapons Group (the Atomic Weapons Establishment) were transferred
to the Ministry of Defence from 1st April 1973.
The Department of Trade and Industry and the AEA are jointly responsible
for co-operation with other countries in nuclear energy, partly through the
medium of bilateral agreements with a large number of individual countries
and partly through British membership of bodies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the European Nuclear Energy Agency.
Britain became a full member of the European Atomic Energy Community
Euratom
406 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(Euratom) on 1st January 1973 (see p. 81) under the Treaty of Accession and
under its terms agreed to accept the Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, under
which Euratom was set up, and rules made under it. Britain is taking part in
the four-year Euratom research and training programme agreed in February
1973 and costing over £70 million.
The provision of facilities for research in high energy physics is the function
of the Science Research Council (SRC) (see p. 400). The SRC establishments
concerned are the Rutherford High Energy Laboratory, Chilton, with a
7 GeV (thousand million electron volt) proton synchrotron (particle acclera-
tor), and the Daresbury Nuclear Physics Laboratory, Cheshire, with a 5 GeV
electron synchrotron. Experiments at higher energies are carried out by the
European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) to which Britain con¬
tributes through the SRC.
Neutron Beam The SRC shares with its French and West German partners the control of the
Research Institut Max von Lave-Paul Langevin (ILL) which operates a high flux
reactor at Grenoble for neutron beam research.
SPACE Government responsibility for space activities is divided between the Secretary
ACTIVITIES q£ gtate for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for Defence, the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications, while the Secretary of State for Foreign and Common¬
wealth Affairs is concerned with international aspects. Total expenditure on
space activities in 1972-73 was about £32 million. This represented some 15
per cent of all such expenditure in Europe. Expenditure by France accounted
for about 30 per cent and by the Federal Republic of Germany some 30 per
cent.
Britain was a founder member of the European Space Vehicle Launcher
Development Organisation (ELDO), which builds large satellite launchers, and
the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), which was originally con¬
cerned with scientific space research but which has now been charged addition¬
ally with the development of applications satellites. The cost of building large
launchers in Europe is high and in 1968 Britain decided to limit its commit¬
ment to ELDO and no longer makes a financial contribution. Britain supports
fully the ESRO programme of scientific satellites and participates in ESRO’s
applications satellite programmes which include aeronautical, meteorological
and telecommunications satellites. Financial responsibility for the scientific
programme rests with the SRC and for the applications programmes rests with
DTI. The European Space Conference (a ministerial conference which first
met in 1966) agreed at the end of 1972 to accept a British plan for the creation
of a European Space Agency which is being formed from ELDO and
ESRO.
The execution of the civil scientific space research programme is the res¬
ponsibility of the Secretary of State for Education and Science, through the
SRC. Opportunities are provided for research workers to carry out experiments
in Britain’s national satellite and sounding rocket programme, in the ESRO
scientific satellite programme and in various collaborative sounding rocket
programmes through bilateral and multilateral arrangements with other
countries, including the Commonwealth collaborative programme. Britain is
co-operating with the United States in a programme which includes American
launching of the British Ariel series of scientific satellites, the incorporation of
High Energy
Physics
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 407
British experiments in American satellites and the analyses of lunar surface
samples.
Responsibility for the National Space Technology Programme (NSTP)
rests with the Department of Trade and Industry which calls upon the re¬
sources of the Procurement Executive of the Ministry of Defence for advice
and for the technical oversight of the programme. The DTI’s NSTP (designed
to help build up industry’s capability) includes the development of technology¬
proving satellites, of which the first, Prospero, was launched in October 1971.
The latest DTI satellite, the Geostationary Technology Satellite (GTS), is an
experimental maritime communications satellite, and the project is in the final
stage of definition prior to full development. The DTI leads the British
delegation to the European Space Conference—the forum in which the broad
policies of European space programmes are discussed. The Ministry of
Defence is responsible for defence communications satellites.
The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, through the Post Office, is
responsible for the use of satellites for civil communications purposes and
undertakes research work in connection with communications systems using
satellites. Britain and 82 other countries participate in the permanent Inter¬
national Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT) which
started operating early in 1973 in place of the consortium formed in 1964.
The Post Office ground stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall are among the most
successful in the world, and British firms have built and are building such
stations overseas.
Scientific space experiments are undertaken by scientists in universities and
in government research establishments. The Radio and Space Research
Station of the SRC at Slough provides support and services for the national
scientific space research programmes and also operates the United States
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Satellite Tracking
and Data Acquisition Network (STADAN) station at Winkfield. Telemetry
facilities for the DTI’s technology satellites are situated at Lasham, Hampshire,
with data processing and analysis being provided by Space Department, Royal
Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough. Optical tracking of satellites is under¬
taken by many individual observers in Britain and by the Royal Edinburgh
Observatory’s outstation (see below); the prediction and co-ordination centre
is at the Radio and Space Research Station, which is also the home of one
of the three World Data Centres for space research.
The Royal Society represents Britain in non-governmental international
scientific groups such as the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
OPTICAL AND
RADIO
ASTRONOMY
Optical astronomy is carried out in university departments and in the Royal
Greenwich Observatory and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, under the
Science Research Council (SRC). SRC has set out to increase the facilities
available to university and observatory astronomers. The 98-in (245 cm) Isaac
Newton Telescope at the Royal Greenwich Observatory was commissioned
in 1967 and is operated as a national facility. A 150-in (375 cm) telescope is
under construction at Siding Spring Mountain in Australia as a joint Anglo-
Australian project, while a British 48-in (120 cm) Schmidt Telescope, also
under construction, will be installed on the same site. The SRC shares with
the South African Council of Scientific and Industrial Research the costs of
providing optical telescopes for joint use in South Africa.
Cambridge and Manchester Universities are the main centres for research
in radio astronomy with substantial support from SRC. The fully steerable
408
THE NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
Marine
Technology
THE SOCIAL
SCIENCES
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
250-ft (76-2 m) telescope at Jodrell Bank (University of Manchester) has been
modernised. The Cambridge University group at Lord’s Bridge has developed
and made substantial use of the aperture synthesis technique; two telescopes
with 1-61 km (1 mile) and o-8 km (0-5 mile) arrays have been complemented
by a third telescope array 5 km (3-1 miles) long. Both university groups have
other smaller facilities in regular use.
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) was established by
Royal Charter in 1965 under the Science and Technology Act to encourage,
plan and execute research in those sciences, physical and biological, that
relate to man’s natural environment and its resources. These researches are
broadly defined as: Solid Earth—its physical properties and mineral resources
(geology, geophysics, and geochemistry); Seas and Oceans—their behaviour
and living and mineral resources (oceanography and marine ecology); Inland
Waters—their behaviour and living resources (hydrology and freshwater
ecology); Terrestrial Environments—wildlife communities and their resources
(terrestrial ecology and forestry); Atmosphere—its structure and interactions
(some aspects of meteorology); and Antarctica—the physical and biological
properties of the Antarctic environment (life and earth sciences and at¬
mospherics).
The NERC carries out research and training through its own institutes,
grant-aided institutes, and by grants, fellowships, and postgraduate awards
to universities and other institutes of higher education.
The NERC’s institutes are: the British Antarctic Survey, the Culture
Centre of Algae and Protozoa, the Experimental Cartography Unit, the
Institute of Geological Sciences, the Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, the
Institute of Hydrology, the Institute of Marine Biochemistry, the Institute for
Marine Environmental Research, the Institute of Terrestrial Sciences, the
Institute of Tree Biology, the Unit of Invertebrate Virology. The NERC also
maintains a research vessel base. To take over the research functions of the
former Nature Conservancy Committee, the NERC proposes to set up an
Institute of Territorial Ecology (see p. 395).
Grant-aided institutes are: the Freshwater Biological Association, the
Marine Biological Association, the Scottish Marine Biological Association and
the Marine Invertebrate Biology Unit and other smaller units attached to
universities.
The NERC is government financed through the Department of Education
and Science.
A Ship and Marine Technology Requirements Board to identify customer
requirements for research and development in exploiting the resources of the
sea and seabed and in formulating government programmes was set up in 1972
to replace the Advisory Committee on Marine Technology.
The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) was set up in 1965 to encourage,
support and to carry out research in, and to disseminate knowledge about, the
social sciences. It provides grants for research projects at universities and other
institutions, and makes training awards to postgraduate students. It has also
set up three research units: the Industrial Relations RU, the Ethnic Relations
RU, and the Survey Unit. The SSRC’s fields of interest include economics,
political science; psychology; social anthropology; social and economic
statistics; sociology and social administration; social science and government,
OTHER
RESEARCH
Zoological
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
DISSEMINATION
AND APPLICA¬
TION OF
RESULTS OF
RESEARCH
Information
Services
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES 409
education; management and industrial relations; human geography; planning
and various aspects of a wide range of other disciplines.
Several government departments have funds allocated for social research
related to their responsibilities, including the Home Office, which has a large
research unit (see p. no) carrying out a wide variety of sociological studies.
The Social Survey conducts sample survey enquiries at the request of govern¬
ment departments and from time to time also carries out studies in collabora¬
tion with universities and other independent research organisations.
Zoological research is among the activities of the world-famous Zoological
Gardens, extending over 34 acres in Regent’s Park, London, which were
opened by the Zoological Society of London in 1828. A natural zoo of 500
acres was opened in 1931 at Whipsnade, in Bedfordshire, by the Society.
Among other well-known zoos are those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester,
Dudley, and Chessington, Surrey. There are also a number of ‘safari parks’
containing reservations of wild animals through which the public can pass in
closed motor cars.
The British Museum (Natural History) is the principal centre in the Common¬
wealth for the general study of natural history; it has extensive collections of
extant and fossil animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and meteorites. The
Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied science in all
countries, but chiefly in Britain, which has always held a leading place in
engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics, and in the develop¬
ment of industrial machinery and processes. The geology of Britain is probably
known in more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and
the Geological Survey has an outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological
Museum. These three museums are in South Kensington, London. Other
important collections are those of the Museum of Science and Industry, in
Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford.
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and
to ultimate users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume of
information has grown. The traditional method of scientific publication, in
which results are written up into papers and published in journals, is still
the main means of communication among scientists. The leading learned
societies have for long been important agencies for communicating scientific
information.
A description of general library services which also cater for scientific needs is
given on p. 425.
The National Lending Library for Science and Technology (NLL) at
Boston Spa, Yorkshire, within the Department of Education and Science,
collects for loan purposes all literature which is likely to be of interest to the
practising scientist and technologist, covering all branches of science and
technology (including agriculture and medicine) and, since 1967, the periodical
literature of the social sciences.
The National Reference Library of Science and Invention (NRLSI),
administered by the British Museum, is divided between the Holborn Division,
formerly the Patent Office Library, and the Bayswater Division which has
substantial collections, especially in the life sciences. The NLL and the NRLSI
with other libraries are to become the British Library (see p. 425).
Aslib, representing special libraries and information units in industry,
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
government departments, universities, colleges and other institutions, carries
out research into the collection, utilisation and dissemination of information,
provides consultancy and advisory services and training courses and offers
members an enquiry and reference service covering all subjects.
The Office for Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) was set up in
the Department of Education and Science in 1965 to promote research;
develop new techniques and systems; improve existing services and experi¬
ment with new ones; to stimulate training of scientists for information work
and in the use of information sources; and help to co-ordinate information
activities at home and overseas.
An Advisory Committee for Scientific and Technical Information was set
up in October 1965 to advise the Secretary of State for Education and Science
particularly in relation to the work of OSTI and the co-ordination of this work
with other government departments and independent organisations.
The Department of Trade and Industry and the AEA devote considerable
sums to advisory information services. The former has nine regional offices
and sponsors over 70 industrial liaison centres, based on universities or
technical colleges which make contacts with local industries to promote greater
use of existing scientific and technical knowledge. A Production Engineering
Advisory Service equipped with mobile demonstration units brings knowledge
of new techniques directly to the workshop floor. The grant-aided industrial
research associations circulate research reports and provide information
services to members. Besides information services provided by its various
groups, which include the Ceramics Centre and the Non-destructive Testing
Centre at Harwell, the AEA has an information centre at its London head¬
quarters, and a network of regional advisers on the use of radioisotopes.
In agriculture, the Commonwealth Agricultural Institutes and Bureaux (see
p 411) provide abstracts and an information service in various branches of
agricultural science. The ARC publishes an Index of Agricultural Research in
Progress, and gives an account of current developments in its annual reports.
The advisory services of the agricultural departments bring research results
directly to the farmer.
Medical research results are communicated mainly through journals and
periodicals; but the MRC issues special reports and includes special articles
in its annual reports.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is an independent
public corporation financed by government loans through the DTI. Set up
under the Development of Inventions Act 1948 its borrowing power, originally
/c million, has been progressively increased to £50 million..
The NRDC’s functions are to promote the adoption by industry of new
products and processes invented in government laboratories, universities, and
elsewhere, advancing money where necessary to bring them to a commercially
viable stage; and to speed up technological advance by investing money with
industrial firms for the development of their own inventions and projects.
Projects so far sponsored include the Cephalosporin C antibiotic, hovercraft,
computers, advanced types of electric motor, diesel engines, insecticides,
microelectronics and fuel cells.
Inter-governmental organisations involved in scientific co-operation with
which the Government is concerned include: specialised agencies of the United
Nations, for example, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO), the World Health Organisation (WHO), the Food
INTERNATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
National
Research
Development
Corporation
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
Overseas
Development
Administration
Commonwealth
Agricultural
Bureaux
Commonwealth
Scientific
Committee
411
and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); nuclear energy, for example, the Inter¬
national Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the European Nuclear Energy
Agency (ENEA) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop¬
ment (OECD), and the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN);
space research, for example, ESRO; and the International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC). There are agreements between the United Kingdom AEA
and other atomic energy authorities, including that of the Soviet Union; and
there are permanent representatives of the United States Atomic Energy
Commission in London and of the United Kingdom AEA in Washington.
Britain is also represented on the two scientific committees of the OECD.
In areas of non-governmental collaboration, the main representative of the
United Kingdom is the Royal Society.
The promotion by the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office of scientific activities in the interests of
developing countries comprises research covering a wide range of disciplines,
specialist advice from Britain, advisory visits, conferences for exchange of
information, training scientists from overseas in universities and research
institutions in Britain, recruiting scientific staff from Britain, and providing
support for existing research services and research projects overseas, for
example, in East Africa and the Caribbean. Equipment is sometimes provided
for research purposes and to encourage scientific training. There are three
organisations which form part of the ODA wholly engaged on scientific work
to assist developing countries. They are the Tropical Products Institute in
London, which aims at improving the economic viability of the less-developed
tropical countries, especially those within the Commonwealth, by research
into new uses for tropical plant and animal products; the Centre for Overseas
Pest Research which was established in London in 1971 (it includes the former
Anti-Locust Research Centre, internationally recognised as a world centre for
locust research since 1931); and the Land Resources Division which is con¬
cerned with all aspects of land resource appraisal. The ODA provides over
£5 million a year for scientific activities including research for the benefit of
developing countries.
The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, financed by contributions from
all Commonwealth countries, comprise four institutes and ten bureaux, all
of which except one institute are in Britain and each of which is concerned
with a particular branch of agricultural science. They act as clearing houses
for the interchange of information of value to research workers in agricultural
science throughout the Commonwealth and increasingly throughout the world.
Seventeen abstract journals, one primary journal and an index are published
periodically and have a combined annual circulation of about 29,000 copies.
The institutes and bureaux also issue monographs on their own particular
subjects and deal with enquiries received from research workers in all parts of
the Commonwealth. Three of the institutes undertake taxonomic services for
all countries of the Commonwealth and many countries outside it.
The Commonwealth Scientific Committee (CSC) consisting of the heads of
the national research organisations of Commonwealth countries, formed in
1958 from the previous Standing Committee set up in 1946, meets biennially.
Operating under the CSC is a consultative sub-committee, membership of
which consists of officials responsible for scientific matters in the Common¬
wealth Missions in London, and representatives from British government
4I2
The British
Council
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
departments, and the Royal Society. There are various specialist com¬
mittees.
The principal aims of the British Council (see p. 169) in the sciences (including
agriculture, medicine and technology) are to foster co-operation between
British scientists and scientists of other countries, to promote among overseas
specialists a better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific
achievements, and, in the developing countries, to assist in curriculum reform
at school level and in the training of teachers of science and mathematics.
Overseas, 50 staff with science or science teaching qualifications assist in
scientific and educational development and in scientific collaboration. Empha¬
sis is placed on facilitating the interchange of scientists and teachers and on the
prorision of library and information services related to advances in science and
science education in Britain. Overseas tours are arranged for British specialists
to advise, run courses or discuss matters of common interest, and scientists
are recruited or seconded to posts in overseas universities, teacher-training
colleges, education authorities, schools or curriculum reform centres. The
council invites senior overseas specialists to Britain, and makes awards to
postgraduate students; it also administers the programmes of a large number
of senior specialists and students who travel to Britain under the auspices of
the UN specialised agencies, or under various bilateral technical assistance
schemes, or as private individuals. The council is responsible for administering
grants awarded under the Academic Interchange with Europe Scheme, the
European Academic Links Scheme, the Younger Research Workers’ Inter¬
change Scheme and the Commonwealth University Interchange Scheme.
In Britain, advisory and information facilities are provided by speciahst
departments (and libraries) for education, medicine and science including
science education. The council publishes Higher Education in the United
Kingdom. Other publications include British Medical Bulletin, British Medicine,
a monthly guide to current literature, British Medical Periodicals, a select and
annotated list, British Medical Books for Postgraduates, a select and annotated
list; Science Education Newsletter, which lists facilities for education and train¬
ing in Britain, and Scholarships Abroad which lists awards available to British
postgraduate students wishing to study overseas.
19 The Arts
Government
Support
Arts Councils
In the last three decades there has been a steady growth in popular interest,
both active and passive, in the arts in Britain. This development—reflected,
for example, in the profusion of amateur dramatic and musical societies, the
growth in sales of books and gramophone records, and the large attendance
figures at major art exhibitions—is largely the result of increased leisure time
and improved education in the arts. Another major factor has been the growth
in television ownership which has made the best in the arts available to people
in their own homes.
Artistic activities in Britain receive financial and other support from many
sources. Though some of the arts—for example, painting and literature—
continue to flourish with little outside help, others, notably drama and classical
music, have become more and more reliant on it. Valuable assistance comes
from such private sources as voluntary trusts and commercial concerns, but
since 1945 the Government and local authorities have played an increasingly
important part in encouraging the arts.
The Government is concerned with the preservation of the country’s cultural
heritage, the promotion of education in the arts, the dissemination of the arts to
a wider public and the encouragement of high standards in the performing and
creative arts. In Great Britain ministerial responsibility for the arts is borne by
the Paymaster General (see p. 56) who works in close co-operation with the
Department of Education and Science and the Welsh and Scottish Offices, and
in Northern Ireland it lies largely with the Minister responsible for Finance.
Estimated government expenditure on the arts in Great Britain is ^47-5
million in 1973-74 compared with £9-1 million in 1963-64. Direct allocations
include ^23-4 million for the Arts Council of Great Britain and about £9-8
million for museums and galleries. The Government also finances the British
Library (see p. 425); in addition it is responsible through the Department of the
Environment, Scottish and Welsh Offices for the upkeep of ancient monuments
and historic buildings and offers financial help to independent bodies con¬
cerned with preservation, such as the National Trust (see p. 175).
In Britain the main educational functions concerning the arts are carried out
through the education departments. They are concerned, in partnership with
local education authorities and voluntary bodies, with art education in schools,
colleges of further education, evening institutes and community centres, and
with the public library service.
Most government support for the creative arts takes the form of grants to
independent promotional bodies. These include the British Film Institute (see
p. 420) and the Design Council (see p. 264), but the most important is the Arts
Council of Great Britain, established by Royal Charter in 1946, whose main
objects are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and prac¬
tice of the arts, to increase their accessibility to the public, and to advise and
co-operate with government departments, local authorities and other organisa¬
tions. The council promotes music and drama through grants to professional
orchestras and opera, ballet and theatre companies, and arranges art exhibi¬
tions in London and the regions. Tours by major orchestras and opera, ballet
4.14 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and theatre companies are organised by the council. A Umited amount of
assistance is given to individual artists, including painters, sculptors, writers
and composers, for particular projects; and the construction of new theatres,
concert halls and other arts buildings is encouraged by grants provided under
the council’s ‘Housing the Arts’ scheme.
Members of the council are appointed by the minister responsible for the
arts. Advised by panels responsible for different aspects of the arts, the council
itself allocates grants to the main artistic bodies in England, but a growing
proportion of its funds is now channelled to regional arts associations (see p.
415) which determine final allocation. Organisations in Scotland and Wales
receive their grants from the Scottish and Wrelsh Arts Councils; these are com¬
mittees of the Arts Council of Great Britain which allocates to them apart of its
funds.
In Northern Ireland there is an independent Arts Council with similar aims
and functions to that of Great Britain. It receives an annual grant from the
Northern Ireland Exchequer.
British Council The Government promotes knowledge of English literature and culture over¬
seas mainly through the British Council (see footnote, p. 169), which supports
some 177 libraries of books and records in over 70 countries. The British
Council also sponsors overseas tours by leading British actors, producers,
theatre companies, musicians, orchestras and opera and ballet companies; it
promotes exhibitions and lectures overseas on the fine arts in Britain and
organises British participation in international exhibitions; and it distributes
overseas a wide range of specialised films, many of them on the arts.
Broadcasting A major contribution to the arts (particularly music and drama) is made by the
Organisations British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and, to a lesser extent, b\ the
independent television programme companies and the Independent Broad¬
casting Authority (IBA). The BBC spends some £3 million each year in copy¬
right payments to authors and composers and has orchestras employing about
a third of the country’s full-time professional musicians. Each week it broad¬
casts nearly 100 hours of serious music—both live and recorded—on its Radio 3
channel. It regularly commissions new music, particularly by British com¬
posers, and sponsors concerts, competitions and festivals. Both the BBC and
IBA broadcast a wide range of new drama together with adaptations of novels
and stage plays; they also screen a variety of feature films including selections
of the best British and overseas productions.
Independent television companies make grants for the promotion of the arts
in their regions and the IBA transmits general magazine programmes on the
arts.
Local Support Local authorities support the arts in many ways. In addition to their responsi¬
bilities for education (including specialised art education) and the public
library service, many provide and maintain local museums and art galleries. In
Great Britain the authorities have power to incur expenditure on entertain¬
ment in all its forms (including cultural activities). Many authorities make
contributions towards the expenses of professional symphony orchestras and
local theatre companies. Grants are often made towards the capital cost of
new arts buildings, especially theatres; the Greater London Council, for
example, is contributing over ^4 milhon towards the cost of the new National
Theatre (see p. 415).
Private
Contributions
Regional
Arts
Associations
and
Arts Festivals
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
THE ARTS 415
Valuable support for the arts comes from many voluntary sources including
charitable trusts and foundations, and supporters’ organisations of the major
national institutions. Industrial and commercial concerns provide a certain
amount of patronage, frequently taking the form of grants to regional arts
associations, local arts festivals and orchestras; some companies sponsor series
of concerts and other cultural events.
The arts benefit most when the patrons—central and local government,
voluntary bodies, industry, the universities and individuals—combine.
Over the past ten years the government has encouraged regional co-opera¬
tion in arts patronage through the formation of regional arts associations
whose aim it is to ensure that the whole range of the arts is more widely avail¬
able to people throughout their areas. There are 14 such associations in
England and Wales and they channel financial assistance to local arts organisa¬
tions and offer an advisory and promotional service for all sorts of local arts
activities. They are financed by a combination of local authority, Arts Council
and private funds; local authorities and a wide range of other interests are
represented on the associations’ committees.
Similar examples of co-operative patronage are the societies formed to
present some of the many arts festivals in Britain. The outstanding example
is the Edinburgh Festival Society, but other festivals organised on a similar
basis include those held in the City of London, Brighton, King’s Lynn,
Norwich and York.
Britain is one of the world’s major centres of theatrical activity. In London
during the summer season, theatres are packed with foreign visitors, while in
the provinces there is enthusiastic support for the work of local repertory
companies. A recent development in the theatre—particularly in London—
has been the emergence of ‘fringe’ theatre groups presenting short plays in an
informal atmosphere.
A large part of this development of British drama stems from the growing
government support provided through the Arts Councils of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland which grant subsidies to drama companies registered
as charities (that is, are non-profit distributing), provided that such companies
have given evidence of serious aims and of consistently high standards of
practical competence. The Arts Council of Great Britain operates a scheme
to promote new drama: guarantees may be offered to managements giving
the first professional production of selected new plays; and promising authors
may be awarded bursaries. Schemes are also in operation to train stage
designers, producers and those wishing to take up theatre administration.
There are over 270 theatres in professional use in Britain. Some are owned or
rented by non-profit-distributing companies receiving Arts Council subsidies,
while the remainder are operated commercially. In 1972-73 Arts Council
support for the theatre in Great Britain amounted to some £3-2 million.
The centre of theatrical activity is in London where there are some 40
principal theatres in or near the West End and another 15 in the suburbs.
Most of the theatres are let to producing managements on a commercial basis
for each production, but four are occupied by important subsidised companies,
including the National Theatre and Royal Shakespeare companies. The former,
which will move into its new building on the South Bank during 1975, stages
classical and modern plays from all countries; the latter presents Shakespearean
plays in Stratford-upon-Avon and a mixed repertoire in London.
416
Amateur
Theatre
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Outside London there are a number of commercial theatres, which accom¬
modate pre- and post-West End tours by the major London productions and
performances by companies specially formed for touring. These have been
declining in numbers, and several have now been purchased by local authori¬
ties. The other commercial theatres outside London present all kinds of drama
and many also put on variety shows and other entertainments. There has how¬
ever been a growth in the activities of some 60 repertory companies, which
receive financial support from the Arts Council and also from the local
authorities. The repertory companies employ many leading dramatists, pro¬
ducers, designers and actors, and standards are high. Some companies have
the use of their own theatres, while others rent from local authorities. Over a
dozen new repertory theatres have been built since i95^-
All plays produced in Great Britain are subject to the provisions of the
Theatres Act 1968. There is no censorship, but the Act makes it a criminal
offence to present or direct an obscene performance of a play in public or in
private (including theatre clubs), an obscene performance being defined as
one w’hich tends to ‘deprave and corrupt persons who are likely ... to attend
it’. Provision is made in the Act for a defence against a charge of obscenity on
the grounds that the performance is for the public good in the interests of,
for example, drama, opera or literature.
There are thousands of amateur dramatic societies in Britain; they are en¬
couraged by local education authorities, by other public bodies, and by four
special organisations—the British Theatre Association, the National Drama
Conference, the Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association
of Ulster Drama Festivals. Most universities have active amateur drama clubs
and societies; an International Festival of University Theatre is held annually.
Dramatic Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the most
Training important are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the Central School of
Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, and
the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, all of which are in London; and the
Old Vic School in Bristol. In Scotland there is the Royal Scottish Academy of
Music and Drama in Glasgow which is grant-aided by the Scottish Education
Department. An increasing number of universities offer courses in drama.
Theatre for Theatre for young people has increased in importance in the past 15 years.
Young People In 1970, under the aegis of the National Theatre, the l:oung Vic was opened
as a theatre for the young. The National Youth Theatre has a permanent home
in London. There are some 20 specialist companies, including the Unicorn
Theatre for Young People, Theatre Centre and the Polka Company, which are
concerned exclusively with the production of plays for young people; some of
these are supported by the Arts Council. In the provinces about 33 repertory
companies provide programmes and engage in other types of theatre activity
for young people. Nottingham has its own Youth Theatre Workshop and
Birmingham has the Midlands Arts Centre for Young People. In Northern
Ireland a subsidised company called Interplay Theatre works mainly in
schools.
In addition it is estimated that there are some 200 amateur youth theatres
in Britain, most of which are supported by local authorities. Many schools and
youth clubs put on plays and provide some education in drama. The London
education sendee provides special drama centres for young people.
MUSIC, OPERA
AND BALLET
Music
Orchestras
Choral Societies
the arts 4t7
The Arts Council estimates that annual audience attendances for young
people’s theatre performances are about 3 million.
In 1972-73 the Arts Council’s grants totalled £245,000 in support of young
people’s theatre activities. The National Council of Theatre for Young People
represents all those actively concerned.
Music in all its forms plays an important role in British cultural life. ‘Pop’
music has achieved very great popularity particularly with young people and
concerts of folk music also attract large audiences, while jazz, light music and
brass bands maintain substantial followings. However, a widespread interest
in ‘serious’ music is reflected in the size of attendances at orchestral concerts
and at performances of opera, ballet and chamber music.
Through the Arts Council of Great Britain, the Government encourages
interest in the various forms of ‘serious’ music. The Council makes grants to a
number of orchestras, soloists, opera and ballet companies, music societies
and festivals. It also provides bursaries and commissions for British composers,
musicians, designers and choreographers.
In Britain many libraries have collections of records and musical scores
which are available on loan to the public. The City of Westminster houses the
Central Music Library which lends to other libraries and to individuals.
Another well-known music collection is the Henry Watson Music Library at
the Manchester Central Library.
The National Music Council, representative of many aspects of British
musical activity, is affiliated to the International Music Council, which is
associated with UNESCO.
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large
towns and cities of Britain. In London the principal concert halls are the
Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames, adjacent to which are
the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room which accommodate smaller-
scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall, Kensington, where the annual
summer season of Promenade Concerts is given; and the Wigmore Hall, an
important recital centre.
The leading British symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony, the Royal Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the New
Philharmonia, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester),
the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony and the
Scottish National orchestras. The BBC runs a number of orchestras pro¬
viding broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There are also
specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English Chamber
Orchestra, the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, the London Mozart
Players, the Philomusica of London, the Northern Sinfonia of Newcastle
upon Tyne and the Scottish Baroque Ensemble. Most orchestras (other than
those of the BBC) receive financial aid from the Arts Council of Great Britain
and local authorities and some also receive assistance from commercial tele¬
vision and other business organisations. In Northern Ireland the Ulster
Orchestra receives financial aid from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
Among the principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral Society,
the Bach Choir, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Choir, the New Philhar¬
monia Chorus, the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union and the Belfast Philhar¬
monic Society. Certain of these are closely associated with famous orchestras
4-i 8
Music Festivals
Amateur Interest
Opera and
Ballet
Opera Groups
Ballet Companies
Education in
Music, Opera
and Ballet
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
while others combine with them in major choral works; most choral societies
are affiliated to the National Federation of Music Societies.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held
annually in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in
existence for over 250 years. The famous Edinburgh International Festival
lasts three weeks; other festivals, such as that at King’s Lynn, last a week or
less. Among the better known are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales;
the National Gaelic Mod, held at a different place in Scotland each year; the
Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; and the
Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. An annual international festival of folk song
and dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is encouraged by the work of County
Music Committees (some of which are voluntary and some sub-committees
of local education authorities), which are aided by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music.
The National Federation of Music Societies, which receives an annual grant
from the Arts Council, assists amateur groups with the cost of engaging pro¬
fessional soloists; over 1,000 music societies are members of the federation.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London, which receives financial assistance from the Arts
Council. The Royal Opera House has its own company—The Royal Opera—
and a ballet company—The Royal Ballet. The opera company numbers about
200 (including guest artists) and has a permanent orchestra. The Royal Ballet
has a high international reputation and makes overseas tours. It also has a
regular London season and performs in the provinces.
Seasons of opera and operetta in English are given by the Sadler’s Wells
Company which plays in modernised premises at the London Coliseum,
besides making provincial tours. Its former home, the Sadler’s Wells Theatre,
provides a London stage for visiting opera and dance companies from the
provinces and from abroad.
At Glyndebourne, in Sussex, an opera season, for which an international cast
is specially assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies include
the English Opera Group, noted for its performances of chamber operas by
Benjamin Britten and other composers, the New Opera Company which has
been associated with Sadler’s Wells Opera and performs at Sadler’s Wells
Theatre, Scottish Opera and the Welsh National Opera Company. Opera in
Northern Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust and the
Studio Opera Group with financial support from the Arts Council of Northern
Ireland.
Britain’s other ballet companies include London’s Festival Ballet, the Ballet
Rambert (Britain’s oldest ballet company) and the Scottish Theatre Ballet
which specialises in contemporary works. The London Contemporary Dance
Theatre provides regular seasons of modern dance at the Place in London
besides touring extensively. The work of the Patricia Mulholland Irish Ballet
Company in Northern Ireland, which is sponsored by the Arts Council of
Northern Ireland, combines traditional music, dancing and mime.
Professional training in music is given at colleges of music, of which the Royal
Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music in London, and the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow are grant-aided. Other
FILMS
Feature Films
National Film
Finance
Corporation
The Levy
Quota System
Cinema Licensing
and Film
Censorship
THE ARTS 4i9
leading colleges include the Trinity College of Music and the Guildhall School
of Music and Drama, both in London, the Northern College of Music in
Manchester and the Birmingham School of Music. The London Opera Centre
provides advanced training courses for student singers and stage managers.
The leading ballet schools are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert School of
Ballet and the London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many
private schools, have played an important part in raising British ballet to its
present high standard.
Young people are encouraged to take an interest in music, opera and ballet.
There are frequent concerts for children and the National Youth Orchestra of
Great Britain, the National Youth Orchestra of Wales and the London
Schools’ Symphony Orchestra are noted for their high standard of perfor¬
mance. A Youth and Music organisation, affiliated to the international
Jeunesses Musicales, encourages opera, ballet and other performances for
young people. The Royal Ballet sponsors a small group, Ballet for All, to give
lecture-demonstrations to the public and to schools.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and
over 208,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the exami¬
nations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music.
There are some 1,540 cinemas in Great Britain and estimated attendance in
1972 amounted to 163*2 million. British films, actors and creative and tech¬
nical talent are appreciated both at home and abroad, and regularly achieve
success at international film festivals and other events.
The feature film industry is based in the London area where all the main film
studios are centred. Cinema and television films are exported to most countries
in the world. The trade association to which the majority of feature film pro¬
ducers belong is the Film Production Association of Great Britain.
Although much of British main feature production is still financed by United
States interests the proportion is declining; there is, however, also substantial
investment by British companies.
There is no state-owned film production unit in Britain, but the National
Film Finance Corporation lends money for feature film production through
a consortium formed by the corporation and private interests in 1972. The
consortium will operate with a capital of ^1 million advanced by the Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry, and £750,000 provided by private interests. The
consortium is expected to achieve eventual independence from government
support.
There is a levy on cinema admissions which provides a fund to benefit the
makers of eligible British films. The money so raised is distributed by a
public body—the British Film Fund Agency—in proportion to a film’s takings,
so that the more successful a film is at the box-office, the more it receives from
the fund.
Under legislation dating from 1927 a specified proportion of British films must
be shown in British cinemas each year. For main feature films the quota has
remained at 30 per cent since 1950 and for supporting programmes at 25 per
cent since 1948.
The state takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but before it can
be shown a film must be licensed by a local authority or, in some areas, a
magistrate. In considering the suitability of films the authorities normally rely
420
Documentary
Films
British Film
Institute
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on the judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to
which most films for public showing are submitted (other than newsreels).
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative of
the cinema industry, to ensure that a proper standard was maintained in the
films offered to the public. The Board, which does not use any written code of
censorship, may require cuts to be made before granting a certificate to a
film; very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the Board are placed
into one of four categories: ‘U’ (suitable to be seen by any person not less than
five years of age); ‘A’ (for persons of not less than five years of age but con¬
taining material that some parents might prefer their children not to see); ‘AA’
(for persons of not less than 14 years of age); and ‘X’ (for persons of not less
than 18 years of age).
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain goes back to
1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive
and imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial
organisations. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then,
British documentary technicians have continued to produce high quality
factual films which have won numerous international awards. The British
Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use of films in
industry, science and commerce. The Federation of Specialised Film Associa¬
tions is the trade association of documentary, short, industrial, advertising
and cartoon film makers.
The National Panel for Film Festivals assists in the selection of short films
for British entries to international short film festivals.
The Government sponsors a wide range of films to inform audiences over¬
seas about British life and achievements, including documentary films, tele¬
vision programmes and newsreels; they are produced through the Central
Office of Information (COI), which commissions their production by private
companies.
A large number of films are sponsored by industrial concerns and other
organisations, such as the British Tourist Authority and the British Pro¬
ductivity Council. The best of these and industrial films from other countries
are available through the COI’s Central Film Library and other agencies.
The Films of Scotland Committee promotes the production of Scottish films
covering the industries and cultural traditions of Scotland.
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer grant
and by the Scottish Film Council which also receives a government grant.
The Institute encourages the making and showing of good films. It also
administers the National Film Theatre in London and the National Film
Archive, runs an annual summer school, and maintains a film library from
which films may be hired, a library of books on the film and an information
service. It makes grants to the Federation of Film Societies, the British
Universities Film Council and the Society for Education in Film and Tele¬
vision.
The National Film Archive contains about 22,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, besides scripts, art designs, posters and about
700,000 photographic stills, selected to illustrate the history and the art of the
film and as significant social and historical records.
The National Film Theatre, on the south bank of the Thames in London,
has two cinemas showing films of outstanding historical, artistic or technical
THE ARTS
421
Training in Film
Production
Children and
the Cinema
VISUAL ARTS
The Art Market
interest; it holds a unique position as a cinema offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the
films shown. Each year it organises a London Film Festival. The British Film
Institute has promoted the development of over 40 regional film theatres on
the lines of the National Film Theatre and may make grants towards their
recurrent and capital costs. Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland.
An independent national film school offering three-year courses for writers,
directors, producers and cameramen began operating in 1971. The school,
which is financed by government grant, had 23 students in its first year and 49
in its second. Training in film production is also given at the London Film
School which has 249 students and provides two-year courses.
The Cinematograph Act 1952 provided for the making of regulations by the
Home Secretary to protect the health and welfare of children attending film
shows. Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from the
licensing authority, which may impose conditions. There are about 800
children’s cinema clubs which provide special programmes on Saturday
mornings. An important contribution to these programmes is made by the
Children’s Film Foundation, which, with the aid of grants from the British
Film Fund Agency, produces and distributes entertainment films specially
designed for children.
A number of modern British painters and sculptors have a high international
reputation, winning many international prizes and commissions for major
works in foreign cities. The growth of interest in the visual arts at home has
been stimulated by an increasingly lively attitude towards display on the part
of museums and galleries, and by the activities of many institutions, societies,
private galleries and the growing number of local art centres.
State support for painting and sculpture mainly takes the form of mainten¬
ance and purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase
grants for municipal museums and galleries, and grants towards the cost of
local education authority art education. The Government is advised on grants
and policy towards museums by the Standing Commission on Museums and
Galleries.
The Government also encourages high standards of industrial design and
craftsmanship through grants to the Design Council and craft organisations.
In addition to direct state assistance, the Arts Council runs the Hayward
Gallery in London, where major loan exhibitions are shown, maintains its own
collection of contemporary British art, and organises or offers grants or guaran¬
tees towards a variety of touring and other exhibitions. There are also Arts
Council galleries in Edinburgh and Cardiff. It also supports art societies and
independent galleries, and provides commissions and awards for artists.
London is a major centre for the international art market: exports and imports
of works of art for the year ended June 1972 were estimated at ^62-5 million
and £62*6 million respectively. Certain items are covered by export control:
these are works of art and other antiques over 100 years old and worth more
than £4,000; documentary and photographic material over 70 years old; and
British archaeological material. A licence is required before such items can be
exported but this is granted automatically in the case of objects imported into
Britain within the last 50 years. In other cases the application for a licence is
422 BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
considered by the Department of Trade and Industry, and if the department’s
expert advisers recommend the withholding of a licence, the matter is re¬
ferred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art; if the
committee regards a work to be of national importance it can advise the
government to withhold the export licence for a specified time to enable a
public museum or art gallery to purchase the object at a fair price.
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
Other Collections
Co-operation
Over 950 museums and art galleries are open to the public in Britain. These
include the major national collections together with a wide variety of munici¬
pally and independently owned institutions.
Of the national museums and art galleries, those in London probably contain
between them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic, archaeo¬
logical, scientific, historical and general interest ever to exist within one
city. They are the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the
National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial
War Museum, the National Army Museum, the National Maritime Museum,
the London Museum (to be amalgamated with the Guildhall Museum into the
Museum of London), the Wallace Collection, the British Museum (Natural
History), the Geological Museum and the Science Museum (see p. 409).
There are three national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum
(including the Scottish United Services Museum), and the National Galleries
of Scotland (comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the National
Portrait Gallery of Scotland, and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern
Art). The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at St. Fagan’s
Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed; and in Northern Ireland
there is the national Ulster Museum in Belfast.
Most of the national museums and galleries are administered by trustee
bodies, but the Victoria and Albert and Science Museums are the direct
responsibility of the Department of Education and Science, and the Royal
Scottish Museum has a similar relationship with the Scottish Education
Department.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries (Tower of
London), the Public Record Office (see p. 425) and the Sir John Soane’s
Museum. In Buckingham Palace there is a small gallery for exhibition of
pictures from the extensive royal collections. Most cities and large towns and
many other towns have a museum devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes by a local
learned society or privately by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and
Cambridge are rich in museums, many of them, as in other towns, associated
with the universities—for example, the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford,
founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and the Fitzwilliam Museum in
Cambridge. There are important museums and art galleries in Birmingham,
Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Read¬
ing, Southampton and York. In Northern Ireland there are notable museums
and galleries in or near Belfast (the Ulster Folk Museum and the Northern
Ireland Arts Council Gallery), in Armagh City and in Londonderry. Many
private art collections housed in historic family mansions, including those in
the ownership of the National Trust (see p. 175), are open to the public.
A function of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries is to
advise the Government on the relationship between national and provincial
THE NATIONAL
MUSEUM FOR
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Recently extended
and modernised
Displays include:
power technology
{above left); art
galleries {above
right)', natural
sciences {right).
i
PARTICIPATION
IN THE ARTS
Housewives attend¬
ing art class.
Below right:
Saturday morning
creative session for
children at the
London Theatre
Centre.
Above:
Theatre centre
in a village school.
Right:
The Bubble
Theatre Company
tours London
with professional
players using a
portable structure
which is erected on
flat grassland. The
company also runs
workshop sessions
for schools.
The Dogg’s Troupe
travel all over
Britain taking
theatre into the
streets and en¬
couraging passers-
by to participate.
The Solihull
Youth Orchestra
rehearsing for
performances in
the Netherlands.
MODERN
BRITISH
CRAFTS
Some items from
which Britain's
entry to the 1974
World Crafts
Exhibition at
Toronto, Canada,
will be selected:
Right: Brooch by
Gunilla Treen.
Titanium and
acrylic with mobile
ivory birds.
Far right: Set oi
four rings by Wendy
Ramshaw. Gold and
silver with enamel
perspex stand.
Above:
Brooch or pendant
and chain by
Jacqueline Mina.
Green, red and
white gold with
diamonds; knitted
chain. Ring in green
gold with malachite
beads.
Above right:
Reduced stoneware
dish by Ray Finch.
Right:
Tapestry wall
hanging by Archie
Brennan.
Left:
Glazed stoneware
pot by Bernard
Leach.
I
THE ARTS
423
Exhibitions
Finance
Art Education
institutions. Close relations are fostered by the eight area museum councils
which cover the whole of Great Britain. They are grant-aided by the Govern¬
ment and help to improve technical facilities.
The Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries and their
staffs throughout the country belong and which also has many overseas
members, is an independent organisation. The association serves as a central
body for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating
to museum administration, and as a training and examining body for profes¬
sional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions organised and sent on tour by the Arts Councils, the
Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science
Museum and the Art Exhibitions Bureau are a regular feature of many
museums. The Hayward Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the British Museum, the
Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Academy are the main centres for
loan exhibitions; these are also held at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, the
Camden Arts Centre and the Institute of Contemporary Arts. The Greater
London Council exhibits modern sculpture in its parks periodically. Com¬
mercial exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists are held through¬
out the year in the galleries of the art dealers of London (largely in the Bond
Street area).
There are a number of national art exhibiting societies, some of which,
notably the Royal Academy at Burlington House, have their own galleries in
London. The Royal Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh.
An increasing number of amateur art societies throughout Britain hold local
exhibitions and encourage local interest in the fine arts. There are also
exhibitions of children’s art, including the National Exhibition of Children’s
Art sponsored annually by the Sunday Mirror.
All national collections are financed chiefly from government funds. Besides
meeting the administrative and maintenance costs, the government makes
provision for annual purchase grants which totalled £2 million in 1973-74.
It also provides special ad hoc purchase grants, and pre-eminent works of art
accepted by the Government in lieu of estate duty are allocated to public
collections.
Legislation has been passed to allow admission charges to museums and
galleries. The revenue obtained will be taken into account when the govern¬
ment allocates its annual grant to museums and galleries.
Local museums and art galleries, which are maintained from rates or endow¬
ments, can be helped in building up their collections through the annual
government grant administered by the Victoria and Albert, Science and Royal
Scottish Museums. Financial help and practical assistance is also given to
museums and galleries by certain trusts and voluntary bodies, particu¬
larly the National Art-Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society.
Art and design education is provided in maintained colleges of art, colleges of
further education and polytechnics, which are administered by local education
authorities. Other institutions offering art and design courses include univer¬
sities, the Royal Academy Schools and some private art schools. At post¬
graduate level there is the Royal College of Art which awards its own degrees.
Art is also taught at an advanced level at the four Scottish Central (Art)
Institutions administered by the Scottish Education Department. University
art schools include the Slade School of Fine Art and Goldsmiths’ College
(London), the Ruskin Drawing School (Oxford), the Reading School of Art,
424 BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Department of Fine Art of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and
the School of Art of University College, Aberystwyth.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history
of art are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Depart¬
ment of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and
the Warburg Institute, also a part of London University.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland three-year full-time courses lead¬
ing to a Diploma in Art and Design are available to students who have success¬
fully completed a foundation course. The Diploma is broadly comparable to a
university pass degree, and is administered by the National Council for
Diplomas in Art and Design (an independent body set up by the Government
in 1961). The council also administers a scheme of post-diploma studies in a
small number of colleges. In Scotland each of the four schools of art awards
a diploma which is roughly equivalent to the pass degree of a university and
three award associateships, which are comparable with an honours degree. The
Ulster College (see p. 168) is the regional college for Northern Ireland.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society
for Education through Art, among other activities, encourages the purchase
by schools of original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools
exhibition. Pictures may also be borrowed from an increasing number of public
libraries (see p. 425).
Architecture Official responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned with
encouraging the best in new building and preserving the best that has been
inherited from the past (for preservation, see p. 179).
Several government departments are concerned with architecture and help
to promote good design. The Department of the Environment is responsible
for the design, building and maintenance work of government departments
and has a research directorate which co-ordinates building research groups
throughout the government service. It also provides advice to local authorities
in England and Wales on the best standards of housing design through a series
of Design Bulletins, and offers annual awards for the best housing designs in
both public and private sectors. Other government departments, such as the
Department of Education and Science and the Department of Health and
Social Security, provide design advice and exercise design control over
buildings—such as schools and hospitals—falling within their field of responsi¬
bility.
Government departments are assisted in an advisory capacity by the Royal
Fine Art Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland, which also
advise planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of public
amenity or artistic importance, including new building developments.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions
exist to further the interests of architecture, and the Civic Trust (see p. 175)
seeks to promote high standards in architecture and civic planning and to
encourage interest in the appearance and protection of town and countryside.
Education and In Britain it is illegal for a person to practise under the title of ‘architect’
Professional unless registered with the Architects’ Registration Council of the United
Associations Kingdom. Most students train at a full-time school of architecture; there are
33 schools recognised for exemption from the examination in architecture of
the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA). Several of these schools
have part-time courses and there are five other schools which have courses
leading to the RIBA external examination.
THE ARTS
425
LITERATURE
AND LIBRARIES
Libraries
The Royal Institute of British Architects is the leading professional archi¬
tectural institution with a membership of over 20,000 in Britain and 5,000
overseas and over 5,000 students in Britain and overseas countries. The RIBA
has 78 branches in Britain, and allied to it are 24 architectural societies in
overseas countries. It is concerned with a wide range of activities covering pro¬
fessional practice, science, technology, statistics, architectural competitions,
and professional and public relations; arranges lectures and discussions on a
variety of subjects; presents exhibitions; and, through its Board of Education,
exercises control over standards of architectural education. The RIBA has one
of the largest and most important architectural libraries in the world. Among
other associations are the Incorporated Association of Architects and Sur¬
veyors, the Institute of Registered Architects and the Faculty of Architects
and Surveyors. Societies include the Architectural Association, the Archi¬
tecture Club, and several which cover particular aspects of architecture, such
as the Modular Society.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, colleges
and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country, private
libraries and a large number of private literary societies. Book reviews are
featured in the press and on radio and there are numerous periodicals con¬
cerned with literature. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is given in
the form of literary prizes, a number of which are awarded annually, for
instance, the Queen’s Gold Medal for Poetry, the Hawthornden prize for
imaginative writing, and the Somerset Maugham award for young writers.
Government help is given through the Arts Council of Great Britain which
supports literature in a number of ways, including grants for writers, transla¬
tors and publishers. Similar provision is made through the Arts Council of
Northern Ireland for bursaries, poetry readings, and aid for publications.
The British Library, established under the British Library Act 1972, has been
formed from, and has taken over the stock and services of, the British Museum
Library (with an estimated 8 million volumes), the National Reference Library
of Science and Invention (associated with the British Museum Library),
the National Central Library, the National Lending Library for Science
and Technology, and the British National Bibliography. The lending division
is at Boston Spa, Yorkshire, and the reference and bibliographical services
are in London, where a new building is being designed for them.
The right to receive books under legal deposit has been transferred to the
British Library from the British Museum Library under the Act. In addition
to the British Library, the National Library of Scotland (3 million volumes),
the National Library of Wales (2 million volumes), the Bodleian Library of
Oxford University (about 3 million volumes) and the Cambridge University
Library (2*75 million volumes) are also entitled to receive a copy of each new
book published in Britain; the British Library must receive one and the other
libraries may claim one.
The Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum (Natural History)
in South Kensington also have large libraries and many government depart¬
ments have old-established libraries of considerable size and importance. The
Public Record Office contains the records of the superior courts of law and of
most government departments, as well as such famous historical documents
as Domesday Book. The National Register of Archives (maintained by the
Historical Manuscripts Commission) contains particulars of local and private
records.
426
Libraries in
Education
Public Libraries
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Besides the few great private collections, such as those of the Signet Library,
Edinburgh, and the London Library, there are the rich resources of the
learned societies and institutions (for scientific societies and institutions, see
p. 398). Examples are the libraries of the Royal Institute of International
Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the Royal Geographical Society,
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the British Theatre Association (see p. 416),
the Royal Academy of Music, the National Library for the Blind and the
National Book League.
Educational expansion has increased the strain on library resources at all levels
of education. The ancient university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are
not matched by any of the more recent foundations, although the combined
library resources of the colleges and institutions of the university of London
total about 5 million volumes, the John Rylands University Library in Man¬
chester contains more than 2 million volumes, and the university libraries of
Edinburgh, Glasgow and Birmingham each have over three-quarters of a
million volumes. Many universities have succeeded in building up large and
important research collections in special subjects; for example, the Barnes
Medical Library at Birmingham and the Brotherton Library of English Litera¬
ture at Leeds. The new universities, including the new technological uni¬
versities, are also building collections and substantial collections are being
assembled in the libraries of polytechnics and colleges of education.
The importance of good libraries is recognised at all levels of the education
system. School libraries, most of which are maintained by local education
authorities, often receive important support services from the public library
service, including loans of books. Schoolchildren are regularly introduced to
the public library system, which they can use in addition to the school library.
Britain is served by a complete network of public libraries, administered by
local public library authorities. These libraries have a total stock of some 114-5
million books. (The figures do not include the libraries in the publicly main¬
tained schools.) Qualified and specialist staff are available for consultation in
all but the smallest service points. About one-third of the total population are
members of public libraries.
Under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 the Secretary of State
for Education and Science is charged with the supervision of the public library
service in England and in Wales, and is advised by two library advisory coun¬
cils. Under the Act, public library authorities are designated and have a
duty to provide an efficient and (with some limitations) free lending and refer¬
ence library service for books and periodicals. The Local Government Act
1972 (see p. 67) reduces the number of public library authorities in England
and Wales (outside Greater London) from 351 to 83 larger units. Outlying
areas may be served by mobile libraries, of which over 590 are in service, and
domiciliary services exist for people who are unable to visit a library.
In addition to lending books, about a half of the library authorities now lend
gramophone records of various kinds and a growing number are adding loan
collections of works of art, either originals or reproductions. Nearly all library
authorities provide children’s departments, while reference sections and art,
music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. Most library authorities possess a significant
collection of books and documents on the history of their localities.
The public library is often a centre for local cultural activities. Film shows,
lectures, adult education classes, book-week exhibitions, drama groups, gramo-
THE ARTS
427
Library
Co-operation
Library
Associations
Books
phone recitals and children’s story hours are among the many activities pro¬
vided by or based upon the local library.
A voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales has grown
up since the first quarter of this century. The eight regional library bureaux
in England and Wales (consisting mainly of public libraries in each area) aim
to be largely self-sufficient in the interlending of current British books,
achieved in some regions by a system of co-operative subject specialisation.
They organise co-operation among themselves and through the British Library,
which is responsible for interlending at national and international level and
has an extensive collection of books and periodicals, including United States,
German and French academic books in the humanities and social sciences. The
combined resources of libraries available to the British Library for lending,
which include university, industrial and other non-public libraries, amount to
many million books and many thousand sets of periodicals.
There is a growing number of local schemes for the exchange of specialist
books and periodicals and information. These involve industrial, commercial
and sometimes university libraries and are normally centred on a major public
or technical college library.
The Scottish Central Library carries out functions similar to those of the
regional bureaux and the lending division of the British Library and is financed
mainly by Exchequer grants. In Northern Ireland access to the stocks of all
co-operating libraries is available on application to the Belfast public libraries,
Queen’s University Library and the county libraries.
The principal professional organisation is the Library Association, which,
among other functions, holds examinations in librarianship and issues certifi¬
cates of efficiency. The Association in September 1973 had a membership of
20,645 of whom more than 1,988 were from overseas countries. It maintains a
Register of Chartered Librarians, publishes books, pamphlets and official
journals, and holds regular conferences. There are also associations of libraries
of which the Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux (see
p. 409) and the Standing Conference of National and University Libraries are
of major importance.
In 1972 British publishers issued 33,140 separate titles including 8,486 reprints
and new editions. The total of new titles issued was 24,654; among these were
1,224 translations and 163 limited editions. These figures include a small
selection of government publications by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office,
which is the largest publishing organisation in Britain. An increasing propor¬
tion of books—including a wide range of specialised non-fiction—is now sold
in paper-back form; Penguin Books are the best known publishers of paper¬
backs.
Using copies deposited under copyright law, the British National Biblio¬
graphy is published weekly, with three, six, nine and twelve monthly cumula¬
tions, listing in a classified order, with indexes, all new books and new editions,
excluding reprints, of books published in Britain.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with
book production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association and the
Booksellers’ Association. The British Council also publicises British books and
periodicals through libraries in over 70 countries, its programmes of book
exhibitions and its bibliographical publications. The Book Development
Council promotes British books overseas. (For sales and exports of books in
1972, see p. 312.) The National Book League has a membership covering all
428
Literary and
Philological
Societies
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
who are interested in books; authors, publishers, booksellers, librarians and
readers. It encourages an interest in books and arranges exhibitions in Britain
and overseas.
Societies for the promotion of literature include the English Association and
the Royal Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of
Historical, Philosophical and Philological Studies, generally known as the
British Academy, is the leading society of humanistic studies and receives a
grant from the Treasury.
A number of societies sponsor poetry readings and recitals; the Poetry
Society and the Apollo Society are among the best known. Poetry also plays
an important part in various annual festivals, including the National Eisteddfod
—the bardic festival held in Wales—the Stratford-upon-Avon Festival of
Poetry, the Cheltenham Festival of Literature, and the annual poetry festival
organised by the Poetry Book Society in London.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors of which the largest is the Dickens
Fellowship. There are a number of clubs and societies, such as the Book
Society and the Poetry Book Society, which exist to distribute selected new
books to their members.
20 The Press
Ownership
The British press caters for a variety of political views, different levels of
education and a wide range of interests. It is not subject to State control or
censorship.
A large number of newspapers are sold in Britain every day, and although
there are relatively few national newspapers, some of them have circulations
comparable with the greatest in any other part of the world: average daily
sales amount to about i-8 million copies per newspaper; individual audited
circulation figures range from about 200,000 to nearly 4-3 million.
The national newspapers (daily and Sunday) fall into two categories: popu¬
lar and quality. The tabloid format is more commonly used by the former and
the broadsheet format by the latter. Prices range from ^0-03 to £0-06 for
dailies and from ^0-05 to ^0-09 for Sundays. Separate sections or pages on
finance, business, industry, education, the arts, social services and sport are
common, and some papers carry special supplements on particular subjects,
with related advertising. The quality Sunday newspapers have separate
sections for literature and the arts, business and industry, as well as colour
magazine supplements. Free colour magazine supplements are published by
one morning and two Sunday newspapers: the Daily Telegraph, the Sunday
Times and The Observer.
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 131 daily and Sunday news¬
papers and some 1,135 weekly newspapers are published in Britain. These
figures include certain specialised papers, the circulation of which is limited
not by region, but by interest; for instance, business newspapers, sporting
newspapers, newspapers in foreign languages for groups of nationals of other
lands resident in Britain and religious newspapers.
Britain imports three-quarters of its newsprint requirements, over 1 • 1 million
tonnes annually, while the rest is made from imported raw materials.
Newspaper ownership in Britain, as it affects the national daily and Sunday,
London evening and regional daily newspapers, is concentrated mainly in the
hands of a comparatively small number of large press groups. Although most
enterprises are organised as limited liability companies, individual and partner
proprietorship survives. The seven major newspaper and periodical publishers
are: International Publishing Corporation Limited (part of Reed Interna¬
tional); Associated Newspapers Limited; Beaverbrook Newspapers Limited;
the Thomson Organisation Limited; News International Limited; United
Newspapers Limited; and Pearson Longman Limited.
The large national newspaper and periodical publishers are major corpora¬
tions with diversified interests over the whole field of publishing and com¬
munications; some have shares in independent television and radio contracting
companies. The Sound Broadcasting Act 1972 establishes the right of local
newspapers to hold shares in companies providing local independent radio
services (see p. 442).
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly; figures are based on the 1973
edition of The Newspaper Press Directory.
430
The ‘National*
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Although pronounced views may be expressed in newspapers and their
political leanings may be obvious, they are financially independent of any
political party and are not obliged to follow any specific party line.1 In order to
preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are
governed by arrangements which vest ownership of the undertaking in trustees,
or operate it in accordance with a deed of trust, or provide that the transfer
of shares be controlled by trustees. Others have management arrangements
intended to ensure the authority and independence of editors.
Safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentration of the means
of communication are provided in certain Acts of Parliament, for instance, in
the Television Act 1964 which stipulates that, if it appears to the Independent
Broadcasting Authority at any time that newspaper shareholdings in television
programme companies have led or are leading to results which are contrary to
the public interest, the Authority may, with the consent of the Minister of
Posts and Telecommunications, notify the companies that their programmes
may cease to be transmitted. The Sound Broadcasting Act 1972 makes a
similar stipulation for local independent radio and provides that if a local
newspaper has a monopoly in the area, it should not be allowed to have a
controlling interest in the local radio station. In addition the Monopolies and
Mergers Act 1965 empowers the Department of Trade and Industry to control
the transfer of a newspaper or newspaper assets to a newspaper proprietor
whose newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with that of the
newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies—the department, in
some cases, referring the matter to the Monopolies Commission for enquiry
and report.
Nine morning papers are ‘national’ in the sense of circulating throughout the
British Isles, and there are seven national Sunday papers (see Table 35). All
the national dailies are produced in London, but those with big circulations
also print northern editions in Manchester, and the Daily Express has a
Scottish edition printed in Glasgow. The leading Scottish papers {The
Scotsman and The Glasgow Herald) have a considerable circulation outside
Scotland. Each of the (two) London evening papers has ownership affiliations
with a national daily, but both have their distinctive style and draw their
readership very largely from people living in and around London.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, 86 morning or evening
dailies and Sundays and about 720 newspapers appearing once or twice a week)
provide mainly regional and local news. Some of the daily newspapers also
give extensive coverage to national affairs, and a number co-operate to provide
their own foreign news service. The leading regional newspapers have wide
regional circulations; a few have nation-wide reputations.
Generally speaking, regional evening newspapers are non-political, while
the morning newspapers are independent or conservative in outlook.
The total circulation of the regional morning and evening papers is estimated
at over 8 million. Of the morning papers the Liverpool Daily Post, the York¬
shire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo (Darlington) have circulations of over
100,000 and two provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon
Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury (Birmingham)—have circulations of over
200,000. Individual circulation figures of regional evening papers start at
1 The one exception is the Morning Star which is owned by a co-operative society and
expresses the views of the Communist Party of Great Britain.
TABLE 35
‘National’
Newspapers and
London Evenings
the PRESS
431
Title
Controlled by
Circulation1
average
Jan.-June
1973
Dailies
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
The Daily Telegraph
(1855)
Financial Times (1888)
The Guardian (1821)
Morning Star (1966)*
The Sun (1969)
The Times (1785)
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Pearson Longman Ltd.
Guardian Newspapers Ltd.
People’s Press Printing
Society Ltd.
News International Ltd.
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
3,296,988
1,703,215
4,261,683
1,423,031
194,651
344,356
49,241
2,931,466
345,044
London Evenings
Evening News (1881)
Monday-Friday
Saturday
Evening Standard (1827)
Monday-Friday
Saturday
Associated Newspapers Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
861,453
680,407
519,604
372,625
Sundays
News of the World
(1843)
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday People
(1881)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
The Sunday Telegraph
(1961)
The Sunday Times
(1822)
News International Ltd.
The Observer Trust.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
5,950,645
795,076
4,428,598
4,086,482
4,496,082
755,326
1,504,515
1 Unless asterisked, circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations
(founded in 1931 and consisting of publishers, advertisers and advertising bureaux)
and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period.
432
London Suburban
Papers
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Wales
Channel
Islands and
Isle of Man
The
Periodical
Press
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
about 16,000; most are in the 25,000-60,000 range; a few have circulations of
between 100,000 and 380,000. Weekly papers are mainly of local appeal; they
are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have circulations in the
10,000-60,000 range.
There are also a number of free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly),
some of which are published by orthodox newspaper publishers.
The London local weeklies (148) include papers for every district in Greater
London. They are assembled mainly in groups of six to eight, affiliated in some
cases to larger groups.
A number of new evening newspapers, using the latest production tech¬
nology, have recently been started in the outer metropolitan area on the fringe
of the circulation areas of the two London evening newspapers.
Scotland has five morning, seven evening and two Sunday newspapers, in
addition to the Scottish editions of the Daily Express and Sunday Express. The
leading morning papers are The Scotsman, published in Edinburgh, and The
Glasgow Herald. Others are: the Daily Record, published in Glasgow; the
Courier and Advertiser, published in Dundee; and the Press and Journal of
Aberdeen. Evening papers include the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s
Evening Times and Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post,
Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock
Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail and the Sunday Post both
of which are published in Glasgow.
Weekly and local newspapers published in Scotland number about 138. The
most widely known are the People's Journal, which has several local editions,
and the Weekly News.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening paper and one
Sunday paper, all published in Belfast: they are The News-Letter (Unionist)
and the Irish News (Nationalist), the evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday
News. There are 42 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, with circulations
ranging from about 3,500 to about 24,000. The majority are published by
individual companies.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in
Cardiff; it circulates mainly in southern Wales. In North Wales the Liverpool
Daily Post gives wide coverage to events in the area. Evening papers pub¬
lished in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff, the South Wales Argus,
Newport, and the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea. North Wales is served
by the Liverpool Echo and to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (over 60 papers) includes English language papers, some
of which carry articles in Welsh; eight papers in Welsh; and one bi-lingual
newspaper.
The Channel Islands have two daily (evening) papers (one in Guernsey and
one in Jersey) and two weeklies, which also circulate in Alderney and Sark.
In the Isle of Man there are five weekly newspapers of which the Isle of
Man Examiner has the largest circulation.
There are over 4,300 periodical publications in Britain, classified as ‘general’,
‘specialised’, ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There are also some 750
‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or
public services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients.
THE PRESS
433
News Agencies
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodicals for all
denominations; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening,
hobbies and humour; journals specialising in various subjects such as politics,
finance and economics, science, agriculture, medicine and the arts; and the
publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and
other associations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales in Britain are: Woman;
Woman’s Weekly; Woman’s Own; Weekend; and Woman’s Realm; together
with the Radio Times and TV Times. The leading journals of opinion are
The Economist, a politically independent publication covering topics from a
wider angle than its title implies; the New Statesman, which is a review of
politics, literature and the arts with an independent socialist political tendency;
the Spectator, which covers much the same subjects from an independent
conservative standpoint; Tribune, which has a strongly left-wing but non¬
communist alignment; New Society, which covers the sociological aspects of
current affairs; and New Scientist, which reports on the progress of science
and technology in terms which the non-specialist can understand. Punch,
traditionally the leading humorous periodical, also devotes increasing attention
to public affairs.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, appeal generally
speaking to the more serious type of reader.
The publication of trade, technical, business, scientific and professional
journals (covering hundreds of subjects, many of them in considerable depth)
has become one of the more important aspects of the British publishing
industry. In addition to circulating in Britain, these journals have a con¬
siderable circulation outside Britain and are an important medium for selling
British goods overseas. Their publication ranges in frequency from weekly to
quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout the United Kingdom.
Weekly papers are also published in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland:
in Wales several monthly and quarterly journals in both Welsh and English;
in Scotland four monthly illustrated periodicals (Scottish Field, Scotland’s
Magazine, Scots Magazine and Scotland), a weekly paper devoted to farming
interests (Scottish Farmer), a number of literary journals, of which the most
famous is probably Blackwood’s, and numerous popular magazines; and in
Northern Ireland weekly, monthly and quarterly publications covering farm¬
ing, the linen industry, building, motoring, politics and social work.
There are three principal British news agencies: Reuters Ltd.; the Press
Association Ltd.; and the Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
Reuters Ltd. is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of Britain,
Australia and New Zealand through the Newspaper Publishers Association,
the Press Association, the Australian Associated Press and the New Zealand
Press Association, which are parties to a trust agreement to safeguard the
independence and integrity of the news service. Founded in Aix-la-Chapelle
in 1850 and transferred to London in 1851, Reuters now has about 1,000
correspondents in 200 countries and territories, and links with 120 national or
private news agencies, which give it access to coverage by many thousands of
local reporters. Between 1,500,000 and 2,250,000 words of general news,
sports, and economic services reports are received in London every day over
a global network of leased cable and radio circuits. From these messages
434
Training for
Journalism
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
regionalised news services, specially tailored to the needs of recipients in Britain
and eight main overseas regions, are transmitted to more than 150 countries
for distribution to information media, either direct or through national news
agencies. Reuters Economic Services supply up-to-the-minute information to
business houses throughout the world. Its computerised systems, including
Stockmaster, Videoscan and Videomaster, offer virtually instant coverage of
the important stock and commodity markets by computer interrogation or
video display. A computerised message-handling system, known as the Auto¬
matic Data Exchange, is used to speed up the handling and distribution of
news.
The Press Association Ltd., the British national news agency founded in
1868, is co-operatively owned by the principal newspapers of the United
Kingdom outside London, and of the Irish Republic. It provides newspapers,
the broadcasting organisations, Reuters (of which it is a major joint owner)
and other international agencies with a complete service of home news, includ¬
ing general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all branches of financial,
commercial and sports news; and includes in its services to regional papers the
world news of Reuters and the Associated Press. News is teleprinted 24 hours
a day from head office in Fleet Street over a network of lines leased from the
Post Office—certain items being available in teletypesetting form.
Through its Photographic Department the Press Association serves London
and regional newspapers with a daily picture service, including its own world
photos and those of the Associated Press. Its Special Reporting Service
supplies reports of local or special interest to daily and weekly papers and
periodicals. All profits are used to develop the service.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. (Extel), an independent news
agency founded in 1872, is a public company with over 1,000 shareholders,
which supplies financial and sporting news to newspapers and broadcasting
organisations. Racing services are also supplied by teleprinter and telephone
to subscribers in London and the provinces from offices in all important cities
and towns.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by
Associated Press Ltd., which is the British operating company of the Associa¬
ted Press of America, and by United Press International, an international
news agency with a headquarters in London.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require¬
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some countries,
but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The Printing and Publishing Industry Training Board (PPITB) is responsible
for training in the printing, publishing and professional photography indus¬
tries. The responsibilities of the board (which has a chairman, a deputy chair¬
man and 22 members, representing employer, employee and educational
interests) include the formulation of training schemes, the establishment of
standards, ensuring that adequate facilities exist, and the provision of a
regional advisory service.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), composed of
the major representative organisations in journalism and the press, works in
partnership with the Board. Its functions include superintending activities
concerning entry into journalism, setting and conducting examinations; and
organising short training courses and seminars for journalists.
THE PRESS
435
There are two normal methods of entry to newspaper journalism: (i) by
selection for a place on a full-time course lasting for one academic year and
(2) by direct recruitment to a regional or local newspaper. Students selected
for a pre-entry course must have gained two passes at the Advanced level of the
General Certificate of Education (GCE) and be under the age of 20 at the
beginning of a course. Some pre-entry students are sponsored by newspapers;
the others are assisted by the NCTJ to find employment on completion of the
course. The minimum educational requirement for direct entry is five GCE
passes at Ordinary level.
Under collective agreements between the employers’ associations in pub¬
lishing and the National Union of Journalists, systematic training under
NCTJ arrangements is obligatory for all entrants to the regional and local
newspaper publishing sector under the age of 31. The scheme consists of
on-the-job training, and block-release courses for those who have not attended
a pre-entry course. A similar syllabus covering practical journalism, shorthand,
use of language, law, public administration and current affairs is used at both
kinds of course. Eight centres (five in England, and one each in Wales, Scot¬
land and Northern Ireland) provide courses for reporters and there is one
centre for newspaper photographers.
All entrants to regional and local newspapers who are under the age of 24
serve an apprenticeship of three years (two years in the case of graduates).
For direct entrants apprenticeship follows six months’ probation. Entrants
from pre-entry courses serve three months’ probation, after which apprentice¬
ship is back-dated to the start of the probation period. After minimum qualify¬
ing service under NCTJ regulations trainees take a proficiency test which
carries a salary bonus.
Both the PPITB and the NCTJ have given attention to the development of
comparable arrangements for entrants to periodical publishing. NCTJ
accredited courses (including pre-entry) are available in central London
(where the greater part of the periodical publishing sector is situated) and the
PPITB has drawn up a recommendation on systematic training for the
editorial staff of periodicals to facilitate the preparation of in-company schemes
which now exist in most major groups. The NCTJ courses are arranged in
association with the London College of Printing and include a one-year pre¬
entry course in periodical journalism, and evening, day release, and occasional
block release courses.
While most training in journalism in Britain takes place at below university
level and there are no courses offering degrees in journalism, the Centre for
Journalism Studies at the University College, Cardiff, has a one-year post¬
graduate diploma course in journalism which is available to any holder of a
degree from a British university or a recognised equivalent. The University of
Warwick provides a management course for newspaper executives in con¬
junction with the Newspaper Publishers Association. In addition a wide range
of training courses, covering circulation, advertising, industrial relations and
supervisory management are provided for the regional newspaper industry by
the Newspaper Society Training Service and for the national newspapers by the
Newspaper Publishers Association. Short general management courses are also
run in conjunction with the University of Aston in Birmingham.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union Travelling Fellowship Scheme for
the training and education of young journalists throughout the Common¬
wealth, about eight journalists from overseas spend five months in the United
Kingdom each year, two months in the offices of newspapers or periodicals
and three months acquiring a general idea of life in Britain. A limited number
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of travelling scholarships are also awarded to British journalists to enable
them to visit Commonwealth countries overseas.
The Thomson Foundation offers scholarships and organises training courses
for journalists from all parts of the world at its Editorial Studies Centre in
Cardiff, and provides consultants and tutors for courses for journalists overseas.
The most important organisations to which employers in the industry belong
are the Newspaper Publishers Association, whose members publish national
newspapers in London and Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which
represents the regional, local and London surburban press; the Scottish Daily
Newspaper Society, which represents the interests of daily and Sunday news¬
papers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper Proprietors Association, which
represents the owners of weekly newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern
Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers
in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Publishers Association, whose
membership embraces the independent publishers of trade and technical
publications and general magazines. On the journalists’ side there are the
Institute of Journalists (loj), founded in 1884 as the National Association
of Journalists, and the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in 1907.
All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio, television, public
relations and freelance journalism) are eligible for membership of either of
these organisations. Total membership is about 29,500 (NUJ about 27,500,
loj about 2,000).
The main aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are to sustain the
dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of editors,
to protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the education
and training of journalists: the Guild has about 400 members. The British
Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to which most
editors of house journals belong.
The Printing and Kindred Trades Federation is the federation of the print¬
ing trade unions which include the National Graphical Association, the
National Society of Operative Printers, Graphical and Media Personnel, the
Scottish Typographical Association, the Society of Lithographic Artists,
Designers and Engravers and the National Union of Journalists.
The Press Council, established in 1953 and reconstituted in 1963, has a lay
chairman and 30 members. Its aims are: to preserve the established freedom
of the British press; to maintain the character of the British press in ac¬
cordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; to keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct of
the press or the conduct of persons and organisations towards the press; to
report on developments in the British press which may tend towards greater
concentration or monopoly; to make representation on appropriate occasions
to the Government, to organs of the United Nations and to press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodic reports recording its work,
and to review from time to time developments in the British press and the
factors affecting them. In fulfilment of these aims, the council carries out the
main centralised research work into the press and the communications industry
generally, and publishes annual reports, which include statistics of the news¬
paper and periodical press and a series of articles examining the structure of
the leading press groups.
THE PRESS
437
The Press and
the Law
The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say
what it likes provided it does not transgress the law; in general, it is at liberty
to comment on matters of public interest. Apart from enactments relating
directly to such matters as the registration of newspapers for postal purposes,
there are no specific press laws but certain statutes include clauses which
apply, in particular or incidentally, to the press. These relate to such matters
as the extent of newspaper ownership in television and radio companies; the
transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on reporting of preliminary hear¬
ings of indictable offences (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland); the
right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings of local authorities;
restrictions on the publication of (a) divorce and domestic proceedings in
courts of law, (b) advertisement and investment circulars, which are governed
by Acts dealing with the publication of false or misleading descriptions of
goods and services and with fraud and (c) advertisements of remedies for
certain diseases, which are covered by public health legislation; agreements
between the Post Office and newspaper proprietors on telegraphic communica¬
tions, which must comply with telegraphs legislation; restrictions on certain
types of prize competition; and copyrights, which come under copyright laws.
The press is also affected by the Trade Descriptions Act which imposes
penalties for false or misleading descriptions of goods or services.
Of particular relevance to the work of the press are the laws on libel,
defamation and contempt of court. A newspaper may not publish comments
on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice their
reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings nor may it
publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence the
result. The obtaining and publication of information from state and official
sources of a confidential or security nature is affected by the Official Secrets
Acts. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings for seditious libel and incite¬
ment to disaffection.
Legal proceedings against the press are comparatively infrequent; the
majority of actions that do take place are libel actions brought by private
individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publisher, printer and
distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author of the article, may all be
held responsible.
21 Broadcasting
Broadcasting by television and radio in Britain is regulated by the Minister of
Posts and Telecommunications under the Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1949-
1967, which prohibit the sending or receiving of wireless communications,
except under licence.
Two public bodies—the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the
Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)—are licensed to provide television
and radio broadcasting services. The BBC, which was established by Royal
Charter in 1927, operates two national television services, four national radio
services and 20 local radio stations; it also broadcasts to countries abroad
through its external services division. The IBA, originally established in 1954
as the Independent Television Authority, controls the operation of the single
independent television service and has similar responsibility for a network of
independent local radio stations which is being established (see p. 442).
Users of television sets must obtain an annual receiving licence, which can
be bought from most post offices. Licences for sets receiving black and white
pictures cost £7 a year, and for those receiving colour pictures ^12 a year.
There were some 17-2 million receiving licences current in Britain in June
1973 of which over 13*4 million were for black and white, and nearly 3-8
million for colour television.
Broadcasting
Authorities
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
Both the BBC and the IBA are constitutionally required to provide a ‘public
service’ with the purpose of disseminating information, education and
entertainment. The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by
the new Royal Charter granted in 1964 and by the Licence and Agreement of
1969, and those of the IBA by the Television Act 1964, the Sound Broadcasting
Act 1972 and its 1973 Licence.
The BBC and the IBA are independent authorities in the day-to-day
operations of broadcasting, including programmes and administration. The
Government, however, retains ultimate control, and the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications is answerable to Parliament on broad questions of policy
and may issue directions to the BBC and the IBA on a number of technical
and other subjects. Both organisations are expected to show balance and due
impartiality in their general presentation of programmes, particularly where
matters of public policy or controversial subjects are concerned, and in this
connection the Minister has powers to prohibit the broadcasting of any
particular item or class of item, or to revoke the licences of the BBC or IBA
at any time. These are treated as major reserve powers and no formal veto
has ever been placed on the broadcasting of a particular item. Both the BBC
and the IBA are required to prepare annual reports and accounts which are
presented to Parliament.
The Corporation consists of 12 governors (including a chairman, a vice-
chairman and separate national governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland), each appointed for a period of not more than five years by the
Queen on the advice of the Government. The governors are constitutionally
responsible for the conduct of the whole broadcasting operation, including
BROADCASTING
439
The Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
the production and presentation of the programmes on television and radio,
and the provision and working of the necessary installations and equipment.
A number of committees advise them on such matters as the social effects of
television, religious broadcasting, music, agriculture, school broadcasting,
further education, programmes for immigrants, science and engineering and
charitable appeals. The governors appoint the chief executive officer of the
BBC—the Director General—with whom they discuss all major matters of
policy and finance. He is chairman of the BBC’s board of management, which
also includes his chief assistant, the managing directors for television, radio
and external broadcasting, the directors of programmes for television and
radio, and the directors of personnel, finance, public affairs and engineer¬
ing.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales control the
policy and content of television and radio programmes intended primarily
for reception in their respective countries. Local radio councils, representative
of the local community, are appointed by the BBC to advise on the develop¬
ment and operation of local radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally by an annual
grant voted by Parliament (£122 million in 1972-73) which is the income from
the sale of television receiving licences less certain deductions for collection
and other expenses. This is supplemented by profits from trading activities,
including domestic sales of magazines and other publications dealing with
BBC radio and television programmes, and overseas sales of programmes.
Nearly three-quarters of the BBC’s expenditure on domestic services relates
to television. The BBC meets the cost of local radio stations but some local
education authorities have assisted in the making of educational programmes.
The BBC’s external services are financed by a grant determined each year
by the Government; in 1972-73 this amounted to over £15 million.
The Independent Broadcasting Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy
chairman and nine other members (three of whom have responsibility for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) appointed by the Minister of Posts
and Telecommunications. The IBA does not itself produce television pro¬
grammes; these are provided by commercial programme companies (see p.
440). The authority’s four main functions are to appoint the programme
companies, to control the programme output, to control the advertising and to
build, own and operate the transmitting stations for the independent television
(ITV) network. It has similar functions with regard to the independent local
radio network (see p. 442).
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broad¬
casting, religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist
panel advises on medical and allied advertisements. Local advisory committees
are to provide advice on local radio services.
The chief executive officer of the IBA is the Director General. There are
also two deputy directors general, and a headquarters and regional office staff
covering all technical and administrative services.
The IBA receives no payments from licence revenue; the finance for its
operations is drawn from annual rental payments made to it by the television
programme companies which amounted to about ^13 million in the year ended
March 1973. The programme companies also pay to the IBA for transfer to the
Exchequer a further sum (the levy) related to their advertising revenue; in the
year ended March 1973 this amounted to some £18 million.
440
The Programme
Companies
Control by
the IB A
Domestic
Television
and Radio
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fifteen programme companies hold six-year contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions of Britain (two com¬
panies share the contract for London, one providing programmes during
the week and the other at the weekend). The companies operate on a commer¬
cial basis, deriving their revenue from the sale of advertising time. The financial
resources, advertising revenue, and programme production of the companies
vary considerably, depending largely on the size of population in their areas.
(Independent Television serves a population of some 14 million people in the
London area compared with some 107,000 people in the Channel Islands.)
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the pro¬
grammes to be broadcast in its area. These consist partly of material produced
by the company itself, partly of that produced by the other programme com¬
panies, and partly of that purchased from elsewhere. The five largest com¬
panies (Thames, ATV, Granada, Yorkshire and London Weekend) produce a
larger proportion of their own programmes and provide more programmes
for broadcast elsewhere on the national network than do the smaller ones.
A common news service is provided by Independent Television News
Limited, a non-profit-making company in which all the programme com¬
panies are shareholders. The negotiations concerning the supply, exchange
and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated transmission through
the independent television network take place largely on the Network Planning
Committee which consists of representatives of all the programme companies
and of the IBA.
When a company, on the basis of negotiations with the other companies, has
decided on a programme schedule for its area, it is required to submit this to
the IBA for approval. The authority has wide-ranging powers to control and
regulate the content and quality of programmes; for example, it ensures that a
‘proper balance’ of views is expressed and has drawn up a code on violence
stating that special precautions are to be taken when children are likely to be
viewing. There are also safeguards in the Television Act 1964 and the Sound
Broadcasting Act 1972 to prevent newspaper shareholdings in a programme
company leading to results contrary to the public interest. However, the IBA
believes that newspapers bring valuable qualities to the development of tele¬
vision and radio and is not opposed to investment by them. In certain circum¬
stances local newspapers have a right to a share in the control of local radio
companies.
Television viewing has become by far the most popular recreational activity in
Britain and some 94 per cent of the population now watch television in their
own homes. Average viewing time per head of population in 1971-72 was
over 15 hours a week. There are three television channels: BBC 1 and ITV
which broadcast on both 405 lines very high frequency (vhf) and 625 lines
ultra high frequency (uhf), and BBC 2 which broadcasts on 625 lines uhf
only. Some 99 per cent of the population live within range of vhf, and more
than 93 per cent within range of uhf transmissions. A growing number of
people—nearly half the population in 1973—own uhf receivers, and when most
of the old vhf-only receivers have been replaced the vhf broadcasts of BBC 1
and ITV will cease. Colour programmes were first introduced on BBC 2 in
1967 and were extended to BBC 1 and ITV in 1969 when they began uhf broad¬
casts. A high proportion of programmes on the three uhf services are trans¬
mitted in colour, though receivable also in black and white.
Radio attracts its largest audiences during the mornings. In 1971-72 radio
BROADCASTING
44I
BBC Television
Independent
Television
BBC Radio
listening averaged some 9^ hours a week per head of population. Among
important innovations in the past six years have been the introduction of a
separate BBC radio channel providing continuous ‘pop’ music, and the develop¬
ment of local radio.
Apart from a break during the war years the BBC has been providing regular
television broadcasts since 1936. Since 1964 it has operated two services—
BBC 1 and BBC2. All BBC 2 programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1
are broadcast on the national network. Although many nationally networked
programmes are produced in London some originate from regional studios in
Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and eight regional centres in England.
In 1971-72 some 4,417 hours were broadcast on the BBC 1 national network
including 694 hours of programmes produced by regional organisations for
network transmission; similar figures for BBC 2 were 2,545 hours including
260 hours of regional productions. Regional studios also originate programmes
of news and local interest which are inserted into the BBC 1 service for
regional transmission only; these varied from 676 hours in Wales (of which
373 were in the Welsh language) to an average of over 145 hours in each of the
eight English regions.
Through co-ordinated planning of programmes on its two services the BBC
is able to cater simultaneously for people of differing interests. While both
services cover the whole range of television output, BBC 1 presents a higher
proportion of programmes of general interest, such as light entertainment,
sport, children’s programmes and outside broadcasts, while BBC 2 places
greater emphasis on minority interests, providing a larger element of news,
documentaries, serious drama and music. Programmes successful on BBC 2
are frequently repeated on BBC 1. Both channels provide a wide range of
education programmes, including over 16 hours a week of schools broadcasts
on BBC 1 and transmissions of Open University lectures (see p. 165) on BBC 2.
During 1971-72 BBC television programmes won 22 international awards
and more than 7,000 screen hours of programmes were sold to 86 countries
overseas.
The first regular independent television broadcasts began in London in 1955.
ITV transmissions are provided on a regional basis by 15 programme com¬
panies. In 1971-72 some 7,900 hours of different programmes were shown over
the independent television network: 7,000 hours were produced in the com¬
panies’ own studios of which two-thirds were programmes designed for
regional audiences (including news and magazine programmes) and the re¬
mainder were nationally networked. About 900 hours consisted mainly of
programmes imported from overseas for showing largely on the national
network.
ITV programmes cover the whole range of television output, but include a
high proportion of drama (often in serial form), light entertainment, music,
sport and feature films which together account for about 60 per cent of output.
Other items in the weekly schedules include news broadcasts and docu¬
mentaries, religious and education programmes. More than one-third of view¬
ing time is filled with ‘serious’ programmes. There are about three short
advertising intervals an hour, in and between programmes.
BBC Radio provides listeners with four alternative national channels, each of
which has a distinct character. Radio 1, broadcasting some 12 hours a day,
provides a programme of ‘pop’ music, while Radio 2, broadcasting over 20
hours a day, provides light music as well as being the principal channel for
442
Independent
Radio
BBC External
Services
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the coverage of sport. Radio 3, broadcasting some 17 hours a day, provides
continuous, mainly classical, music (much of which is in stereo) and in the
evening offers, in addition, adult education programmes and works of artistic
and intellectual interest. Radio 4, broadcasting 17 hours a day, is the main
speech programme, providing the principal news and information service of
the BBC; in addition it presents a wide range of drama, talks and entertain¬
ment programmes as well as broadcasts to schools.
Local radio was started by the BBC as an experiment in eight towns in
1967 and in September 1973 there were 20 stations. Broadcasting on vhf and
the medium waveband, local radio stations provide between 9 and 13 hours of
locally produced programmes each day, normally during the early morning,
lunch-time and early evening periods. During the rest of the day they transmit
programmes from the BBC’s national networks. Local broadcasts provide a
comprehensive service of local news and information, besides covering local
arts and sports activities and offering residents opportunities to air their views
on subjects of local interest.
Under the terms of the Sound Broadcasting Act 1972 local broadcasting by a
system of up to 60 independent radio stations is being introduced. The
stations will broadcast on both vhf (with some programmes in stereo) and
medium wave bands. They will operate under the control of the IBA and will
be financed by advertising revenue. Much of the output will be popular
programming and the stations will also be expected to provide a national and
local news service, information, and programmes on local affairs and com¬
munity activities.
The first two stations, one a general entertainment service and the other a
specialist news service, plan to begin broadcasting in the London area in
October 1973. The news station will provide world and national news to
the other independent radio stations as they open elsewhere in Britain; the
first three of these will begin broadcasting in Birmingham, Manchester, and
Glasgow in the spring of 1974, followed by stations in Swansea and Tyneside/
Wearside in the summer of that year.
The BBC broadcasts to most countries overseas. The main objectives of BBC
external broadcasts are to give unbiased news, to reflect British opinion and
to project British life and culture. The BBC broadcasts in 40 languages
(including English) for a total of over 700 hours a week. News bulletins, current
affairs programmes, political commentaries and topical magazine programmes
form the main part of the output. A full service of sports commentaries and
results, all kinds of music, drama and a wide range of general entertainment
programmes are also included.
The languages in which the external services broadcast and the length of
time each language is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart
from this the BBC has full responsibility and it is completely independent in
determining the content of news and other programmes.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by additional series of programmes
designed to be of special interest to Africa, Europe and the Caribbean.
The foreign language services are divided into areas, namely, the African,
Arabic, Eastern, Far Eastern, Latin American, French (to Europe and Africa),
Central European, South European, German and East European Services.
Broadcasts range from 70 hours a week in Arabic to half an hour in Nepali.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive
Transmitting
Stations and
Studios
BBC
IBA
Advertising
BROADCASTING 443
language teaching undertaking in the world. Some 250 radio programmes of
English lessons are broadcast weekly with explanations in 26 other languages,
and recorded lessons are supplied to some 280 stations in over 70 countries.
English by Television programmes are shown in more than 60 countries.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are rebroadcast by the domestic
radio services of many countries. Rebroadcasting involves direct relays from
BBC transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through
the BBC tape and disc transcription service. There are some 3,000 rebroadcasts
weekly of World Service programmes in some 50 countries. The Transcription
Service offers programmes to more than 100 countries.
Another part of the external services is the Monitoring Service which listens
to and reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news
and comment from overseas to the BBC, the Press, and the Government.
Programme links are generally rented by the BBC from the Post Office, al¬
though some are provided by the BBC with Post Office agreement. The opera¬
tion and maintenance of the 225 transmitting stations from which its various
programmes are sent out are, however, solely a BBC responsibility.
For its domestic radio programmes, the BBC uses 142 studios in London
and the regions, and for its external services 51 in London. In addition, there
are 24 semi-automatic studios which can be operated by programme officials
without engineering staff. Each BBC local radio station has two studios. BBC
television productions come from main studios at the Television Centre in
west London and other studios in various parts of London, and from fully
equipped regional studio centres at Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff,
Glasgow and Manchester. There are also television studios at Aberdeen,
Bangor, Edinburgh, Leeds, Newcastle, Norwich, Plymouth and Southampton.
Outside broadcasting is covered by a number of mobile units.
The IBA transmits programmes from 47 vhf and about 100 uhf stations
throughout Britain, programme links being provided by the Post Office.
Independent television programmes are produced at studio centres in Aber¬
deen, Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Carlisle, Dover, Glasgow, Leeds,
London, Manchester, Newcastle, Norwich, Plymouth, St. Helier, and South¬
ampton. The establishment of these studios is the direct result of the IBA’s
policy of encouraging the development of regional television, and the pro¬
grammes are designed for either local or national broadcasting. A number of
new studios have also been built for colour television.
The BBC does not give publicity to any individual firm or organised interest
except when it is necessary in order to provide effective and informative pro¬
grammes. Under the terms of its licence and agreement it must not broadcast
sponsored programmes or, without the consent of the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications, broadcast any matter for payment.
Advertisements are broadcast on Independent Television subject to the
relevant provisions in the Television Act, in particular that there should be
no sponsoring of programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should be
clearly distinguishable as such and recognisably separate from the pro¬
gramme, and that the amount of time given to advertising should not be so
great as to detract from the value of the programmes as a medium of informa¬
tion, education and entertainment. In any one hour of broadcasting the
amount of advertising time is normally limited to seven minutes. Averaged
over the day’s programmes it must not exceed six minutes per hour. The
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
independent local radio stations will normally be limited to up to nine minutes
of advertising each hour. The IB A has drawn up a code governing standards
and practice in advertising on television and radio giving guidance about the
types and methods of advertisement that may not be used. Certain types of
advertising are prohibited, notably that of cigarettes (under a government
ruling of 1965) and for betting. Advertisements may not be inserted in certain
types of programme, for example, in broadcasts to schools.
Political Broadcasts on political issues include a daily factual and impartial account of
Broadcasting proceedings in Parliament, transmitted on BBC’s Radio 4 when Parliament
is in session, and there is frequent coverage of political subjects in news
bulletins and current affairs programmes on both radio and television.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are also transmitted periodically
under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC and the IBA.
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is advised on the technical
aspects of television and vhf sound broadcasting by the Television Advisory
Committee, which consists of an independent chairman, the Directors General
of the BBC and IBA, independent members, and representatives from the
radio industry and interested government departments.
Research into technical problems is carried out by the scientific and
engineering staffs of the BBC, the IBA, the Post Office, the Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunications, and the radio industry. Advances by the BBC
have included the electronic conversion of monochrome and colour television
pictures between the European and the American systems, and the develop¬
ment of a sound-and-vision system, which enables the television sound and
picture to be carried over a single 625-line vision circuit, and thus eliminates
the operational complexity and expense of a separate circuit for the sound.
During 1972 IBA engineers introduced the world’s first fully digital field rate
standards converter (DICE) which improves the interchange of programmes
between areas using the 525-lines system (for example, North America) and
those using the 625-lines system (for example, Europe). In early 1973 the IBA
began tests of an experimental digital data broadcasting system (‘Oracle’) for
transmitting the written word in the vertical interval of television signals.
International The BBC and the IBA (together with the Independent Television Companies
Relations Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU),
which was established to advance international broadcasting projects. The
union manages Eurovision, is responsible for the technical and administrative
arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over that net¬
work and for intercontinental satellite links, and maintains a technical monitor¬
ing station, where frequency measurements and other observations on
broadcasting stations are carried out.
The BBC belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference whose
members extend to each other such facilities as the use of studios, recording
channels, and programme contributions. The BBC also provides a large amount
of technical aid, particularly in training the staff of other broadcasting organisa¬
tions throughout the world; members of the BBC’s staff are seconded for
service overseas.
The BBC is a partner in Visnews, which supplies a service of world news
film to some 152 television organisations in 86 countries and is the most widely
used newsfilm agency in the world, and a member of the International Tele¬
vision Federation (Intertel), which produces high-quality information pro-
Technical
Developments
BROADCASTING
445
grammes which are exchanged overseas. United Press International, a
television newsfilm agency, and Independent Television News jointly provide
an international service to more than 100 overseas television organisations via
the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The Government spends a considerable amount each year on radio and
television training for overseas students in Britain and largely finances the
Centre for Educational Development Overseas (CEDO, see p. 171), which
includes in its activities training in educational television and radio for members
of broadcasting organisations overseas. Training in television work is also
provided for overseas trainees at the Thomson Centre in Glasgow, run by the
Thomson Foundation, a charitable trust.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International Tele¬
communications Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency re¬
sponsible for the regulation and control of all international telecommunication
services (including radio and television), for the allocation and registration of
all radio frequencies and, through its international consultative committees,
for the promotion and co-ordination of the international study of technical
problems in broadcasting. The BBC is also represented on the United King¬
dom Committee of the International Special Committee on Radio Interference.
22 Sport
General
Administration
and Promotion
Sports Councils
Interest in most sports in Britain, for both participants and spectators, is grow¬
ing, in some cases (for example, water sports of all kinds) at a very fast rate;
a recent trend has been the growth of ‘high risk’ sports such as mountain¬
eering and parachuting. Some of the sports most popular among participants
are: swimming, fishing, bowls, association and rugby football, lawn tennis,
squash rackets, golf, riding, cricket, sailing and skating. For spectators (includ¬
ing television audiences) the following sports are among the most popular:
association and rugby football, racing, boxing and wrestling, motor car and
motor cycle racing, athletics, cricket, show jumping, lawn tennis, swimming
and skating. Sportsmen may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs.1
Many professionals set technical standards, attract spectators, and provide
coaching and instruction, but the sporting life of Britain derives its character
principally from the amateur element—people who devote time and energy to
organising sport and to teaching and training, as well as the many thousands
of all ages who engage in sport for pleasure alone.
The Government is not concerned with the organisation or the direct promo¬
tion of individual sports in Britain; there is, however, a minister (of the
Department of the Environment) with special responsibility for sport, and the
policy of the Government is to foster the development of all aspects of physical
recreation, stimulating the provision of sports facilities and encouraging their
use to the fullest capacity.
The main responsibility for the general development of sport in Great Britain
rests with three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England and for
general matters affecting Great Britain) and the Sports Councils for Wales and
Scotland. Members of the councils are appointed by the Government. The
councils have the task, subject only to general ministerial directives, of allocat¬
ing funds made available by the Government. They award grants and loans
for sports development, coaching and administration to the governing bodies
of sport and to other national organisations; they assist British representatives
at international sports meetings; they encourage links with international and
overseas organisations; and they administer national sports centres (see p.
448). The Sports Council consults with the Central Council of Physical
Recreation, a non-executive body comprising a standing forum of the national
governing and representative bodies of sport and physical recreation. The
Sports Council is linked with nine regional sports councils in England on which
are represented local authorities and sports interests in each region.
Sport and physical recreation in Northern Ireland are promoted by the
Northern Ireland Sports Council which was set up in 1973. The council has
powers to establish sport and recreation centres, to organise activities and to
pay grants to voluntary organisations and assist them in other ways.
A bibliographic service about sport is provided by the United Kingdom
National Documentation Centre for Sport, Physical Recreation and Recrea-
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby Union football, hockey and rowing, are
entirely amateur, but in other sports the distinction between professional and amateur
status is becoming less strictly defined.
SPORT
447
Facilities for
Sport
Composite
National Bodies
The British
Olympic
Association
The National
Playing Fields
Association
tion which has been set up by the Sports Council and is based in Queens’
University, Belfast. The Sports Council has an information centre providing
data on a wide range of sports topics at its headquarters.
In 1972-73 central government expenditure on sport in Great Britain
totalled some ^4-6 million. The money allocated to the Sports Councils for
England, Wales and Scotland by the Government amounted to ^6-5 million
during 1973-74. In Northern Ireland £480,000 in grants was given to public
authorities and voluntary organisations for sports facilities, playgrounds,
overseas visits and coaching schemes. Voluntary bodies and private concerns
also make substantial provisions for sport in Britain, but the largest provision
is made by local authorities which made available some £i7'2 million in
1971-72.
The law requires all publicly maintained schools in Britain to provide for the
physical education (gymnastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of
their pupils. Schools in the national systems (except those solely for infants)
must have a playing field, or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a
gymnasium and other amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls
designed for dance and movement: in an increasing number of areas, physical
education facilities in schools are being developed so as to meet the recrea¬
tional needs of the whole community. Facilities for, and instruction in, many
kinds of sport are likewise provided at the independent preparatory and public
schools and at the universities (some of which have departments of physical
education). Local authorities are the main providers of land and large-scale
facilities to be used by the community for recreation—they establish, for in¬
stance, playing fields, gymnasia, tennis courts, golf courses, boating lakes,
swimming baths and sports centres and many arrange further education classes
in various physical education subjects. Large industrial firms often provide
sports facilities for their employees and, in many cases, make them available
for the public.
Among the national voluntary bodies most closely connected with the general
development of sport are the British Olympic Association, the National Playing
Fields Association and the British Sports Association for the Disabled.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, organises the participation
of British teams in the Olympic Games. The association’s council is composed
of members of the International Olympic Committee, representatives of the
controlling bodies of some 25 sports, representatives of the armed services’
sports organisations and of certain other affiliated bodies concerned with
sporting activities, and a few co-opted members. It determines the overall
size of the British team; raises funds; makes all the arrangements for the
team’s travel and comfort at the games; organises the provision and transport
of clothing and equipment; and provides a headquarters staff for the overall
management of the team.
The National Playing Fields Association (NPFA) aims to stimulate the provi¬
sion of playing fields, playgrounds and recreation centres by publicity and
technical and financial assistance. Since its inception in 1925 it has distributed
over £2 million in the form of grants for playing field, playground and recrea¬
tion centre schemes and over £700,000 in the form of loans. It assists more than
500 schemes a year. With a council composed of representatives of the govern¬
ing bodies of sport, a number of educational bodies, voluntary youth organisa¬
tions, physical education associations, local authorities and individuals, the
448
The British Sports
Association for the
Disabled
Sports
Centres
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NPFA gives advice on the provision and layout of sports facilities, including
small recreation centres, on matters relating to the recreational needs of
children from their earliest years, and on the establishment of playgrounds and
play leadership schemes. The NPFA is a national charity established by royal
charter. It derives its funds mainly from voluntary contributions, but it also
receives a small Sports Council grant towards administrative costs. It has
branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland and in nearly every English and
Welsh county.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961, encourages
sporting activities for the physically handicapped. The association, which
receives an annual Sports Council grant, provides advice on physical recrea¬
tion through sport for the disabled, arranges sports meetings at the Stoke
Mandeville Sports Stadium for the Paralysed and Other Disabled, and en¬
courages the provision of facilities (including sports clubs) for physically dis¬
abled people.
The policy of establishing sports centres bringing together people of all ages
and different recreational interests is regarded as an important part of the
provision for physical recreation in Britain.
National centres, some of which were initially financed by funds from volun¬
tary sources, are maintained by the Sports Councils and provide recreational
facilities and a wide range of courses for instructors and performers in many
recreational activities. As well as making residential courses available for
enthusiasts from all over Britain, the national sports centres are used exten¬
sively by local clubs and the local community generally: it has been estimated
that some 450,000 a year use the Crystal Palace centre in this way.
One centre has been developed as a national sailing centre; two are primarily
used as training centres for mountain activities, including climbing and rescue
techniques; and a fourth provides training for outdoor activities such as walk¬
ing, climbing, sailing and field studies. A national water sports centre was
opened in 1973. Combined facilities for ranges of sports are provided at the
other centres which include the Crystal Palace National Sports Centre in
London and the National Sports Centre for Wales in Cardiff. The centre at
Crystal Palace has a main stadium seating 12,000 spectators, a sports hall
seating 2,000 spectators, a swimming hall with pools meeting Olympic require¬
ments, a teaching pool and a gallery for 2,000 spectators, an indoor cricket
school, practice rooms for all indoor activities, a hostel for 140 residents and
staff housing: these facilities are available for international competitions as well
as for training purposes, and are supported by a grant from the Greater
London Council, in addition to the Sports Council grant. The Cardiff centre
is supported by local authorities, as well as by Sports Council grants.
In addition to the national sports centres, other centres—such as the
Meadowbank Sports Centre administered by Edinburgh Corporation—cater
for a wide range of recreational activities and often attract more than purely
local interest. Some 35 indoor sports centres serve local rather than national
needs; many more are planned, some as ‘dual’ projects on school sites. There
are also several national centres catering for specialised interests and generally
administered by the sponsoring organisations; these include the National
Equestrian Centre, run by the British Equestrian Federation, and the Stoke
Mandeville Sports Stadium for the Paralysed and Other Disabled, run by the
British Paraplegic Sports Society—the first sports centre of its kind in the
world.
SPORT
449
POPULAR SPORTS
Aero Sports
Archery
Association
Football
In Northern Ireland the first multi-purpose sports centre was opened in
1973-
Some of the most popular sports in Britain are listed below in alphabetical
order. Each has its own governing organisation to promote and protect its
interests and to prevent infringement of agreed rules and practices. Some of
the organisations cover the whole of Britain; others are concerned individually
with the different constituent countries of Britain. A number of sports also
have separate bodies governing the participation of women and girls.
Aero sports—including private flying, gliding and parachuting—are becoming
increasingly popular in Britain. Private flying is promoted by the British Light
Aviation Centre, founded in 1966, to which are affiliated some 250 clubs.
There are over 10,000 private pilots active in Britain (many of whom fly for
business purposes as well as for pleasure) and some 3,000 aircraft weighing
less than 6,000 lbs. are registered. Air racing, rallying and aerobatics are con¬
trolled by the competitions committee of the British Light Aviation Centre.
Gliding attracts about 9,000 people to some 80 gliding clubs in Britain. The
clubs organise flying activities, including regional and national championships,
and are members of the British Gliding Association, founded in 1929. Para¬
chuting is a popular sport, with 36 clubs affiliated to the British Parachute
Association, formed in 1962. The association, which has about 4,600 members,
organises national championships, prepares teams for international cham¬
pionships, and regulates the safety aspects of the sport.
Target archery has a following in Britain of some 12,200 members from over
700 clubs and societies. The governing body is the Grand National Archery
Society, founded in 1844, to which are affiliated regional and county
organisations.
Although football of a kind was played in the Middle Ages or even earlier,
as an organised game it dates from the nineteenth century; association football
was adopted at Cambridge in 1848. Nowadays, the game (often called ‘soccer’)
is controlled in England by the Football Association (FA), formed in 1863.
The FA promotes the interests of the game; prevents infringement of the
agreed rules; arranges for instruction of promising young players; organises
matches and competitions, including the international matches played by
England, the Amateur Cup competition, the FA Sunday Cup competition,
two national youth competitions, and the competition for its own leading
trophy, the FA Challenge Cup; and chooses and manages English inter¬
national teams. Over 350 clubs are registered with the FA and some 37,000
clubs are affiliated to district or regional associations. The FA derives its main
income from subscriptions and admission charges to international and cup
matches, and ploughs back a large portion of the money into the game.
Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales have their own controlling bodies: the
Scottish Football Association, the Irish Football Association and the Football
Association of Wales.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played once or
twice weekly) are controlled by the Football League, comprising 92 profes¬
sional clubs. The league’s funds are derived largely from a levy of 4 per cent
of the net gate receipts from league matches, after allowable expenses have
been deducted; from annual payments from football pools promoters for the
use of league fixture lists; and from television rights. In Scotland the Scottish
45°
Athletics
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Football League comprises 37 clubs; Northern Ireland has its own league.
Clubs belonging to the English and Scottish Leagues are organised in divi¬
sions, the members of which compete against one another for the respective
league championships. During the season attendances at Football League
matches total about 30 million. Several million people stake small weekly sums
on the results of league matches in a form of pool betting operated by com¬
mercial companies.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup and the Scottish FA Cup
are organised on a knock-out basis, and the finals—two of the most important
football matches of the year—are played at Wembley Stadium, London
(which can accommodate some 100,000 spectators), and at Hampden Park,
Glasgow (which can accommodate about 135,000 people). International
matches, including those between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland, also arouse great interest.
Amateur footballers greatly outnumber the professionals (there are nearly
a million amateurs, including schoolboys and members of the armed forces,
to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals), but their teams rarely compete on equal terms,
since professional teams are more systematically and intensively trained.
Amateur teams compete against each other for the FA Amateur Challenge Cup.
In England and Wales, amateur athletics, which include running (track, road
and cross-country), relay racing, jumping, vaulting, hurdling, steeplechasing,
throwing and race-walking are governed (for men) by the Amateur Athletic
Association (AAA), founded in 1880 to encourage the sport, to establish
uniform regulations, and to promote annual championship meetings. The
AAA is now organised from club to national level by honorary officers and
managed by representative members appointed by the Northern, Midland,
Southern and Welsh areas and by affiliated clubs and associations (amateur
athletic clubs, schools and youth organisations), of which there are hundreds
throughout England and Wales. Women’s athletics in England and Wales are
promoted by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association, founded in 1922.
Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own amateur athletic associations,
with similar functions; there are also separate women’s AAAs for each country.
Track meetings are held throughout Britain from April to October. The
main events in England and Wales are: the national championships for men
and women and international matches usually held in London; area and county
championships; and the universities, armed services, business houses and
schools championship meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country run¬
ning from October to March, and county, area and national cross-country
championships are held. Scottish events follow a similar pattern.
International athletics and the selection of British teams are dealt with by
the British Amateur Athletic Board (BAAB), composed of representatives of
the national associations for men and women and affiliated to the International
Amateur Athletic Federation. Teams from Britain compete in the Olympic
Games, and separate teams representing England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, held at four-yearly
intervals between the Olympic Games. The BAAB administers a coaching
scheme under which nine full-time national coaches lecture and coach in
schools, youth clubs, evening institutes, training colleges and universities and
at special courses organised by the BAAB or by regional associations. Some of
the coaches’ work is directly concerned with coaching athletes but their main
duties are to instruct men who wish to qualify as coaches, several hundreds of
whom give voluntary service to clubs throughout the country.
SPORT
451
Highland Games
Badminton
Basket Ball
Billiards and
Snooker
Bowls
Boxing
The Highland Games, traditional gatherings of local people in the Highlands
of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting the weight,
and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping competitions take place,
are unique spectacles which attract large numbers of spectators from all over
the world. Among better known Highland Games are the Braemar Gathering
(traditionally attended by the Royal Family), the Argyllshire and Cowal
Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear, but the Badminton Association of
England—which together with the Scottish and Welsh Badminton Unions
today organise the sport in Great Britain—was formed in 1893 and the first
tournament was promoted five years later. By 1914 the game had spread to
many other Commonwealth countries and it is now played throughout the
world (the national bodies in Great Britain were among the founder members
of the International Badminton Federation).
Basket ball is played in Britain both indoors and outdoors, primarily by men
and boys. There are about 1,000 senior clubs and the game is played in many
schools. The Amateur Basket Ball Association, organises championships and
is affiliated to the Federation Internationale de Basket Ball Amateur.
Although references to billiards in England survive from the sixteenth
century, the character of the present game was acquired at the end of the
seventeenth century. The Billiards and Snooker Control Council is the game’s
controlling body (for professionals and amateurs) and holds the copyright of
the rules. In the early 1930s snooker (a shorter game offering more diverse
incidents) began to acquire popularity, often at the expense of professional
billiards, and today, although both games are played widely at amateur levels,
snooker forms the essence of the professional game.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. Nowadays the
game is regulated, as far as the English Bowling Association (EBA, founded in
1903) is concerned, by the International Bowling Board (IBB). The Bowling
Associations of Ireland, Scotland and Wales also play to the IBB’s laws, but
there are other bowling associations in England—the English Bowling Federa¬
tion, the Crown Green Association and the English Women’s Bowling
Association—which are not under the IBB’s control. During the summer
bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in winter it is played on indoor
greens, which are increasing in number. At one time regarded as a pastime for
the elderly, the game is now played by people of all ages. Over 2,640 bowling
clubs are affiliated to the EBA. International, inter-county matches and national
championship competitions of singles, pairs, triples and fours are played.
Boxing as a British sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modern
form, which has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates from 1865
when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules eliminating much of
the brutality that had characterised prize fighting, and making skill the basis
of the sport. Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs,
and there are various amateur boxing competitions carried out according to
the rules of the Amateur Boxing Association, which controls all amateur
boxing, including schoolboy boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing
in the armed services.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control,
452
Canoeing
Cricket
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
founded in 1929. The board’s strict medical regulations provide for an
examination of boxers before and after each contest, an extensive annual
medical examination and the appointment of inspectors, medical officers and
representatives of the Board to ensure that the regulations are observed and to
guard against over-matching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests since
the presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late Lord
Lonsdale in 1909. Amateur championships are decided at 11 weights: light
flyweight, flyweight, bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight, light welter¬
weight, welterweight, light middleweight, middleweight, light heavyweight
and heavyweight. In professional boxing there is no light flyweight category.
Canoeing, the world’s oldest type of boating, dates as a modern sport from the
mid-nineteenth century; a canoe club was founded in 1866, and in 1867 a canoe
regatta was held on the Thames. The International Canoe Federation was
formed in 1936; in Great Britain, the British Canoe Union (a member of the
federation and established in 1936) promotes canoeing in all its forms and
assists the interests of its members.
Cricket, sometimes called the English national game, has uncertain origins,
but it is known to have been played at Guildford Grammar School in 1550,
and after the Restoration (of 1660) it became fashionable with the nobility,
who competed with each other to sponsor matches for very large sums of
money. Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century was the
famous Hambledon Club in Hampshire, whose members supported the most
brilliant players of the day. Towards the end of the century the Marylebone
Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in London and reframed the ‘Laws of
Cricket’. It has since had considerable influence on the development of the
game in Britain. Its headquarters, Lord’s (named after Thomas Lord, who
rented the first headquarters), were opened in 1787, and moved to the present
site in 1814. Nowadays, cricket in Britain is governed by the Cricket Council,
made up of representatives of the MCC, the Test and County Cricket Board
(representing first-class cricket) and the National Cricket Association (rep¬
resenting club and junior cricket). The MCC retains its world-wide responsi¬
bility for the laws of cricket.
The game is played in schools and universities, and most towns and villages
(as well as industrial sports clubs) have teams which play at least one match a
week from late April to early September. In the London area a large number
of pitches are provided by local authorities to augment those leased or owned
by clubs. In the Midlands and the north of England there is a network of
League cricket, contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players reinforced
by professionals, often distinguished overseas players.
The focus of the season centres on a series of ‘Test matches’ played between
England and a touring team from overseas (or sometimes two teams). The
first of these matches was played in Melbourne between England and Australia
in 1877. Since then international tours have taken place regularly between
countries of Test status, which now number seven. The matches last 30 playing
hours spread over five days and arouse great popular interest.
In addition to the Test matches, a First-Class County Championship,
decided on a points system, is contested by 17 counties, each playing 20
three-day matches. The counties not deemed first-class and second elevens of
the first-class counties play in a Minor Counties Championship. The univer¬
sity teams of Oxford and Cambridge rank as first-class and play an annual
SPORT
453
Croquet
Cycling
Fencing
Field Sports
Hunting
match at Lord’s. The counties also compete in two sponsored knock-out
competitions and a sponsored Sunday League. All three consist of one-day
matches.
Cricket is also played by women and girls in Britain, the governing body
being the Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926.
Croquet was introduced into Britain in the middle of the nineteenth century
and has developed into a game played by people of all ages on the lawns of local
croquet clubs and private gardens. Some 80 clubs are registered with the
Croquet Association—formed in 1896—which promotes the sport in Britain
and maintains links with croquet associations in other countries.
In Britain the internationally recognised body for cycle racing is the British
Cycling Federation which has 700 affiliated clubs and provides third-party
insurance and a legal aid and touring service for its members. It controls
track and massed-start road racing in Britain, and is concerned with the
cycling events in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games and the annual
world championship. Time trials are controlled by the Road Time Trials
Council.
The principal organisation promoting touring by bicycle is the Cyclists’
Touring Club (CTC), the oldest touring club in the world, with a membership
of some 20,000. CTC representatives in all parts of Britain offer help to touring
cyclists; its 50 district associations arrange holiday and week-end tours and
competitions, rallies and rides of all kinds; and its travel department provides
touring itineraries for members both at home and overseas, and maintains a
full travel agency service. Other benefits include a touring magazine, a members’
handbook, legal aid and third-party insurance.
Fencing as a sport has made considerable progress throughout Britain during
the past 25 years. The Amateur Fencing Association (founded in 1902) has
over 600 clubs, and many classes are organised and financed by local authori¬
ties. Fencing is also practised in most universities and an increasing number of
schools. Under the auspices of the association, national championships and
international tournaments are held every year.
The most popular field sports—hunting, game shooting and fishing—have a
long history, and still play a considerable part in the life of the countryside.
The British Field Sports Society looks after their interests.
In Britain hunting means primarily fox hunting on horseback with a pack of
hounds; but it also includes stag hunting (in Devon and Somerset), hunting
the hare, either on foot with beagles or with harriers when the followers are
mounted, and otter hunting along river banks. Hunting depends not on right
but on the goodwill of small landowners and farmers, most of whom support
their local hunt by allowing it to ride over their property.
Fox hunting became a widespread activity in the English countryside some
200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for the landed gentry and local farmers,
it has gradually widened its appeal, in spite of the fact that it is an expensive
pastime for those who ride to hounds. The sport is not without its critics, but
an ever-larger number of people, including many townsmen, take a keen interest
in it. Most hunts meet two or three times a week and an estimated 25,000 to
30,000 people ride to hounds weekly, many others following in cars, on bicycles
or on foot. The fox hunting season starts in early November and lasts until
454
Game Shooting
Fishing
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
April; it is preceded by cub hunting (the hunting of young foxes) when young
hounds are trained. At the end of the season most hunts organise steeplechases
(point-to-points) which attract large crowds. There are over 190 packs of
hounds in England and Wales, some 3 in Northern Ireland, and 11 in Scot¬
land. Hunts are financed mainly by the subscriptions of their members (£15 or
less to £50 or more), by ‘caps’ (contributions paid by non-subscribers), and by
the proceeds of such annual events as the point-to-points and the hunt ball.
Sometimes the Master of Fox-hounds, who is in charge of the hunt, bears a
proportion of the cost.
Game shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the
early part of the nineteenth century; nowadays, game consists mainly of
grouse, partridge, pheasant, snipe and woodcock. There is virtually no free
shooting in Britain. A certificate (for which a fee is payable) must be obtained
from the local police by anyone who possesses, purchases or acquires a shot
gun1; and it is necessary to have a licence to kill game. Nearly all game birds
are found on privately owned land, shot over either by the owner and his
friends or by syndicates which have leased the shooting rights. However, in
some parts of the more remote countryside, rough shooting may be enjoyed in
a less formal way. Much of the country’s wild-fowling is controlled by the
Wildfowlers’ Association of Great Britain and Ireland, through its numerous
clubs. The Game Conservancy, formed by landowners, farmers and others
interested in game conservation and research, collects information on a
national scale and studies factors controlling game population.
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other birds are protected by law
during a ‘close season’ and allowed to breed in security, often under the care of
privately employed gamekeepers on numerous estates. Grouse shooting takes
place mostly in Scotland, northern England and north Wales; partridge and
pheasant shooting in nearly all regions of Great Britain, the former mainly over
farm land, and the latter in or near woodland; and wildfowling on the marshes
and fenlands of the coastal areas.
Deer stalking is mainly a sport of the Highlands of Scotland. The deer are
preserved in privately owned ‘deer forests’, covering 9,000 to over 30,000
acres (3,642 to 12,140 hectares), and are protected during close seasons.
Fishing is the most popular of the country sports, being within the reach of
everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and
line to the experienced fly-fisherman). There are some 3-8 million anglers
in Britain. The outstanding forms of the sport are salmon and trout fishing.
There are trout streams in most parts of the country, and in Scotland many
hundreds of lochs also provide good sport. Salmon fishing may be enjoyed in
many regions of Britain, but the best salmon rivers are in Scotland. In England
and Wales the most widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as
pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench, chub and bream, and the National
Federation of Anglers (NFA) has over 382,000 members in over 200 clubs
or associations. Match angling—competitive fishing for coarse fish by weight—
is a feature of the many angling clubs affiliated to the NFA, particularly in the
Midlands and north of England. A national angling championship, composed
of teams of 12 anglers, is organised annually by the NFA, and the NFA enters
a team in the International Angling Competition. As a rule, freshwater fishing
1 A shot gun is defined in the Firearms Act 1968 as ‘a smooth-bore gun with a barrel
not less than 24 inches in length, not being an air-gun’. Shot guns are subject to control
under the Act.
SPORT
Golf
Gymnastics
Hockey
455
has to be paid for and local enquiries made about any permit or licence required.
Most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs; trout and salmon fishermen either
rent a stretch of river, join a club, stay at an hotel with its own fishing rights, or
pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. The cost of salmon fishing
is often high. Coastal fishing and deep-sea fishing for shark and tunny are
growing in popularity and are free to all (except for salmon and sea trout
fishing, which is by licence only).
The National Anglers’ Council is a central consultative and co-ordinating
body, representative of the various national bodies concerned with angling.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in other
parts of Britain until towards the end of the nineteenth century. Since then,
however, it has gained steadily in popularity (particularly since the mid-
1950s); nowadays there are golf courses in the vicinity of many towns and
villages in all parts of Britain—some owned by local authorities, but the
majority owned by golf clubs. The headquarters of the Royal and Ancient
Golf Club is St. Andrews, Scotland.
The main event of the golfing year is the Open Golf Championship, first
played in i860; other important matches include the Walker Cup (for
amateurs) and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played between Britain
and the United States; the Amateur Championship; the World Amateur Team
Championship; and the Ladies Championship.
Gymnastics involving bodily exercises and disciplines were originally de¬
veloped as a sport in ancient Greece; nowadays in Britain the sport is a non-
seasonal activity for both men and women and is controlled nationally by the
British Amateur Gymnastics Association (affiliated to the Federation Inter¬
nationale de Gymnastique and the British Olympic Association). The asso¬
ciation’s activities include the promotion of international and national
programmes (including the national tournaments at the Royal Albert Hall,
London) and of proficiency award schemes for people of all ages.
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain
for at least five centuries, and some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in
Scotland, are still played extensively. Modern hockey, however, dates from
the formation (in 1886) of the Hockey Association of England. The Inter¬
national Hockey Rules Board controls the rules of the game. There are some
1,500 men’s hockey clubs throughout Britain with at least 40,000 male adult
players; some 600 boys’ schools also play the game. A county championship is
held annually in England; in Wales there is a cup competition; and in Scotland
there is a cup competition and six local league competitions. Regular amateur
international matches are also played. Men’s hockey is an Olympic sport, and
team arrangements are made by the Great Britain Hockey Board.
The controlling bodies of women’s hockey are: the All England Women’s
Hockey Association (founded 1895) to which are affiliated some 800 clubs and
2,200 schools, representing a membership of about 25,000 adults; the Irish
Ladies’ Hockey Union; the Scottish Women’s Hockey Association; and the
Welsh Women’s Hockey Association. The first international women’s hockey
match took place in 1896. Nowadays such a match is played annually at
Wembley Stadium (in addition to those played in other parts of the country)
and attracts over 60,000 spectators.
456
Judo
Lacrosse
Lawn Tennis
Motor Sports
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Judo, an Olympic sport originating in Japan, has a large and growing follow¬
ing in Britain and is governed by the British Judo Association, which is
affiliated to the International Judo Federation under the rules of which judo
competitions are conducted. There are some 600 clubs in the association,
which has coaching schemes for some 30,000 registered members.
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North
America, is played mainly by women—in girls schools, at lacrosse clubs, and
at universities. Women’s international and regional matches are played under
the auspices of the All England Women’s Lacrosse Association, the All Wales
Women’s Lacrosse Association and the Scottish Women’s Lacrosse Association.
The men’s game, controlled by the English Lacrosse Union, is played in ten
universities, several colleges of education and by clubs and schools, mainly in
the London, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and Nottingham areas. Matches
played include county matches, an annual fixture between the North of
England and the South, the English Club Championship, and international
matches between Australia, the United States, Canada and England.
The forerunner of modern lawn tennis (the game known as 7^ de paume) was
introduced into England from France in the fifteenth century and a ‘tennis
court’, built by Henry VIII, is still in use at Hampton Court. The modern
game,’first played in England in 1873, quickly became very popular; in 1877
the first championships were played. The Lawn Tennis Association, the
game’s controlling body in Britain, was founded in 1888. The international
governing body of the game (the International Lawn Tennis Federation, with
headquarters in London) was founded in 1913.
The number of tennis players has greatly increased during the present
century, particularly since the game has spread to practically every country in
the world. In Britain the game is played in almost all girls’ and in many boys’
secondary schools, on private courts, in parks and recreation grounds and at
several thousand tennis clubs.
The annual Wimbledon fortnight, held during the summer, is the main
event of the lawn tennis season in Britain, and, in fact, in the world. These
championships, for players of many nationalities, draw large crowds; the
grounds at the All England Club at Wimbledon can accommodate over 30,000
spectators, including 14,000 round the Centre Court where the finals are
played. Other tournaments which attract a good deal of attention are: the
British Hard Court Championships, the British Junior Championships, and the
County Championships. There are also national competitions for boys’ and
girls’ schools. The most important international events are the Davis Cup (for
men) and the Federation Cup competition (for women). Women players from
Britain and the United States also compete for the Wightman Cup.
Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain, more
racing and sports cars have been built in Britain than in any other country,
and British drivers (including women drivers) have an international reputation
second to none. The Royal Automobile Club (RAC) is the governing body of
motor sport in Great Britain, and the 800 motor clubs registered with it
organise each year 5,500 motor sporting events, 260 of which are race meetings
held on 18 different racing tracks licensed by the RAC. The RAC also issues
yearly 28,000 competition licences covering all events from hill climbs and
autocross to full international race meetings; and it organises the British Grand
SPORT
457
Mountaineering
Netball
Orienteering
Polo
Prix which counts towards the Formula One World Motor Racing Champion¬
ship. Kart racing also comes under the RAC’s jurisdiction.
In addition to motor car racing, there is motor cycle racing—the most
important contest of the year is for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy—for
which the controlling body is the Auto-Cycle Union (founded in 1903 and
represented on the Federation Internationale de Motorcycliste), with over 600
affiliated clubs in Great Britain. Motor cycle speedway racing, introduced into
Britain in 1928, is governed by the Speedway Control Board.
The popularity of mountaineering has grown considerably in Britain. Clubs
in the British Mountaineering Council (BMC) and the Mountaineering
Council for Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number over 190,
ranging from national clubs, such as the Alpine Club (founded in 1857, the
oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish Mountaineering
Club, to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. A number of local
education authorities, and national bodies such as the Sports Council and the
Outward Bound Trust have established mountaineering training centres.
Training courses are run jointly by the Sports Councils, and BMC, the Youth
Hostels Association and other bodies, and many universities and schools have
mountaineering sections.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring and climbing
most of the great ranges of the world, for example, the first ascent of the
Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, andof Kangchenjunga in 1955. Regular
expeditions are sent to many of the world’s mountain ranges.
Netball is a popular game for girls and women. The controlling body in
England is the All England Netball Association to which clubs, colleges and
schools are affiliated through county netball committees. The women’s armed
services and national youth, university and college organisations are also
affiliated. National tournaments for counties, clubs, colleges and schools and
international matches are organised each year; and inter-Commonwealth tours
are also arranged.
Orienteering involving competitive wayfinding across country (usually on
foot) was introduced into Britain on a national basis in the early 1960s,
although similar activities had been promoted in the past (the armed forces,
for instance, often use wayfinding in training programmes). Both men and
women participate and the sport is organised for team and individual competi¬
tions by the British Orienteering Federation. Several schools have taken up
the sport, combining outdoor exercise with practical geography.
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British
in India, and brought to England in 1869. The sport’s governing body is the
Hurlingham Polo Association, to which many overseas polo associations are
affiliated. Polo players are a very small section of the community, for the cost
of keeping polo ponies is high. However, many clubs now own trained ponies
for hire to members at moderate cost. Over 400 players receive handicaps
from the association, but many less expert players take part in club games.
Public interest in polo has increased and spectators attend inter-club tourna¬
ments and matches between high-handicap teams with players from several
countries, including other Commonwealth countries, the United States and
Argentina.
458
Racing
Horse-racing
Greyhound Racing
Betting on
Racing
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean, first and foremost,
horse-racing. Other forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing (a
form of hunting with greyhounds), pony racing, trotting races and pigeon
flying.
Horse-racing has been known in England since Tudor times and even earlier.
The Jockey Club (originally formed about 1750) controls all horse-racing in
Britain and its rules are the basis of universal turf procedure.
Flat racing is carried on from late March till the beginning of November
and steeplechasing and hurdle racing from August to June. The classic flat
races are: the Two Thousand Guineas for colts and fillies, and the One
Thousand Guineas for fillies only, both run at Newmarket; the Derby for
colts and fillies and the Oaks for fillies only, both run at Epsom; and the St.
Leger, for colts and fillies, run at Doncaster. The Derby is the outstanding
event in the racing calendar; it takes place annually in early June and is one
of the most colourful and exciting events of the sporting year. The most
fashionable race-meeting of the season is held at Ascot in Berkshire, in mid-
June, and is known as ‘Royal Ascot’, being traditionally attended by the
Sovereign.
The most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting is the National
Hunt Festival Meeting at Cheltenham in March. The best-known single
steeplechase is the Grand National at Aintree, near Liverpool, run annually
since 1839.
In England and Wales there are 57 racecourses (which must be licensed by
The Jockey Club) and Scotland has six racecourses. Over 950 days’ racing
are held each year. There are some 10,000 horses in training in Great
Britain.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926,
when the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester.
There are now about 114 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of them near
large towns, and meetings are held two or three times a week. The licensing
authorities for greyhound racing tracks are the county and county borough
councils. Some 8 million people a year watch greyhound racing, the rules
of which are drawn up by the National Greyhound Racing Club. The 46
greyhound racecourses which accept the rules of the club are the largest in
the country and account for approximately 93 per cent of the total attendance
and totalisator turnover.
Greyhound racing can be conducted only at a licensed greyhound racecourse
and only on 130 racing days in a licensing year (1st July-30th June). There
are some 10,000 greyhounds in training under the National Greyhound Racing
Club Rules.
Betting on racing is allowed for people of at least 18 years of age, subject to a
government betting duty (see p. 217)- Bookmakers (who must hold personal
permits) provide betting facilities both on and off racecourses and greyhound
tracks (bets laid off course in Great Britain comprise about 86 per cent of the
betting turnover, mainly through some 14,800 licensed betting offices). For
horse-racing, the Horserace Totalisator Board (HTB), a statutory body, runs
totalisator betting (a form of pool betting), both on and off the courses, for
greyhound racing there is no statutory body, but some 70 tracks are allowed to
run their own totalisators under strict control by local authorities. Book¬
makers and the HTB have to contribute a ‘betting levy’ to the Horserace
Betting Levy Board which promotes the advancement of veterinary science
Riding
Rowing
sport 459
and education and the improvement of breeds of horses (including the work of
the National Stud at Newmarket) and horse-racing in general.
The British Equestrian Federation, the authority responsible for equestrian
activities (other than racing) in Great Britain, co-ordinates the work of the
British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Association (see below),
and runs the National Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh, Warwickshire.
The British Horse Society is responsible for promoting the interests of horse
and pony breeding, furthering the art of riding, and encouraging horse-
mastership and the welfare of horses and ponies. It provides tests, lectures,
publications, a film library, courses and examinations, and employs a national
instructor who, together with riding schools approved by the society, helps to
promote horsemastership throughout the country. With some 21,000 members,
the society is also the parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding Club
Movement. The Pony Club (39,500 members) runs its own national champion¬
ships, arranges conferences, instructors’ courses and efficiency tests, and pub¬
lishes information on riding techniques and horse management. The Riding
Clubs (about 26,000 members) also hold national championships each year and
the Riding Club Horseshoe Long Distance Ride—a test of stamina for horses
and riders, held annually in different parts of Britain.
Under the auspices of the society, horse trials are held throughout Britain
during the spring and summer. The three-day events held each year—in April
at Badminton, Gloucestershire, in May at Tidworth, Hampshire, and in
September at Burghley House, Lincolnshire—are among the outstanding
equestrian events of the year. These trials include dressage, cross-country
riding and showjumping; some 60 one-day and two-day horse trials on similar
lines are held annually.
Affiliated dressage competitions are held throughout the year, many of them
as qualifying rounds for championships held at the Royal International Horse
Show and the Horse of the Year Show (see below) and for dressage champion¬
ships at the National Equestrian Centre.
Showjumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association, which
is responsible for drawing up the rules for the judging of jumping competitions
and prescribing the general standards and height of obstacles for show
jumping. It encourages showjumping events and keeps a register of horses and
ponies taking part at affiliated shows. The association seeks to improve the
standard of jumping and to provide for the representation of Great Britain in
international competitions. More than 800 shows are affiliated each year to the
association, which has a membership of over 9,000. The two major show
jumping events each year are the Royal International Horse Show and the
Horse of the Year Show.
Rowing is enjoyed by participants from all sections of the community and
attracts considerable spectator interest. The art of oarsmanship is taught in
many schools, universities and rowing clubs (including women’s clubs)
throughout Britain, where the governing bodies of the sport are the Amateur
Rowing Association and the Scottish Amateur Rowing Association and the
Ulster Branch of the Irish Amateur Rowing Union. Since the late 1940s, the
number of rowing clubs has doubled. The first rowing course in Britain built to
Olympic 2,000-metre standards has been opened at the National Water Sports
Centre in Nottingham.
The University Boat Race between eight-oared crews from Oxford and
Cambridge originated in 1829 an^ has been rowed on the Thames almost every
460
Rugby Football
Sailing
Shooting
(Target)
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
spring since 1836. The Head of the River Race in March (also on the Thames)
is the largest assembly of racing craft in the world—more than 325 eights row in
procession. At Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire (founded in 1839) crews from
all over the world compete each July in various kinds of races over a straight
course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-1 kilometres). Many other riverside resorts
arrange summer regattas. The oldest annual event in the English racing
calendar is Doggett’s Coat and Badge, founded in 1716 and organised since
by the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers; originally for professional water¬
men and limited to six entrants, the race (along the Thames in London) is now
open to amateurs (who must still be apprentice watermen).
Rugby football is played according to two different sets of rules. Rugby Union
football (‘rugger’—in which there are 15 players in a team) is played through¬
out Britain under the auspices of English, Welsh, Scottish and Irish rugby
football unions.
International matches between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and
France are played regularly at the leading rugby football grounds of each
country, including Twickenham, London—the headquarters of the Rugby
Football Union (England)—and there are tours by international teams. Other
important rugby matches are the county championship competitions, the
annual match between the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the Hospi¬
tals’ Cup Final, and the Inter-Services tournament. Membership of the
different Rugby Unions is confined to amateur clubs of which there are over
2,500 in membership, with over 2,000 schools.
Rugby League football—a 13-a-side game for professionals as well as
amateurs—is played mostly in the north of England. The game’s governing
body, the Rugby Football League (instituted in 1895) has its headquarters
at Leeds and regularly sends touring teams to Australia and New Zealand.
Annual international games, professional and amateur, are played against
France. The major match of the season—the Rugby League Challenge Cup
Final—attracts crowds of 100,000 at Wembley Stadium.
Sailing has always been popular on Britain’s inland and coastal waters but the
sport, and in particular small boat sailing, has recently widened its appeal. The
Royal Yachting Association (RYA), the national authority, has over 1,500 clubs
and 36,000 personal members. The RYA has many recognised schools giving
courses for novices, a National Sailing Centre where instructors are coached
and tested, and is responsible for the selection of Great Britain’s Olympic
team. One of the world’s main regattas takes place from Cowes in the Isle of
Wight annually during the first week of August. Other major events are held
at such sailing centres as Poole, Lowestoft, Harwich, Burnham-on-Crouch,
Plymouth, Falmouth and the Clyde. Racing is subject to the rules of the
International Yacht Racing Union, founded in 1907.
The Joint Shooting Committee for Great Britain, founded in 1955, represents
its member associations—the National Rifle Association (NRA), the National
Small-Bore Rifle Association (NSRA) and the Clay Pigeon Shooting Associa¬
tion (CPSA)—in the International Shooting Union and the British Olympic
Association. The committee sponsors all entries to international competitions.
Full-bore (7-62 mm and -303 in.) rifle and pistol (high power) shooting is
organised by the NRA, founded in i860. Some 80 county rifle associations, 100
schools and more than 500 rifle clubs are affiliated to the NRA. The annual
Imperial Meeting at Bisley Camp, Surrey—attended by some 2,000 competi-
SPORT
Skating
Skiing
Squash Rackets
Swimming
461
tors from Britain and other Commonwealth countries, including cadets from
schools—comprises (for individuals and teams) competitions for members of
the armed services and for schools, and target rifle competitions at county,
national and international level, concluding with the Queen’s Prize, which
attracts about 1,000 entries. The NRA also organises postal matches for British
and overseas teams, and sends teams to other Commonwealth countries.
Small-bore (-22 in.) rifle and pistol shooting—carried out either on indoor
ranges of 15 to 25 yards (14-23 m) in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards
(183 m)—and air rifle and pistol shooting (-177 in.) at 6 yards and 10 metres
(both indoors and outside) are also widely practised in Britain. Some 3,500
clubs are affiliated to the NSRA, which arranges inter-club and inter-county
competitions for teams and individuals. Clubs also compete in county and local
groups. The NSRA organises a National Bisley Meeting (usually attended by
more than 2,000 competitors), a Scottish meeting (some 600 competitors),
and the British Pistol Championships (some 600 competitors) at Bisley.
International small-bore rifle and pistol matches are held with teams from
overseas. The NSRA provides coaching and advisory services.
Some 400 clay pigeon shooting clubs are situated in all parts of Great Britain;
the sport is governed by the CPSA which represents Great Britain in major
international events.
The world’s first skating club was formed in Edinburgh in 1742 and the first
mechanically refrigerated ice rink was built in London in 1876. There are
now 31 artificial ice rinks in Britain, and where facilities exist many local
authorities provide skating tuition for school children. Over 60 ice clubs are
affiliated to the National Skating Association of Great Britain (which also
promotes roller skating), formed in 1879—one of the associations which in
1892 established the International Skating Union to supervise and standardise
ice figure, ice speed and (later) ice dance skating regulations.
When there is sufficient snow, skiing takes place in several parts of Britain.
The governing body of the sport is the National Ski Federation of Great
Britain; there are also regional ski associations in Scotland, Wales, Northern
Ireland and England. There are now over 60 artificial ski-slopes in Britain.
Winter sports centres have been established in Aviemore, Glencoe and Glen-
shee (all in Scotland) with ski-lifts and ski schools staffed by professional
instructors. There are half a million skiers in Great Britain and 162 ski clubs.
Squash rackets is thought to have originated at Harrow School in the 1850s;
the Squash Rackets Association, formed in 1929 to promote and organise the
game, was a founder member of the International Squash Rackets Federation.
A European Squash Rackets Federation was formed in 1973 on the initiative
of the SRA. The game, which is both amateur and professional, is played
mainly by men and boys (it is very popular in many boys’ schools and uni¬
versities), although an increasing number of participants are women. There are
national inter-county and a number of major area amateur and open cham¬
pionships.
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the
seaside, and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people.
The existence of indoor swimming baths (mainly provided by local authorities)
makes all-the-year swimming possible, and instruction and coaching is pro¬
vided in some places by qualified teachers who hold certificates for elementary
462
Underwater
Swimming
Table Tennis
Tenpin Bowling
Volleyball
Water Skiing
Weightlifting
Wrestling
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
or advanced teaching awarded by the Amateur Swimming Association (ASA).
The ASA’s objects are to promote the teaching and practice of swimming,
diving and water polo and to stimulate public opinion in favour of providing
proper accommodation and facilities for them; and to draw up and enforce
uniform laws for the regulation of amateur swimming, diving and water polo
and synchronised swimming (a form of water ballet) championships and
competitions in England.
Underwater swimming (sub aqua), one of the fastest growing sports in Britain,
is governed nationally by the British Sub Aqua Club, which promotes under¬
water exploration, science and sport. Formed in 1953, the club has become
the largest in the world, with some 20,000 active members and 600 branches
in Britain and overseas.
Table tennis had its origins in Britain in the late nineteenth century and was
then often referred to as ‘ping pong’ (the name is derived from the sound of the
ball hitting the bat). In 1902 the Ping Pong Association was formed to organise
championships, and in 1927 it was reconstituted as the English Table Tennis
Association—the body which today controls the game.
Types of bowling are thought to have been played in ancient Egypt and have
been known in Europe for over 700 years. Tenpin bowling was re-introduced
in its present form from North America in i960 and rapidly became a popular
sport in Great Britain where the controlling body is the British Tenpin Bowl¬
ing Association, founded in 1961.
Volleyball, introduced into Europe from the United States, is growing in
popularity in England and Scotland where it is promoted by the English
Volleyball Association and the Scottish Volleyball Association. There are some
214 clubs affiliated to the English Association, and both associations are
members of the British Olympic Association.
The popularity of water skiing in Britain, both during the summer and at
suitable times in the winter, is increasing. The British Water Ski Federation,
formed in 1951, represents over 5,000 water skiers, several of whom have won
world and European titles. Over 100 clubs are affiliated to the federation.
Modern weightlifting with bar-bells and dumb-bells became popular towards
the end of the nineteenth century; the first championships open to the world
were held in London in 1891. The sport is regulated on a world-wide scale by
the International Weightlifting Federation, formed in 1920, and in Britain
by the British Amateur Weightlifters’ Association.
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world. The style most commonly
used in Britain is the ‘free’ style, which evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can
or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling is still
practised in the north of England and in Scotland, and Cornish style wrestling
(in which the contestants wear rough canvas jackets by which all holds must
be taken) takes place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the free and Graeco-Roman
styles features at the Olympic Games; in the Commonwealth Games only
free style is wrestled. Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British
Amateur Wrestling Association, which is affiliated to the International
Amateur Wrestling Federation.
Appendix
Adoption of
Metric System
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
CURRENCY
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There
are six denominations: 50p; lOp; 5p; 2p; Ip; and ip.
METRIC EQUIVALENTS FOR BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The Metrication Board was set up in 1969 to promote the planning and
publicising of the changeover to the international system of units for weights
and measures throughout the economy and educational system, mainly by 1975.
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint =
= 1 quart =
= 1 gallon =
= 1 bushel =
= 1 quarter =
16 oz.
14 lb.
112 lb.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1-609 kilometres
1 square inch
1 square foot
1 square yard
1 acre
1 square mile
0-568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (lb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
= 6-451 square centimetres
= 929-03 square centimetres
= 0-836 square metre
= 0-405 hectare
= 2-59 square kilometres
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
T016 tonnes
0-907 tonne
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them,
as the case may be, for example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540
centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-404
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
464
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo¬
grammes
Av.
Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
35-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 553
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
Thermometrical
Table
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by f;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by f, then add 32.
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade — 212° Fahrenheit.
Bibliography
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide to
further reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers are asked to note that in Britain the Central Office of Information refer¬
ence documents marked with an asterisk may be obtained, on payment of a small
charge, from the Central Office of Information, Reference Division Distribution
Unit, Hercules Road, Westminster Bridge Road, London SEi 7DU; and overseas
they may be obtained from British Information Offices.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Information can
be purchased from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These
pamphlets are listed here with their respective prices {postage extra).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from
H.M. Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
International Standard Book Numbers {ISBN) should be quoted when ordering
publications. So that readers will be supplied with the latest edition no ISBNs are
given for annual publications.
OP means the book is out of print.
Physical
Background
Demographic
Background
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
ISBN
Bowen, David. Britain’s Weather. David & Charles 0 7153 4717 9
East, W. Gordon, Editor. Regions of the British
Isles (series). Nelson
Fairbrother, N. New Lives, New Landscapes.
Penguin
Fitter, R. S. R., Heinzal, H. and Parslow, J.
The Birds of Britain and Europe. Collins
Martin, W. Keble. A Concise British Flora in
Colour. 2nd edn. Ebury Press
Mitchell, J. B., Editor. Great Britain:
Geographical Essays. Cambridge University Press
Reader’s Digest. Complete Atlas of the British
Isles. The Reader's Digest Association
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Land of Britain: Its Use
and Misuse. 3rd edn. Longmans
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: A
Geographic and Economic Survey. 6th rev. edn.
Longmans
Trueman, A. E. Geology and Scenery in England
and Wales. Rev. edn. Penguin
British Regional Geology Handbooks. HMSO
Meteorological Office Annual Report. HMSO
Allen, D. Elliston. British Tastes. Hutchinson
Halsey, A. H., Editor. Trends in British Society
Since 1900. Macmillan
Howard, Alexander. Endless Cavalcade: A Diary
of British Customs and Traditions. Weidenfeld &
Nicolson
Marsh, D. C. The Changing Social Structure of
England and Wales, 1871-1961. Routledge
0 14 021388 0
0 00 212043 7
0 7181 4028 1
0 521 05739 6
0 582 48740 4
0 582 48144 9
0 09 088110
0 333 10549
£
1969 2-75
1960 3 15
onwards to
5-25
1972
1972
1969
1962
1966
1963
1971
0 14 020185 8 1972
1947
to
1970
1968
1972
100
2-50
2- 50
5-90
5-50
600
3- 50
1-25
0-40
2-25
4-95
0 213 17257 7 1971 1-50
0 7100 3373 7 1966 2-50
466
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
General Survey
The Monarchy
Parliament
ISBN
Annual Reports and Statistics
Registrar General, Northern Ireland. Belfast,
HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland
Part I. Mortality Statistics. HMSO
Part II. Population and Vital Statistics. HMSO
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England
and Wales
Part I. Medical. HMSO
Part II. Population. HMSO
Part III. Commentary. HMSO
Census of Northern Ireland 1966. General 1968
Report. Belfast, HMSO
Census 1971
County Reports. HMSO
England and Wales: Preliminary Report. HMSO 0 10 690116 0 1971
Greater London: Advance Analysis. HMSO 011 690184 5 1972
Great Britain: Advance Analysis. HMSO 011 690198 5 1972
New Towns (England and Wales): Advance 0 11 690185 3 1972
Analysis. HMSO
Northern Ireland: Preliminary Report, Belfast. 0 337 02239 9 1971
Scotland: Preliminary Report. Edinburgh, HMSO 0 11 490654 8 1971
Family Expenditure Survey. HMSO
Report of the Population Panel. Cmnd 5258 0 10 152580 X 1973
HMSO
Sample Census 1966 Great Britain Summary 1967
Tables. HMSO
Social Trends. HMSO
Ulster Year Book. Belfast, HMSO
Cymru: Wales. HMSO
2. GOVERNMENT
Birch, A. H. The British System of Government.
Allen & Unwin
Calvert, H. Constitutional Law in Northern
Ireland. Szveet & Maxwell
Cross, J. A. British Public Administration.
University Tutorial Press
 Modern British Government. University
Tutorial Press
de Smith, S. A. Constitutional and Administrative
Law. Penguin
Hanson, A. H. and Welles, Malcolm. Governing
Britain. Fontana-Collins
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution.
5th edn. Cambridge University Press
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History
of Modern Britain since 1485. 9th edn. A. & C.
Black
Murray, J. O. Government and People. Harrap
Wade, E. C. S. and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional
Law. 8th edn. Longmans
Burkes Guide to the Royal Family. Burkes Peerage
Hardie, F. The Political Influence of the British
Monarchy. Batsford
The Monarchy in Britain. Reference Pamphlet
R.5526/71 COI
Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A
Parliamentary Dictionary. 3rd edn. Butterworth
Butler, David E. and Freeman, Jennie.
British Political Facts, 1900—1967. 2nd edn.
Macmillan
 and Stokes, D. Political Changes in
Britain: Forces shaping Electoral Choice. Penguin
Campion, Lord, Consultant Editor", Fellowes, Sir
Edward and Cocks, T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas
Erskine May’s Treatise on the Law, Privileges,
Proceedings and Usage of Parliament. Butterworth
0 04 320042 7 1967
0 420 42230 7 1968
0 7231 0517 0 1970
0 7231 0573 1 1972
0 14 080223 1 1971
0 00 632374 X 1970
0 521 09136 5 1966
0 7136 0939 7 1969
0 245 51905 X 1973
0 582 48823 0 1970
0 220 66222 3 1973
0 7134 1113 9 1970
1971
0 406 10101 9 1970
0 333 03360 4 1969
0 14 021339 2 1971
0 406 29101 2 1971
1-50
various
0-60
0-37
4-50
0-34
0-30
0-30
0-90
1-62}
1-50
5 00
M0
115
1- 50
0-50
0-574
2- 25
2-10
4-00
1000
2-10
#
2- 50
3- 50
0-80
8-80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Prime
Minister, The
Privy Council,
Government,
Government
Departments
Local
Government
Hanson, A. H. and Crick, Bernard, Editors. The
Commons in Transition. Fontana-Collins
Hollis, Christopher. Parliament and its
Sovereignty. Hollis and Carter
King, Anthony and Sloman, Anne. Westminster
and Beyond. Macmillan
Laundy, Philip. The Office of Speaker. Cassell
 and Wilding, Norman. An Encyclopaedia
of Parliament. Cassell
Madgwick, D. J. Introduction to British Politics.
Hutchinson Educational
Roberts, Geoffrey K. Political Parties and
Pressure Groups in Britain. Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Stacey, Frank. The British Ombudsman.
Clarendon Press
‘The Times.’ House of Commons 1970. The Times
The British Parliament. (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.5448/73) No. 33. HMSO
The Organisation of Political Parties in Britain.
Reference Paper R.4769/72 COI
Parliamentary Elections in Britain. Reference Paper
R.5513/73 COI
Brown, R. G. S. The Administrative Process in
Britain. Methuen
Fry, Geoffrey Kingdom. Statesmen in Disguise.
The Changing Role of the Administrative Class of
the Home Civil Service, 1853-1966. Macmillan
Mackintosh, John P. The British Cabinet. 2nd
edn. Methuen
New Whitehall Series: For the Royal Institute of
Public Administration.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
by Sir John Winnifrith. Allen & Unwin
The Central Office of Information, by Sir Fife
Clark. Allen & Unwin
Her Majesty’s Customs and Excise, by Sir
James Crombie. Allen & Unwin
The Foreign Office, by Lord Strang and others.
Allen & Unwin
The Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam. Allen
& Unwin
The Inland Revenue, by Sir Alexander Johnston.
Allen & Unwin
The Scottish Office and other Scottish
Departments, by Sir David Milne. Allen &
Unwin
Roseveare, H. The Evolution of a British
Institution: The Treasury. Allen Lane
Annual Reports
Civil Service Department. HMSO
Her Majesty’s Civil Service Commissioners. CSC
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration.
HMSO
The British Civil Service. Reference Paper
R.5599/71 COI
Central Government in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5564/71) No. 40. HMSO
The Civil Service. Report of the Committee
1966-68 [Fulton Report]. Cmnd 3638 HMSO
Her Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Public
Departments [5 issues a year}. HMSO
Buxton, Richard. Local Government. 2nd edn.
Penguin
Cross, C. A. The Local Government Act 1972.
Sweet & Maxwell
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of
Local Government and Administration. 9th rev.
edn. Butterworth
Jewell, R. E. C. Central and Local Government.
Knight
ISBN
0 00 632373 1
0 370 01358 1
0 333 14492 9
0 304 92536 5
0 304 93689 8
0 09 096891 3
0 297 00090 X
0 19 825304 4
0 7230 0011 5
0 11 700625 4
0 416 15020 9
0 333 00290 3
1970
1973
1973
1964
1972
1970
1970
1971
1970
1973
1972
1973
1971 1-30
1969 600
0 04 354019 8
0 04 354006 6
0 04 354016 3
0 04 354010 4
0 04 354013 9
0 11 700111 2
0 10 136380 X
0 14 080237 1
0 421 19140 6
0 406 59403 1
1971
1971
1973
1973
1973
467
£
0-50
2- 50
4-95
3- 75
6-50
1-50
1-00
4- 00
3-50
0-47
0 416 29670 X 1968 1-40
1962 2-00
1971 OP
1962 1-75
1955 1-75
1955 OP
1965 1-75
1958 1-50
0 7139 0111 X 1969 4-20
free
#
0-30
1968 0-871
0-25
1- 50
2- 75
6-80
0 85314 041 3 1970 2-25
468
BRITAIN 1974". AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Fire Service
The Law
Municipal Year Book and Public Utilities
Directory. Municipal Journal
Richards, Peter G. The Reformed Local
Government System. Allen & Unwin
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections.
Shaw
The Future Shape of Local Government Finance.
Cmnd 4741 HMSO
Local Government in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5505/72) No. 1. HMSO
Local Government in England. Government
Proposals for Reorganisation. Cmnd 4584 HMSO
Local Government in Northern Ireland. Report of
the Review 1970. Cmd 546 Belfast, HMSO
Reorganisation of Services: Consultative
Document. Belfast, HMSO
Local Government Reform [Summary of Maud
Report]. Cmnd 4039 HMSO
The New Local Authorities: Management and
Structure [Bains Report]. HMSO
Reform of Local Government in Scotland.
Cmnd 4583 HMSO
Reform of Local Government in Wales. HMSO
Fire Protection Directory Annual. Benn
Annual Reports
Fire Research. HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England
and Wales). HMSO
H.M. Inspector of Fire Services for Scotland.
HMSO
The Fire Services in Britain. Reference Paper
R.5580/72. COI
Report of the Cunningham Inquiry into the work
of the Fire Service. Cmnd 4807 HMSO
Report of the Departmental Committee on the Fire
Service. Cmnd 4371 HMSO
ISBN
0 04 352048 0
0 7219 0340 1
0 10 147410 5
0 11 700605 X
0 10 145840 1
0 337 10546 4
0 10 140390 9
0 11 750530 7
0 10 145830 4
0 11 790013 3
0 10 148070 9
0 10 143710 2
£
1973 3-50
1971 6-30
1971 0-30
1972 0-45
1971 012^
1970 0-35
1971 0-25
1969 0 171
1972 1 00
1971 0-22}
1971 0-30
4-00
1972 *
1971 0-90
1970 1 00
3. MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Cosgrove, Carol Anne. A Reader’s Guide to
Britain and the European Communities. PEP
The European Communities—Text of the
Communique issued by the Heads of State or
Government of the Countries of the enlarged
Community at their Meeting in Paris. Cmnd 5109
HMSO
Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel
Community. Cmnd 5189 HMSO
Treaty of Accession to EEC and Euratom
Part I, Cmnd 5179-1 HMSO
Part II, Cmnd 5179-11 HMSO
(including texts of the Rome and Euratom
treaties)
The United Kingdom and the European
Communities. Cmnd 4715 HMSO
British Membership of the European Community.
(COI Reference Pamphlet R.5940/73) No. 109.
HMSO
0 8537 4026 7
0 10 151090 X
0 10 151890 0
0 10 151790 4
0 10 151791 2
0 10 147150 5
0 11 700617 3
1970 0-75
1972 0-10±
1973 1 00
1973 1-65
1973 1-90
1971 0-25
1973 0-57
4. LAW AND ORDER
Black, H. K. and Latham-Brown, D. J. An
Outline of English Law. Methuen
Cornish, W. R. The Jury. Penguin
Edwards, J. LI. J. Law Officers of the Crown.
Sweet & Maxwell _ >
Fanner and Latham, Editors. Stone’s Justices’
Manual. Butterworth ...
Foulkes, David. Introduction to Administrative
Law. Butterworth
0
0
0
0
423 43150 1
14 021218 3
421 03940 X
406 58402 8
1966 0-75
1971 0-50
1964 4-60
1968 1-50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Treatment of
Offenders
The Police
Service
469
Halsbury, Lord. Laws of England. 3rd edn.
Editor-in-Chief Viscount Simonds. 43 vols.
Butterworth
Holdsworth, Sir William. A History of English
Law. 16 vols. Methuen!Szveet & Maxwell
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Justice in
England. 5th edn. Cambridge University Press
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law.
7th edn. Butterworth
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law. 6th
edn. John Murray
Radcliffe, G. R. Y. and Cross, Lord. The English
Legal System. 5th edn. Butterworth
Radzinowicz, Leon. A History of English
Criminal Law and its Administration from 1750.
4 vols. Stevens
Reader’s Digest. Family Guide to the Law.
Reader's Digest
Street, Harry. Freedom, the Individual and the
Law. 3rd edn. Penguin
Wade, H. W. R. Administrative Law. 3rd edn.
Oxford University Press
Walker, D. M. The Scottish Legal System.
William Green
Walker, Peter N. The Courts of Law. David Gf
Charles
Wraith, R. E. and Lamb, G. B. Public Inquiries
as an Instrument of Government. Allen & Umvin
Yardley, D. C. M. Introduction to British
Constitutional Law. 3rd edn. Butterworth
Annual Reports
Council on Tribunals. HMSO
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales. HMSO
Criminal Statistics, Scotland. HMSO
The Law Commission. HMSO
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid
Scheme. HMSO
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice
Act. HMSO
Scottish Law Commission. HMSO
The English Legal System. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5312/72) No. 49. HMSO
Royal Commission on Assizes and Quarter Sessions
[Beeching Report]. Cmnd 4153 HMSO
McClean, J. D. and Wood, J. C. Criminal
Justice and the Treatment of Offenders. Sweet &
Maxwell
Rose, Gordon. Schools for Young Offenders.
Tavistock
West, D. J. The Young Offender. Penguin
Annual Reports
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. HMSO
Parole Board. HMSO
Parole Board for Scotland. HMSO
Prisons in Scotland. HMSO
The Work of the Prison Department. HMSO
People in Prison. Cmnd 4214 HMSO
Report on the Work of the Probation and After-
Care Department, 1966-68. Cmnd 4233 HMSO
The Sentence of the Court. A Handbook for
Courts on the Treatment of Offenders. HMSO
The Treatment of Offenders in Britain. Reference
Pamphlet R.4414/68 COI
Cain, Maureen E. Society and the Policeman’s
Role. Routledge and Kegan Paul
Conlin, J. Local and Central Government: Police
Administration. Cassell
Critchley, T. A. A History of the police in
England and Wales. Constable
ISBN
0 406 03000 6
various
0 521 05395 1
0 406 60493 2
0 7195 1727 3
0 406 64702 X
various
0 276 00001 3
0 14 020646 9
0 19 876016 7
0 414 00508 2
0 7153 4977 5
0 04 351037 X
0 406 69002 2
1954 258-00
to
1964
1956
to
1968
1967
1969
1967
1971
1948
to
1968
1971
1972
1971
1969
1970
1971
1969
0 11 700610 6
0 10 141530 3
0 422 70300 1
0 14 020872 0
0 10 142140 0
0 10 142330 6
0 11 340085 3
0 7100 7490 5
1969
1969
1966
1968
2- 70
to
6-00
3- 20
1-20
1- 25
2- 80
5-50
to
7-00
5-50
0-50
1-75
3- 75
1-75
4- 50
1-60
1972 0-32
1969 0-87*
0 421 10170 9 1969 3-50
1967 2-60
1970 0-35
0-62i
0-42}
0-37^
1973 4-95
1967 OP
0 09 450370 2 1967 2-75
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ISBN £
Judge, Anthony. A Man Apart. Arthur Barker 0 213 00459 X 1972 2-65
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis.
HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary for
Scotland. HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary (Counties
and Boroughs in England and Wales). HMSO iqaq «
The Police Service in Britain. Reference 1969
Pamphlet R.5598/69 COI
5. DEFENCE
Barnett, Correlli. Britain and Her Army 0 7139 0112 8 1970 5 00
1509-1970. Allen Lane
Brassey’s Annual: Defence and the Armed Forces,
edited by Major-General J. L. Moulton and others.
Clowes
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, edited by John
W. R. Taylor. Sampson, Low, Marston
Jane’s Fighting Ships, edited by R. V. B.
Blackman. Sampson, Low, Marston
Jane’s Weapons Systems, edited by R. T. Pretty
and D. Archer. Sampson, Low, Marston
The Military Balance. International Institute for
Strategic Studies
Supply Estimates, Defence. HMSO
Statement on the Defence Estimates. HMSO
State and
Voluntary
Services
Social Security
Health and
Welfare
6. SOCIAL WELFARE
Brown, M. Introduction to Social Administration
in Britain. Hutchinson
Forder, A., Editor. Penelope Hall’s Social Services
of England and Wales. Routledge
Hobman, David. Who Cares? A Guide to
Voluntary and Full-time Social Work. Mowbrays
Morris, Mary. Voluntary Work in the Welfare
State. Routledge
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary
Social Services: Handbook of Information and
Directory of Organisations. Rev. edn. NCSS
 Public Social Services: Handbook of
Information. 12th edn. NCSS
Sleeman, J. F. The Welfare State. George Allen
and Unwin
Timms, N. Social Work. An Outline for the
Intending Student. Routledge
Willmott, Phyllis. Consumer’s Guide to the
British Social Services. Penguin
Annual Report
Charity Commissioners for England and Wales.
HMSO
Boulton, A. Harding. Law and Practice of Social
Security. Jordan and Sons
Family Benefits and Pensions. DHSS
Social Security in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5455/73) No. 90. HMSO
Strategy for Pensions—The Future of State and
Occupational Pensions. Cmnd 4755 HMSO
Brockington, C. F. A Short History of Public
Health. 2nd edn. J. & A. Churchill
Family Welfare Association. Guide to the Social
Services 1973. Family Welfare Association
Foren, R. and Brown, M. J. Planning for Service.
An Examination of the Organisation and
Administration of Local Authority Social Services
Departments. Charles Knight
Jones, Kathleen. The Year Book of Social Policy
in Britain 1971. Routledge and Kegan Paul
0 09 098801 9
0 7100 7057 8
0 264 64556 1
0 7100 6581 7
0 7199 0858 2
0 7199 0861 2
0 04 360028 X
0 7100 6789 5
0 14 020871 2
0 8530 8025 9
0 11 700619 X
0 10 147550 0
0 7000 1031 9
0 7121 0716 9
0 85314 087 1
0 7100 7348 8
1969 0-55
1971 2-25
1971 0-50
1970 2-50
1973 1-50
1973 1-25
1973 3-85
1970 1-50
1973 0-50
1972 1-95
Free
1973 0-36
1971 0-25
1966 1-75
1972 0-85
1971 2-00
1972 400
Child Care
Immigration and
Race Relations
BIBLIOGRAPHY 4-7
ISBN £
Lee, Michael. Opting out of the NHS. PEP 0 85374 038 0 1971 0-50
Broadsheet 557. Research Publications
Murray D. Stark. Blueprint for Health. George 0 04 616012 4 1973 4-50
Allen and Unwin
National Old People’s Welfare Council. 0 7199 0827 2 1972 0-50
Services for the Elderly at Home. NCSS
Annual Reports
Central Health Services Council. HMSO
Department of Health and Social Security.
HMSO
 On the State of the Public Health.
HMSO
Health Education Council. The Council
Ministry of Health and Social Services
(Northern Ireland). Report of the Chief Medical
Officer. Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department. Social Work
in Scotland. HMSO
Scottish Home and Health Department and
Scottish Health Services Council. Health
Services in Scotland. HMSO
Care of the Elderly in Britain. Reference Paper
R.5858/69 COI
Health and Welfare: The Development of
Community Care. Revision to 1975-76. Cmnd
3022 HMSO
Health Services in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5154/73) No. 20. HMSO
Second Review of the Hospital Plan for Northern
Ireland 1970-75. Cmd 556 Belfast, HMSO
National Health Service Reorganisation, England.
Cmnd 5055 HMSO
The Prevention and Treatment of Drug
Dependence in Britain. Reference Pamphlet
R.5945/73 COI
Race Relations in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5934/72) No. 108. HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of Disabled People in
Britain. Reference Pamphlet R.4972/72 COI
Reorganisation of the Scottish Health Services.
Cmnd 4734 HMSO
Boss, P. Exploration into Child Care. Routledge
A Guide to Adoption Practice. Advisory Council
on Child Care. HMSO
Annual Report
Children in Care in England and Wales. HMSO
Children in Britain. (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.5236/73) No. 34. HMSO
Children’s Department of the Home Office.
Report on Work 1967-69. HMSO
Bindman, G. and Lester, A. Race and Law.
Penguin
Rose, E. J. B. and Associates. Colour and
Citizenship. A report on British race relations.
For Institute of Race Relations. OUP
Sivanandan, A. Coloured immigrants in Britain.
Select bibliography. 3rd edn. Institute of Race
Relations
Annual Reports
Commonwealth Immigrants Acts 1962 and 1968.
Statistics. HMSO
Community Relations Commission. HMSO
Race Relations Board. HMSO
The Education of Immigrants. Education Survey
13. HMSO
free
0 11 700620 3
0 337 10556 1
0 10 150550 7
0 11 700613 0
0 10 147340 0
0 7100 6965 0
0 11 340213 9
0 11 700618 1
0 10 214071 5
0 14 080227 4
0 19 218180 7
0 85001 006 3
0 11 270201 5
1969 *
1966 l-87£
1973 0-68
1971 0171
1972 0-68
1973 *
1972 0-36
1972 *
1971 0-12i
1971 1-50
1970 0-75
1973 0-47
1970 0-45
1972 1 00
1969 3-25
1969 1 05
1971 0-85
7. EDUCATION
Association of Commonwealth Universities.
Commonwealth Universities Yearbook. The
Association
472
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ISBN £
Association of Commonwealth Universities.
Awards for Commonwealth University
Staff. The Association
Association of Teachers in Colleges and
Departments of Education. Handbook for
Colleges and Departments of Education. Lund
Humphries
Baron, George. A Bibliographical Guide to the
English Educational System. 3rd edn. Athlone Press
Benn, C. and Simon, B. Halfway There
(Comprehensive Schools). Penguin
Boyle, Edward and Crosland, Anthony. The
Politics of Education. Penguin
British Council. Annual Report. British Council
 and The Association of Commonwealth
Universities. Higher Education in the United
Kingdom: A Handbook for Students from
Overseas Biennial. Longmans
Burgess, Tyrrell. A Guide to English Schools.
Penguin
 and Pratt, John. Policy and Practice: The
Colleges of Advanced Technology. Allen Lane
Callender, Patricia. Programmed Learning, its
Development and Structure. Longnums
Committee of Vice-chancellors and Principals
of the Universities of the United Kingdom.
A Compendium of Entrance Requirements for
First Degree Courses in the United Kingdom
Annual. The Committee
Council for National Academic Awards.
Compendium of Degree Courses. CNAA
 Report. CNAA
Dent, H. C. The Educational System of England
and Wales. University of London Press
Education Committees Year Book. Councils and
Education Press
Halsey, A. H. and Trow, Martin. The British
Academics. Faber
Hunter, S. Leslie. The Scottish Educational
System. Pergamon
Jackson, Stephen. Special Education in England
and Wales. Oxford University Press
Kelly, Thomas. A History of Adult Education.
Liverpool University Press
Maclure, J. Stuart. Educational Documents,
England and Wales. 1816—1968. Chapman & Hall
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult
Education in the United Kingdom: A Directory
of Organisations Annual. National Institute of Adult
0 485 11078 4
0 14 080697 0
0 14 080607 5
0 14 020690 6
0 7139 0151 9
0 582 41043 6
0 340 15465 9
0 571 09585 2
0 08 016668 7
0 19 919001 1
0 85323 230 X
0 416 41830 9
1965 0-90
1972 1-50
1971 0-35
1972 0-35
1970 5-25
1970 1-75
free
free
1971 1-00
1971 5-00
1972 1-65
1969 0-75
1972 3-25
1969 2-50
Education
Open University. The First Teaching Year of the
Open University: Report of the Vice-Chancellor
1971. The University
Peers, R. Adult Education: A Comparative Study.
Routledge & Kegan Paul
Perkin, H. J. New Universities in the United
Kingdom. OECD
Robinson, Eric E. The New Polytechnics. Penguin
Universities Central Council on Admissions
Annual. UCCA
Wardle, D. English Popular Education 1780-1970.
Cambridge University Press
Annual Reports and Statistics
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom.
0 7100 7410 7
0 14 080041 7
0 521 09631 6
1973 6-50
1969 2-40
1968 0-30
1970 0-60
HMSO
Education and Science. HMSO
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland
Education in Northern Ireland. Belfast, HMSO
Education Statistics. Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland. HMSO
Scottish Educational Statistics. HMSO
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Youth Service
473
Annual Reports and Statistics—contd.
Statistics of Education (6 volumes)
Vol. 1 Schools. HMSO
Vol. 2 School Leavers, GCE and CSE. HMSO
Vol. 3 Further Education. HMSO
Vol. 4 Teachers. HMSO
Vol. 5 Finance and Awards. HMSO
Vol. 6 Universities. HMSO
Blackie, John. Inside the Primary School. HMSO
Bristow, Adrian. Inside the Colleges of Further
Education. HMSO
Burgess, Tyrrell. Inside Comprehensive Schools.
HMSO
Adult Education: A Plan for Development
[Russell Report]. HMSO
Children and their Primary Schools. Report of the
Central Advisory Council for Education (England)
[Plowden Report]
Vol. I. Report. HMSO
Vol. II. Research and Surveys. HMSO
Education: A Framework for Expansion. Cmnd
5174. HMSO
Education in Britain. (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.4751/71) No. 7. HMSO
Education in Scotland: A Statement of Policy.
Cmnd 5175 HMSO
Education Priority—EPA Problems and Policies
Vol. 1 (Report of a research project sponsored
by the Department of Education and Science
and the Social Science Research Council.) HMSO
Educational Techniques in Britain. Reference
Paper R.5754/72 COI
Educational Television and Radio in Britain.
Reference Paper R.5781/71 COI
The Health of the School Child. Report of the
Chief Medical Officer of the Department of
Education and Science Biennial. HMSO
Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges: Higher
Education in the Further Education System.
Cmnd 3006 HMSO
Primary Education in Wales. HMSO
Public Education in Scotland. HMSO
Technician Courses and Examinations. Report of
the [Hazlegrave] Committee. HMSO
Teacher Education and Training [James Report].
HMSO
Universities in Britain. Reference Paper R.5520/73
COI
ISBN £
0 11 270048 9
0 11 270174 4
0 11 270149 3
0 11 270336 4
0 10 151740 8
0 11 700119 8
0 10 151750 5
0 11 270295 3
0 11 270125 6
0 11 490787 0
0 11 270143 4
0 11 270236 8
1969 0-25
1971 0-30
1970 0-30
1973 1-90
1967 1-25
1967 l-62£
1972 0-3H
1971 0-73
1972 0-134
1972 1-20
1972 *
1971 *
1966 0-09
1971 1-80
1972 0-47
1969 0-624
1972 0-85
1973 *
University Grants Committee
Annual Survey. HMSO
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme: Annual
Report. Duke of Edinburgh's Award Office
Leigh, John. Young People and Leisure. Routledge
Milson, Fred. Youth in a Changing Society.
Routledge
National Council of Social Service. Youth in
Action. NCSS
Youth and Community Work in the 70s. HMSO
The Youth Service and Similar Provision for
Young People. HMSO
0 7100 7059 4
0 7100 7204 X
0 11 270014 4
0 11 700128 7
8. ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
Cullingworth, J. B. Town and Country Planning 0 04 711094 2
in Britain. Allen & Unwin
Gardiner, George. The Changing Life of
London. Tom Stacey
Gresswell, P. Environment: An Alphabetical
Handbook. Murray
Schaffer, Frank. The New Town Story. Paladin
Thomas, David. London’s Green Belt. Faber
Annual Reports
Commission for the New Towns. HMSO
0 85468 409 3
0 7195 2250 1
0 586 08067 8
0 571 09145 8
1971
1972
1969
1972
1972
1973
1971
1972
1970
free
1-50
1-50
1971 0-40
0-75
3-00
4-50
3-50
3-75
0-75
3-25
474
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports—contd.
Countryside Commission (E & W). HMSO
Countryside Commission for Scotland. HMSO
New Town Development Corporations
England and Wales. HMSO
Scotland. HMSO
British Reports to the 1972 UN Conference on the
Human Environment:
The Human Environment: the British View.
HMSO
Independent working party reports:
Human Habitat: How Do You Want to Live?
HMSO
Natural Resources: Sinews for Survival.
HMSO
Organisations and Youth: 50 Million
Volunteers. HMSO
Pollution: Nuisance or Nemesis? HMSO
Development Policy Control Notes (England and
Wales) Nos. 1-13. HMSO
New Life for Historic Areas. HMSO
New Life for Old Buildings. HMSO
New Life in Old Towns. HMSO
The New Towns of Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.4506/72) No. 44. HMSO
Town and Country Planning in Britain. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5355/72) No. 9. HMSO
Twenty-one Years of Nature Conservation. Nature
Conservancy
9. HOUSING
Cullingworth, J. B. Housing and Local
Government in England and Wales. Allen & Unwin
Donnison, D. V. The Government of Housing.
Penguin
Better Homes—the Next Priorities. Cmnd. 5339.
HMSO
Council Housing: Purposes, Procedures and
Priorities [Cullingworth Report]. HMSO
Fair Deal for Housing. Cmnd 4728 HMSO
Homes for People: Scottish Housing Policy in the
1970s. Cmnd 5272 HMSO
Housing Associations. A Working Paper of the
Central Housing Advisory Committee. HMSO
Housing Design Bulletins Nos. 1—20. HMSO
Housing and Construction Statistics. Great Britain
Quarterly. HMSO
Local Housing Statistics. England and Wales
Quarterly. HMSO
The Reform of Housing Finance in Scotland.
Cmnd 4727 HMSO
Report of the Committee on the Rent Acts.
Cmnd 4609 HMSO
Towards Better Homes: Proposals for Dealing with
Scotland’s Older Housing. Cmnd 5338 HMSO
Widening the Choice: the Next Step in Housing.
Cmnd 5280 HMSO
ISBN
0 11 750516 1 1972
0 11 750514 5 1972
0 11 750511 0 1972
0 11 750513 7 1972
0 11 750517 X 1972
0 11 750526 9 1972
0 11 750385 1 1971
0 11 750227 8 1972
0 11 700341 7 1972
0 11 700606 8 1972
1970
0 04 333001 0 1966
0 14 020873 9 1967
0 10 153390 X 1973
0 11 750207 3 1969
0 10 147280 3 1971
0 10 152720 9 1973
0 11 750370 3 1971
0 10 147270 6 1971
0 10 146090 2 1971
0 10 153380 2 1973
0 10 152800 0 1973
10. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland.
Handbook. Baptist Union
Catholic Directory. The Universe
Church and State. Church of England Information
Office
Church of England. Official Yearbook 1973. For
the Church Assembly. Church of England
Information Office
Church of Scotland. Year Book. Church of
Scotland Department of Publication
l
1-20
1-80
100
1-00
1-00
various
0-80
0-50
3-25
0-42
0-55
0-20
2-00
0-52i
013
0-75
0-224
0-13
0-80
various
0-75
M2
0124
2-85
013
0-13
0-60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
475
Episcopal Church in Scotland. Year Book and
Directory. Representative Church Council of the
Episcopal Church in Scotland
The Jewish Year Book. Valentine Mitchell
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual
Conference of the Methodist Church. Methodist
Publishing House
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book.
Presbyterian Church of Wales
Salvation Army. Year Book. Salvationist Publishing
£2? Supplies
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches.
Handbook. Unitarian and Free Christian Churches
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook.
United Free Church of Scotland
United Reformed Church. Yearbook. United
Reformed Church
11. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Aldcroft, D. H. and Fearon, P. Economic 0
Growth in Twentieth-Century Britain. Macmillan
Brittan, S. Steering the Economy—The Role of 0
the Treasury. Penguin
Cairncross, Sir Alec, Editor. Britain’s Economic 0
Prospects Reconsidered. Allen & Unwin
Caves, R. E. and Associates. Britain’s Economic 0
Prospects. The Brookings Institute/Allen & Unwin
Deane, Phyllis and Cole, W. A. British Economic 0
Growth, 1688—1959. 2nd edn, 1967. Cambridge
University Press
Lewes, F. M. M. Statistics of the British Economy. 0
Allen & Umvin
Murphy, Brian. A History of the British
Economy 1086-1970
Part I 1086-1740. Longmans 0
Part II 1740-1970. Longmans 0
Economic Trends Monthly. HMSO
National Account Statistics: Sources and Methods. 0
Studies in Official Statistics. No. 13. HMSO
National Institute Economic Review Quarterly.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
Northern Ireland Economic Report on 1970. 0
Belfast, HMSO
Statistics
Abstract of Regional Statistics. HMSO
Annual Abstract of Statistics. HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice Yearly. HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice
Yearly. Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics. HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics. HMSO
National Income and Expenditure. HMSO
Statistics on Incomes, Prices, Employment and
Production Quarterly. HMSO
ISBN
333 10041 7
14 021252 3
04 330180 0
8157 1322 3
521 04801 X
1969 2-50
1971 0-60
1971 3-25
1968 200
1967 440
04 310004 X 1967 1-05
582 35033 6
582 35034 4
1973
1973
11 630061 2 1968
337 02210 0 1971
1-60
2-00
2-25
0-75
0-37i
12. FINANCE
Clarke, W. M. The City in the World Economy.
Penguin
Clayton, G. British Insurance. Elek
Cleary, E. J. The Building Society Movement.
Elek
Croome, D. R. and Johnson, H. G. Money in
Britain 1959—60. Oxford University Press
Morgan, E. V. and Thomas, W. A. The Stock
Exchange: Its History and Functions. Elek
Prest, A. R. Public Finance. 3rd edn. Weidenfeld
& Nicolson
Rees, Graham L. Commodity Markets. Elek
0 14 020895 X 1967 0-30
0 236 17618 8
0 236 31144 1
0 19 828250 8
0 236 30952 8
0 297 76034 3
0 236 31076 3
1971
1965
1970
1970
1967
1972
6- 50
5-00
2-25
4-20
2-50
7- 50
476
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Overseas Trade
and Payments
Internal Trade
Sayers, R. S. Modern Banking. 7th edn. Oxford
University Press
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Customs and Excise. HMSO
Commissioners of Inland Revenue. HMSO
Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Royal
Mint. HMSO
British Financial Institutions. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5162/71) No. 24. HMSO
Estimates: Memorandum by the Chief Secretary
to the Treasury. HMSO
Expenditure Committee. Eighth Report, Session
1972-73. Revision of the Form of the Supply
Estimates. HMSO
Financial Statement and Budget Report. HMSO
Financial Statistics Monthly. HMSO
International Monetary Co-operation. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5928/72) No. 106. HMSO
Loans from the National Loans Fund 1972—/3.
Cmnd 4936 HMSO
National Savings [Page Report]. Cmnd 5273
HMSO
New British System of Taxation. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5271/73) No. 112. HMSO
Preliminary Estimates of National Income and
Balance of Payments. HMSO
Public Expenditure. HMSO
Reform of Corporation Tax. Cmnd 4955 HMSO
Reform of Personal Direct Taxation. Cmnd 4653
HMSO
Tax Credit: Report of the Select Committee.
HMSO
Taxation of Capital on Death. A Possible
Inheritance Tax in place of Estate Duty.
Cmnd 4930 HMSO
Value-added Tax. Cmnd 4929 HMSO
13. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
An Account of the British Aid Programme: Text
of United Kingdom Memorandum to the
Development Assistance Committee of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development. HMSO
Annual Report
Commonwealth Development Corporation.
HMSO
Britain and International Tourism. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5913/71) No. 102. HMSO
Britain’s International Investment Position. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5874/70) No. 98. HMSO
Britain’s Invisible Exports. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5852/72) No. 93. HMSO
British Aid Statistics. HMSO
Overseas Aid: A Brief Survey. Reference Pamphlet
R.5762/72. COI
Overseas Trade Statistics of the United Kingdom
Monthly. HMSO
The Pattern of British Exports. Reference Paper
R.5760/70. COI
Report from the Select Committee on Overseas
Aid 1970-71. HMSO
United Kingdom Balance of Payments. HMSO
Hill, S. R. The Distributive System. Pergamon
Mathias, P. The Retailing Revolution. Longmans
Annual Report
Consumer Council. HMSO
The Future Pattern of Shopping. Distributive
Trades EDC. HMSO
ISBN
0 19 828154 4
0 11 700083 3
0 10 220973 1
0 11 700608 4
0 10 149360 6
0 10 152730 6
0 11 700624 6
0 10 149550 1
0 10 146530 0
0 10 287373 9
0 10 149300 2
0 10 149290 1
0 11 580133 2
0 11 700338 7
0 11 700107 4
0 11 700616 5
0 10 229971 4
0 08 011737 6
0 582 50258 6
0 11 700548 7
£
1967 1-40
1971 0-40
1973 0-73
0-90
1972 0-32
1972 0-21
1973 2-10
1973 0-42
1972 0-26i
1971 0-12i
1973 0-68
1972 0-29
1972 0-37
1972 0-21
1972 0-31}
1971 0-45
1972 0-68
1972 *
1-85
1970 *
1971 0-45
1966 1 00
1967 2-50
1971 1-25
BIBLIOGRAPHY
477
Organisation
and Production
14. INDUSTRY
ISBN
0 582 44571 X
Allen, G. C. The Structure of Industry in Britain.
3rd edn. Longmans
British Standards Institution. Year Book. BSI
British Steel Corporation. Report. BSC
Brown, A. J. The Framework of Regional
Economics in the United Kingdom. Cambridge
University Press
Dunning, J. H. and Thomas, C. J. British
Industry. 3rd edn. Hutchinson
Grove, J. W. Government and Industry in
Britain. Longmans
Rowley, Charles K. The British Monopolies
Commission. Allen & Unwin
Thornhill, W. The Nationalised Industries.
Nelson
Youngson, A. J. Britain’s Economic Growth
1920-66. Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports
Design Council. HMSO
Industries Development Assistance. Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Development Department. HMSO
Area Development in Northern Ireland. Belfast, 0 337 06004 5
HMSO
Industrial and Regional Development. Cmnd 4942 0 10 149420 3
HMSO
1970 1-50
0 521 08743 0 1972 4 00
0 09 058974 2
0 582 48720 X
0 04 338028 X
0 17 711004 X
1966 0-58
1962 2-75
1966 3-25
1968 2-10
0 04 330099 5 1968 1-50
1969 0-25
1972 013
Nationalised Industries. A Review of Economic
and Financial Objectives. Cmnd 3437 HMSO
Nationalised Industries in Britain. Reference
Paper R.5629/68. COI
Northern Ireland Development Programme 0 337 02136 8
1970-75. Belfast, HMSO
Public Purchasing and Industrial Efficiency.
Cmnd 3291 HMSO
Regional Economic Planning Councils: Reports on
individual regions. HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry on Small 0 10 148110 1
Firms [Bolton Report]. Cmnd 4811 HMSO
1967 0-134
1968 *
1970 1-00
1967 0-05
1966
to various
1971
1971 2-55
Fuel and|Power
Coal
Petroleum
Electricity and
Gas Supply
Fuel Policy. Cmnd 3438 HMSO
Department of Trade and Industry Digest of
Energy Statistics. HMSO
National Coal Board. Annual Report and Accounts.
HMSO
North Sea Oil and Gas. Committee of Public 0 10 212273 3
Accounts. HMSO
Production and Reserves of Oil and Gas on the 0 11 511056 9
United Kingdom Continental Shelf. Department
of Trade and Industry. HMSO
Statistical Review of the World Oil Industry.
British Petroleum Co.
Electricity Council. Statistical Digest. The
Council
Gas Council. Investment in Natural Gas. The
Council
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Gas Corporation. HMSO
Central Electricity Generating Board. HMSO
Electricity Council. HMSO
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board. HMSO
South of Scotland Electricity Board. HMSO
Nuclear Energy in Britain (COI Reference 011 700086 8
Pamphlet R.5151/69) No. 28. HMSO
1967 0-40
1973 1-55
1973 0-20
free
free
1968 free
1969 0-30
Water Supply
A Background to Water Reorganisation in England 011 750570 6 1973 0-53
and Wales. HMSO
478
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Construction
Manufacturing
Industries
Annual Reports
Water Pollution Research. HMSO
Water Resources Board. HMSO
The Future Management of Water in England and
Wales. A Report by the Central Advisory Water
Committee. HMSO
Ground Water Year Book. HMSO
Local Government Return: The Water Service in
Scotland. Report of the Scottish Water Advisory
Committee. HMSO
Report of a River Pollution Survey of England and
Wales
Vol. I. HMSO
Vol. II. HMSO
Report on the Water Resources of Wales. HMSO
Surface Water Yearbook. HMSO
Towards Cleaner Water. Report of a Rivers
Pollution Survey of Scotland. HMSO
Bowley, Marian. The British Building Industry.
Cambridge University Press
Henry, Dorothy and Jerome, J. A. Modern
British Bridges. Maclaren
Annual Reports
Building Research. HMSO
Hydraulics Research. HMSO
Allen, G. C. British Industries and their
Organisation. 5th edn. Longmans
Briscoe, L. The Textile and Clothing Industries
of the United Kingdom. Manchester University
PT6SS
Gale, W. K. V. The British Iron and Steel
Industry: A Technical History. David & Charles
Hardie, D. W. F. and Davidson Pratt, J. A.
History of the Modern British Chemical Industry.
Pergamon
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
The Motor Industry of Great Britain. SMMT
The Textile Council. Cotton and Allied Textiles.
A Report on Present Performances and Future
Prospects. Textile Council
British Industry Today: Aerospace. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5890/73) No. 104. HMSO
British Industry Today: Motor Vehicles. (COI
Reference Pamphlet R.5374/72) No. 105. HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the
Aircraft Industry [Plowden Report]. Cmnd 2853
HMSO
Shipbuilding Inquiry Committee, 1965-66
[Geddes Report]. Cmnd 2937 HMSO
Steel. British Steel Corporation: Ten Year
Development Strategy. Cmnd 5226 HMSO
ISBN
0 11 750396 7
0 11 490773 0
0 11 750454 8
0 11 750472 6
0 11 490780 3
0 521 04292 5
0 85334 058 7
0 582 48002 7
0 7190 0428 4
0 7153 4988 0
0 08 011686 8
0 901568 00 7
0 11 700615 7
0 11 700607 6
0 10 152260 6
l
1971 0-70
1972 0-3H
1971 4-20
1972 4-60
1972 1-35
1966 7-70
1965 2-00
1970 2-25
1971 3-00
1970 1 05
1966 1-25
1969 2-25
1973 0-52
1972 0-32
1965 0-50
1966 0-87i
1973 0 13i
Agriculture
15. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Donaldson, J. G. S., Donaldson, F. and
Barber, B. Farming in Britain Today. Allen Lane
Economic Assessment in 1972. NEDO
Agricultural Marketing in Britain. Reference
Paper R. 5779/72 CO/
Agricultural Statistics, England and Wales. HMSO
Agricultural Statistics, Scotland. HMSO
Agriculture’s Import Saving Role. EDC for
Agriculture. HMSO
Annual Reports
Agricultural Marketing Schemes. HMSO
Animal Health Services in Great Britain. HMSO
Crofters Commission: Report. HMSO
Department of Agriculture for Scotland:
Agriculture in Scotland. HMSO
0 7139 0061 X
0 11 700380 8
1969 3-50
1970 free
1972 *
1968 1-00
Fisheries
Forestry
Shipping
Inland Transport
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Reports—contd.
Ministry of Agriculture, Northern Ireland.
Belfast, HMSO
National Food Survey Committee: Household
Food Consumption and Expenditure. HMSO
Annual Review of Agriculture. HMSO
The Changing Structure of Agriculture, April
1970. HMSO
Examination of the Horticultural Industry, 1970.
HMSO
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual.
HMSO
Modern Farming and the Soil. HMSO
Output and Utilisation of Farm Produce in the
United Kingdom. HMSO
Fishing Industry Index International. Haymarket
Press
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland. HMSO
Herring Industry Board. HMSO
White Fish Authority (and Accounts). HMSO
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries. HMSO
Sea Fisheries. HMSO
ISBN
0 11 240958 X
0 11 241010 3
0 11 240300 X
479
l
1970 0-324
1971 0-56
1971 2-10
Edlin, H. L. Forestry in Great Britain: A Review
of Progress to 1969. Forestry Commission
Forestry in Scotland. Forestry Commission
Census of Woodlands, 1965^67. A Report on
Britain’s Forest Resources. HMSO
Forestry in Great Britain. An Interdepartmental
Cost/Benefit Study. HMSO
Forestry Policy Consultative Document. HMSO
Annual Reports
Forestry Commission. HMSO
Forest Research. HMSO
Britain’s Forests [10 booklets]. HMSO
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission
Guides. HMSO
16. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Blake, G. Lloyd’s Register of Shipping 1760-1960.
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom.
Annual Report. CSUK
International Shipping and Shipbuilding Directory.
Shipping World/Benn
National Ports Council. Digest of Port
Statistics. NPC
 Container and Roll-on Port Statistics. NPC
 Survey of Non-Scheme Ports and Wharves
Preliminary Report. NPC
Final Report. NPC
Port of London Authority. Annual Report. PL A
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Transport Docks Board. HMSO
National Ports Council. HMSO
Final Report of the Committee of Inquiry into
certain matters concerning the Port Transport
Industry [Devlin Report]. Cmnd 2734 HMSO
Ports in Britain. Reference Paper R.5759/67 COI
Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Shipping
[Rochdale Report]. Cmnd 4337 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Marine Search and
Rescue. HMSO
0 11 710123 0
0 11 630324 7
0 11 710125 7
0 901058 40 8
0 901058 45 9
0 10 143370 0
0 11 510387 2
1969 free
1970 free
1970 0-60
1972 1-25
1972 0-18
1948 0-024
to to
1965 0-124
1954 0-074
to to
1968 0-424
1960 2-10
free
1972 0-25
1973 0-50
free
1965 0-80
1967 *
1970 3-00
1970 0-20
Jackman, W. T. The Development of 1962 8-40
Transportation in Modern England. 2nd edn.
Frank Cass
480
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Raihvays
Roads
London Transport
Inland Waterways
Civil Aviation
The Channel Tunnel. Cmnd 5430 HMSO
National Freight Corporation. Annual Report.
HMSO
Proposals for a Fixed Channel Link. Cmnd 2137
HMSO
Transport Planning: The Men for the Job
[Sharp Report]. HMSO
Ellis, C. Hamilton, British Railway History,
1877-1947. Allen & Unwin
British Railways Board. Annual Report. HMSO
 Report on Organisation. HMSO
Railway Policy. Cmnd 3439 HMSO
British Road Federation. Basic Road Statistics.
BRF
Elliot, T. D. W. and Street, Harry. Road
Accidents. (Law and Society Series). Allen Lane
Annual Reports and Statistics
Highway Statistics. HMSO
National Bus Company. HMSO
Road Accidents. HMSO
Roads in England. HMSO
Better Use of Town Roads. HMSO
Cars for Cities. HMSO
The Highway Code, including Motorway rules.
HMSO
London Taxicab Trade [Stamp Report].
Cmnd 4483 HMSO
Public Transport and Traffic. Cmnd 3481 HMSO
Road Safety—A Fresh Approach. Cmnd 3339
HMSO
Roads for the Future: A New Inter-Urban Plan
for England. Cmnd 4369 HMSO
Town Traffic in Britain. Reference Paper
R.5860/72 COI
Traffic in Towns [Buchanan and Crowther
Reports], HMSO
Transport and Road Research Laboratory.
Transport and Road Research. HMSO
The Transport of Freight. Cmnd 3470 HMSO
Barker, T. C. and Robbins, M. A History of
London Transport. Vol. I. The Nineteenth
Century. Allen & Unwin
Day, John R. The Story of London’s
Underground. London Transport
Annual Report
London Transport Executive. LTE
Transport in London (Ministry of Transport).
Cmnd 3686 HMSO
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals. David &
Charles
British Waterways: Recreation and Amenity.
Cmnd 3401 HMSO
British Waterways Board. Annual Report.
HMSO
 Facts about the Waterways. HMSO
 Leisure and the Waterways. HMSO
British Airports Authority. Report. BAA
Flight Directory. Kelly's Directories Ltd.
Annual Reports
British Airways Board. HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and
Accounts). HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and
Accounts). HMSO
British Air Transport in the Seventies.
Cmnd 4018 HMSO
Proceedings of the Commission on the Third
London Airport (Roskill). HMSO
ISBN
0 10 154300 X
0 11 550108 8
0 04 385010 3
0 10 205070 8
0 7139 0073 3
0 11 550054 5
0 10 144830 9
0 10 143690 4
0 85329 031 8
0 10 136860 7
0 7153 4673 3
0 10 140180 9
£
1973 0-68
1963 0-32i
1970 0-62i
1960 3-50
1969 0-20
1967 0-29
1968 2-50
1967 0-37i
1967 1 05
1969 006
1970 1 15
1967 0 19
1967 009
1970 0 17i
1972 *
1963 2-50
1967 0-14
1963 3-50
1972 0-40
1968 0-37i
1969 2-50
1967 005
1965 0-75
1967 0-30
1969 1-75
1970 various
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Post Office
Martin, Nancy. The Post Office. Dent
Annual Reports and Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. HMSO
Post Office. HMSO
Reorganisation of the Post Office. Cmnd 3233
HMSO
Report of the Select Committee for Nationalised
Industries—The Post Office. HMSO
ISBN
0 460 06602 1
481
£
1969 1-50
1967 0-09
1967 0-82i
17. EMPLOYMENT
Clegg, H. A. The System of Industrial Relations 0 631 12700 3 1970 3‘25
in Great Britain. Blackwell
Lumley, R. White Collar Unionism in Britain. 0 416 24150 6 1973 0-95
Methuen
McCarthy, W. E. J., Editor. Trade Unions. 0 14 080625 3 1972 0-60
Penguin
Annual Reports
Chief Registrar of Trade Unions and Employers’
Associations. HMSO
Commission on Industrial Relations. HMSO
British Labour Statistics. Year Book. HMSO
Time Rates of Wages and Hours of Work: April 011 360824 1
1972. HMSO
Department of Employment Gazette Monthly.
HMSO
Industrial Relations: A Guide to the Industrial
Relations Act 1971. Department of Employment
Industrial Relations Code of Practice. HMSO 0 11 360888 8
Industrial Relations in Britain. Reference Paper
R.5930/72 COI
Pay Board. Anomalies Arising out of the Pay 0 10 154290 9
Standstill of November 1972. Cmnd 5429 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions 0 10 136230 7
and Employers’ Associations. Cmnd 3623 HMSO
Seventh Report from the Expenditure
Committee: Session 1972-73
Vol. I. Employment Services and Training.
HMSO
Vol. II. HMSO 0 10 281073 7 1973
Vol. III. HMSO 0 10 281173 3 1973
1972
1972
1972
1972
1973
1968
2-40
0-52*
free
015
#
0-23}
100
0 10 280973 7 1973 1-00
2-50
2-50
18. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies
of Great Britain: A Handbook compiled from
Official Sources. 61st edn. Allen & Unwin
Cardwell, D. S. L. The Organisation of Science
in England (Revised edn 1972). Heinemann
Industrial Research in Britain. 7th edn. Francis
Hodgson
Nicholson, Max. The Environmental Revolution.
Hodder & Stoughton
Poole, J. B. and Andrews, Kay. The Government
of Science in Britain. Weidenfeld
Purver, M. The Royal Society: Concept and
Creation. Routledge
Who’s Who of British Scientists. Longmans
Zuckerman, Lord. Beyond the Ivory Towers. The
Frontiers of Public and Private Science.
Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Annual Reports
Agricultural Research Council. HMSO
Atomic Energy Authority. HMSO
Medical Research Council. HMSO
Metrication Board. HMSO
National Research Development Corporation.
HMSO
Natural Environment Research Council. HMSO
Science Research Council. HMSO
Social Science Research Council. HMSO
0 04 062001 8 1964 2-25
0 435 54154 4
0 85280 320 6
0 340 04337 7
0 297 99501 4
0 7100 1978 5
0 297 00236 8
1972 1-25
1972 15 00
1972 0-60
1972 5-00
1967 1-75
1970 2-50
482
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Arts
Visual Arts
Britain and International Scientific Co-operation.
Reference Pamphlet R.5814/68 COI
British Patent System. Cmnd 4407 HMSO
British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science.
Reference Paper R.9178 COI
Department of Trade and Industry: Report on
Research and Development, 1972-73. HMSO
Framework for Government Research and
Development. Cmnd 5046 HMSO
Metrication. Cmnd 4880 HMSO
Notes on Science and Technology in Britain. NST
Series COI
ISBN
0 10 144070 7
011 511058 5
0 10 150460 8
0 10 148800 9
Nuclear Energy in Britain. (COI Reference
Pamphlet R.5151/69) No. 28. HMSO
OSTI. The First Five Years. The Work of the
Office for Scientific and Technical Information
1965-70. HMSO
Persons With Qualifications in Engineering,
Technology and Science 1959—69. HMSO
Report on Marine Science and Technology. HMSO 0
Report of a Study on Supporting Scientific 0
Research in Universities. Cmnd 4798 HMSO
Report of the Working Group on Scientific
Interchange. Cmnd 4843 HMSO
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
First Report. Cmnd 4585 HMSO
Second Report. Cmnd 4894 HMSO
Third Report: Pollution in some British
Estuaries and Coastal Waters. Cmnd 5054 HMSO
Scientific Research in British Universities and
Colleges, 1970-71
Vol. I. Physical Sciences. HMSO
Vol. II. Biological Sciences. HMSO
Vol. III. Social Sciences. HMSO
The Select Committee on Science and Technology
Session 1970-71
Second Report: Research Councils. HMSO
Fourth Report: Proposals for the UK
Computer Industry. Vol. I. HMSO
Session 1971-72
Research and Development. HMSO
Studies in Official Statistics No. 21. Research and
Development Expenditure. HMSO
11 700086 8
11 270204 X
1968
1970
1970
1973
1972
1972
1962
to
1972
1969
1971
10 139920 0
10 147980 8
1969
1971
10 145850 9
10 148940 4
10 150540 X
11 270192 2
11 270193 0
11 270194 9
10 252271 5
10 262171 3
10 237572 0
11 630116 3
1971
1971
1972
1973
£
*
115
*
0-65
013
0-261
*
0-30
0-50
0 11 470223 3 1971 2-25
0-271
0-45
0 10 148430 5 1972 0-42
1971 0-45
1972 0-18
1972 0-85
1971 6-50
1971 6-00
1971 5-50
0-35
0-47
0-42
1-55
19. THE ARTS
Annual Reports
Arts Council of Great Britain. Arts Council
British Council. HMSO
Green, Michael, and Wilding, Michael. Cultural
Policy in Great Britain. UNESCO
Williams, Raymond. Communications (television,
films, theatre, advertising, books and magazines).
Penguin
Promotion of the Arts in Britain. Reference
Pamphlet R.5647/73 COI
Farr, D. British Sculpture since 1945. Tale Gallery
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens in Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. ABC Travel Guides
Jencks, Charles. Modern Movements in
Architecture. Penguin
Maxwell, Robert. New British Architecture.
Thames and Hudson
Webb, M. Architecture in Britain Today. Country
Life
Future Policy for Museums and Galleries.
Cmnd 4676 HMSO
Museums and Galleries in Great Britain and
Ireland. ABC Travel Guides
0 14 020831 3
0 14 021534 4
0 500 34054 4
0 600 43014 6
0 10 146760 5
1970 free
1970 0-30
1973 *
1965 0-30
1973 1-50
1972 7-50
1969 3-15
1971 007|
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Literature
Drama
Films
Music
483
ISBN
Provincial Museums and Galleries. Report of a 011 270344 5
Committee appointed by the Paymaster-General.
HMSO
Atkinson, F. The Public Library. Routledge 0 7100 6689 9
The Oxford Companion to English Literature, 0 19 866106 1
edited by Sir Paul Harvey. 4th edn. Oxford
University Press
The British Library. Cmnd 4572 HMSO 0 10 145720 0
Anderson, Michael and others. A Handbook of 0 273 00038 1
Contemporary Drama. Pitman
Elsom, John. Theatre Outside London. Macmillan 0 333 11066 8
Taylor, John Russell. The Penguin Dictionary 0 14 051033 8
of the Theatre. Penguin
The Oxford Companion to the Theatre, edited by 019 211531 6
Phyllis Hartnoll. 3rd edn. Oxford University Press
The Theatre Today in England and Wales. Report 0 900085 22 3
of the Arts Council. HMSO
Betts, Ernest. The Film Business: A History of 0 04 791028 3
British Cinema 1896-1972. Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency. HMSO
Cinematograph Films Council. HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and
Statement of Accounts). HMSO
The Oxford Companion to Music, edited by Percy
Scholes. 10th edn. Oxford University Press
Searle, Percy and Layton, Robert. Twentieth
Century Composers
Vol. 3. Britain, Scandinavia and the Netherlands. 0 297 99377 1
Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Young, Percy M. A History of British Music. 0 510 37311 9
Benn
1973 1-00
1970 0-90
1967 2-50
1971
1972
1971
1970
1967
1970
0-074
3-80
3- 00
0-40
4- 20
0-50
1973 5-50
0 19 311306 6 1970 5-25
1972 3-50
1967 5-25
20. THE PRESS
Hall, Bernard J. Basic Training in Journalism.
Pergamon
Jackson, Ian. The Provincial Press and the
Community. Manchester University Press
Levy, H. Phillip. The Press Council. Macmilla?i
McNae, L. C. J., Editor. Essential Law for
Journalism. 4th edn. Staples
Newspaper Press Directory. Benn
Press Council. The Press and the People: Annual
Report. The Council
Tunstall, Jeremy. The Westminster Lobby
Correspondents. Routledge
White, Cynthia. Women’s Magazines 1693-1968.
Michael Joseph
Willing’s Press Guide Annual. Thomas Skinner
Directories
Wintour, Charles. Pressures on the Press: An
Editor looks at Fleet Street. Deutsch
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book Annual. A. & C.
Black
The British Press (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.5572/70) No. 97. HMSO
0 08 012864 5
0 7190 0460 8
0 333 02426 5
0 286 62715 9
0 7100 6834 4
0 7181 0687 3
1968 0-60
1971 3-60
1967 5-25
1969 2-00
1970 1-60
1970 3-25
0 233 96376 6 1972 3-50
0 11 700105 8 1970 0-35
21. BROADCASTING
Briggs, Asa. The History of Broadcasting in the
United Kingdom:
Vol. I. The Birth of Broadcasting. Oxford 0 19 212926 0 1961
University Press
Vol. II. The Golden Age of Wireless. Oxford 0 19 212930 9 1965
University Press
Vol. III. The War of Words. Oxford University 0 19 212956 2 1970 6-50
Press
2- 50
3- 75
484
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Broadcasting Corporation. BBC
Handbook. BBC
Broadcasting in the Seventies. BBC
Independent Broadcasting Authority. IBA.
Guide to Independent Television. IBA
Pratten, C. F. The Economics of Television.
Political and Economic Planning
Wedell, E. G. Broadcasting and Public Policy.
Michael Joseph
Wilson, David. Broadcasting: Vision and Sound.
Pergamon
An Alternative Service of Radio Broadcasting.
Cmnd 4636 HMSO
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation. HMSO
Independent Broadcasting Authority. HMSO
Broadcasting in Britain. (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.5531/73) No. 111. HMSO
22. SPORT
Annual Report
National Playing Fields Association. NPFA
Indoor Sports Centres (Sports Council Study).
HMSO
Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports
Grounds. Cmnd 4952 HMSO
Sport and Physical Recreation for the Disabled.
Disabled Lining Foundation
Sport in Britain. (COI Reference Pamphlet
R.4296/72) No. 107. HMSO
ISBN
0 85374 027 5
0 7181 0531 1
0 08 012849 1
0 10 146360 X
0 11 700622 X
0 11 750393 2
0 10 149520 X
0 11 700609 2
£
1969 free
1970 0-80
1968 2-75
1968 0-60
1971 0-12*
1973 0-42
1972 1-20
1972 0-24
1970 0-45
1972 0-42
Most of the organisations concerned with sport publish year books covering results and
records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or monthly periodicals on
sport are also published. In addition some newspapers issue annual surveys of sport.
Index
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
As the main purpose of this book is to inform readers overseas about Britain, organisa¬
tions and societies are generally indexed under their subject matter rather than under
Association of, British, National, Royal, etc. (that is, Accidents, Royal Society for the
Prevention of; Archives, National Register of). In cases where the first word is not
separable, however (for example, Royal Air Force, Royal Society), entries will be found
appropriately.
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where
they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the
relevant subject headings.
Page
•• 365
360,364
443
343
261, 279
404
432
261
333
277
167
28
Aslib see Libraries
Abbotsinch (airport)..
Aberdeen:
airport
broadcasting studio
helicopters (rescue)
industry
marine research laboratory
newspapers
population ..
port..
University.. .. 164,165,166,335
Abingdon
Academic Awards, Council for
National
Accession Council
Accidents:
air 360
industrial .. . . .. 389,390
road users .. .. 95,353.355,356
Royal Society for the Prevention
of(rospa) . . . . 356,390
Administrative Staff College 64, 265
Administrative tribunals
Admiralty:
Board
Court
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising . .54,153, 183,251,432,437
Association .. .. ..251
broadcasting -.439,440,441, 442,
443-4
Institute of Practitioners in ..251
Standards Authority .. ..251
Advisory Committees and Councils
see relevant subject matter
•95-6
. . 116
9i,95
98,99,100
360,364-5
449
Advocates
Aerodromes ..
Aero-engines see Aircraft
Aero-space see Aircraft
Aero sports . .
After-care:
prisoners: .. .. .. 107-9
young offenders .. .. 109-10
Age Concern .. . . .. .. 128
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
and Horticulture Co-operation,
Central Council for .. .. 329
Page
Agricultural—contd.
colleges and institutes .. 161,332
Common Policy (cap) 50, 81, 201,
324-5,329
co-operation .. .. .. 329
Development and Advisory Service
(adas) 329, 331
Engineering:
colleges . . .. .. .. 332
National College of .. .. 332
National Institute of .. . . 323
Guidance and Guarantee Fund,
European (feoga) .. 83, 324
import levies .. .. .. 83
improvement schemes 320, 326-7, 329
industry . . .. 50, 319-20, 332
Inspectorate . . .. .. 389
Land Tribunal .. .. . . 328
Loans Fund (Northern Ireland) . . 327
machinery industry 258, 293, 299
Mortgage Corporation Ltd. 326, 327
Produce, Intervention Board for 50,
324,329
Research Council (arc) 51, 293, 332,
394, 396, 400, 403, 410
Research in Progress, Index of .. 410
Scientific Services Station .. 330
Securities Corporation,
Scottish . .
wages boards
workers:
326,327
•• 383
earnings.. .. 322,323,324
numbers.. .. .. 253,314
protective legislation 331, 378-9,
381, 388, 389,391
Agriculture .. 75,81,203,258,314-32
advisory services . . 323, 331-2
and Horticulture, Advisory
Council for .. .. .. 323
animal disease control 50, 318, 326,
329-30, 403, 404
annual reviews .. .. 324, 325
area available for .. .. .. 314
artificial insemination (ai) .. 318
chemicals, toxic .. .. ..331
credit facilities for .. 322, 326-7
crofts and crofters .. 323, 327
crops 309, 314, 315, 316, 317, 319
protection products .. . . 304
dairying . . 315, 316, 317-8, 323
486
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Agriculture—contd.
economics service and advice 331, 332,
403-4
education and training 158, 165, 332
employment in .. 314, 322, 370
expenses and income . . 322-3
exports . . . . . . 318, 329
farms, number, size and types 6, 314-5,
322, 323
farm tenure .. .. 314,328
feedingstuffs 315, 317, 318, 322, 325,
33i» 334
fertilisers .. . . . .3*7> 326, 334
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 44,
50, 57, 138, 180, 198, 286, 323, 324,
327, 33i, 332, 335> 337> 396, 397»
401, 403, 405
relations with Commonwealth 50
food supplies, home grown 315-7,
319-20, 321, 324, 329
fruitgrowing .. .. 319-20
glasshouse crops .. .. 319,320
grants see subsidies, below
grassland .. 6,314,315,316,317
hill farming .. 314,318,323
horticulture 21, 50, 315, 319-20, 323,
326,329,332
Improvement Scheme . . 326, 329
infestation control. . .. 329-31
land drainage .. 50, 317, 327-8
levies . . .. . . 83, 324
livestock 234, 315, 316, 317, 318-9,
322,323,325,327,329,331. 403.404
imports . . . . 314, 318, 329
machinery syndicates . . • • 323
market gardening . . . . . . 319
marketing boards and schemes . . 318,
3i9, 324, 325, 328-9
mechanisation ..293,322,323,326
milk production and distribution 315,
316,317-8,323,325,328
nursery crops . . .. .. 320
pest clearance .. ..329-31,404
plant health service 50, 234, 330, 404
policy of Government . . 323-8, 329
See also European Community,
Agricultural
price guarantees . . 324, 325, 326
production . . 197, 227, 258, 314,
315-20,327
research see Research
rough grazing . . 314, 316, 317, 323
smallholdings . . . . . . 327
soils  5-6, 314
subsidies and grants 324, 325, 326,
327, 328, 329
veterinary services 329-30, 331, 404
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air:
Force see Defence and Royal Air Force
freight traffic .. 347-8, 363-4
operators’ certificate .. 360, 361
pollution, prevention of 5, 52, 58, 71,
139,178,184,296,360,397
safety .. .. .. 361,389
service agreements, international. . 360
traffic control services . . 361-2
Training, College of . . .. 361
Transport see Civil Aviation
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 125, 197,
253, 254, 258, 259, 299, 300-1
Page
Aircraft—contd.
aerospace industry 125,258, 300-1,402
carriers . . .. .. .. 122
civil . . . . 300, 362, 363
Establishments, Royal 300, 362, 407
landing systems .. .. 361-2
military 118, 119, 122, 123, 124, 300,
362
National Gas Turbine Establish¬
ment .. .. .. .. 300
research .. 57, 125-6, 300, 396, 397
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Airways Board, British 360, 361, 362-3,
364
Airworthiness Requirement Board. . 361
Albert Hall, Royal . . . . 22, 417
Aldeburgh (festival) .. . . . . 418
Aldermen . . . . 28, 69, 86, 88
Aliens.. .. .. 12,54,114,376
Almoners see Medical Social Workers
Ambergate (electronic exchange) . . 367
Ambulance services .. .. 71, 146
Amenities preservation societies . . 175
Amersham .. .. .. 305, 405
Ancient Monuments 52, 175, 413, 424
Angle Bay . . .. . . 276, 347
Anglican Communion .. 193-4, 196
See also Church of England
Angling  454
Animal Health 50, 318, 326, 329-30,
403, 404
Animals, import of . . 234, 319, 329
Antibiotics .. .. .. 303,410
Anti-Locust Research Centre .. 411
Appellate courts 43, 86, 88, 90,91, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97, 101, 102
Apprenticeship . . . . 288, 377
Aquatic sports 23, 452, 459, 460, 461-2
Arbitration boards . . . . .. 387
See also Tribunals
Archbishops . . 33, 45, 192, 193, 194
Archery .. .. .. .. 449
Architects . . .. 288, 289, 424
associations and societies 424, 425
Institute of British, Royal (riba) 424-5
Architecture .. . . .. 175, 424-5
education .. .. 165, 167, 424-5
European Architectural Heritage
Year .. .. .. .• 175
Archives, National Register of .. 425
Area Boards:
electricity . . . . 270, 277-8, 281
gas .. .. .. .. 283, 284
local government .. .. .. 69
Armagh (museum) . . . . .. 422
Armed Forces see Defence
Arms and ammunition import con¬
trols  234
Army 116, 120, 122, 123
arms and services .. .. 126
Board . . .. .. .. 116
Reserve Forces . . .. .. 124
Staff College . . . . . . 122
See also Defence
Arrest, law relating to .. .. 88-9
Art:
and artists’ societies .. 421-4
collections and exhibitions 22, 413,
414, 421, 423, 424, 425
colleges and schools 161, 162, 165,
421, 423-4
INDEX
a PaSe
Art—contd.
Commissions, Royal Fine .. 424
Exhibitions Bureau .. .. 433
festivals . . . . . . . . 415
galleries 59, 71, 72, 396, 413, 414,421,
422-3
admission charges . . . . 423
market . . . . . . 421-2
National Exhibition of Children’s 423
national galleries . . . . 422, 423
Royal College of .. .. 165,423
Society for Education through . . 424
Arts:
Council of Great Britain 413-4,415,
416,417,418,421,422,425
Council of Northern Ireland 414, 415,
417, 418, 421, 425
encouragement of the .. 413-28
Government support for the . . 413
regional associations . . 4x4, 415
Royal Academy of .. .. 423
Royal Society of . . . . 264, 398
Ashridge College of Management . . 265
Assay Offices.. . . . . . . 302
487
. „ Page
Assize, courts of . . .. . . 102
Associated Press Ltd . . .. 434
Association football see Football
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy . . .. . . 407-8
Athletics . . . . 23, 446, 450
Atlas Computer Laboratory . . 401
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
Atomic:
Energy Authority (aea) 279, 280, 282,
295,395,397,405,4io,4i1
Energy Community, European
(euratom) .. .. 81,411
Attendance centres (young offenders) 103,
105, no
Attorney-General . . 44, 54, 55, 61, 88
Auditor General see Comptroller
Automatic Data Exchange . . . . 434
Automation 220, 249, 250, 263, 265,275,
290, 366
Automobile Club, Royal (rac) . . 456
Automobiles see Motor
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Avonmouth . . . . 258, 293, 347
B Bacon curing industry .. . . 309
Bacteriological laboratory services .. 144
Bacton .. . . . . . . 283
Badminton . . .. . . ..451
Bail . . .. . . . . 88-9, 93
Balance of Payments 199, 202, 238-46
Ballet and ballet companies
22, 413,
418, 419
•• 4i9
418-9
.. 278
237, 343
339, 443
Ballet for All
schools
Ballylumford
Baltic Exchange
Bangor
Bank:
European Investment . . . . 83
notes  217, 218
of England 56, 200, 217-8, 219, 220,
223, 235
rate..  218
Bank Holidays . . . . 381-2
Banking system .. . . 217-22
Barnsley .. . . . . . . 260
Barristers
Barrow
Basket-ball
Bath . .
Bedford and Bedfordshire
86, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101
 259
 45i
164, 179, 258, 418
Belfast:
airport
art, drama and music
broadcasting studio
Corporation
electricity supply . .
Fire Authority
industries . .
motorway system
museums . .
newspapers
population . .
port
public libraries
300,311, 320,
332, 362, 409
•• 365
4x7, 422
•• 443
• • 79
277, 278
• • 79
261-2, 276,301, 310
•• 359
.. 422
.. 432
16, 261
345, 347
427
Queen’s University 163, 164, 167, 168,
332, 427, 447
Belfast—contd.
Recorder of
research (veterinary)
transport . .
Berkeley Laboratories
Berkshire , . . . .. 277,
Bernard van Leer Foundation
Betting .. 22,217,251,443,458
Beverage industries . . 246, 308, 309,402
exports . . . . 229, 308, 309-10
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billiards and Snooker
Billingham-on-Tees . .
Bills, parliamentary see Parliament
Bingo ..
Biochemistry
Biological Research Board ..
Biology  404, 408
Birds . . . . . . 6-7, 183, 454
Birkenhead . . . . .. .. 259
Birmingham:
airport .. .. . . .. 365
art, drama, music .. 416, 417, 419, 422
Assay Office . . .. . . 302
broadcasting studio 369, 442, 443
housing and planning 152, 176, 178,
x85, 187
Industrial Safety Training Centre 3 90
95
330
359
282
397
168
45i
276
22
396
403
16, 152, 1
industries
museums
newspapers
population.
radio tower
universities
Birth rate
Births, registration of
Biscuit and cake industry
Bishops .. 33,45,
Blackburn
Blackpool
Blind:
education ..
employment and training
welfare services
258, 297, 302
409, 422
.. 430
76, 178, 258
•• 367
165, 426
9-10,11
.. 8
• • 308
193, i94
.. 259
.. 259
159, 426
.. 148
128, 148
192,
488
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Blood transfusion service .. 140, 143
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Boating . . .. 358, 446, 459-60
Boat races .. .. .. 459-60
Boilers and boilerhouse plant . . 295
Bolton . . .. .. .. 259
Book:
Development Council .. 312, 427
exhibitions .. .. . . 427
League, National .. . . 426, 427
Books.. 312,396, 413. 425,.436, 427
See also Libraries and Publishing
Booksellers’ Association . . .. 427
Borough Councils see Local Govern¬
ment, councils
Borstal institutions and training
103, 104,
boards of visitors ..
Boston Spa, Yorks ..
Botany
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
Bothamsell
Boundary Commissions
Bournemouth
Bowls
Boxing
Page
105,
Isles
area and definition of
climate ..
fauna
flora
.. 2-4
.. 7-8
5-6, 3i4
409, 413, 425
409, 422, 423
409, 422, 425
237
102,
IO9
105
425
396
396
275
34, 35
.. 258, 417
178, 446, 451
23, 446, 451-2
Boys’ Clubs, National Association of 172
Bracknell .. .. 122, 176, 397
Bradford .. . . 16, 164, 260, 307
Bread and flour confectionery in¬
dustry .. . . . . .. 308
Brewing industry 254, 259, 261, 309,
310
Brickmaking .. .. .. 310-11
Bridges and tunnels . . 71, 289, 353, 358
Bridleways .. .. . . 181, 182
Brighton . . . . . . 258, 415
Bristol:
art and drama . . . . . . 416
broadcasting studio . . 369, 443
industries . . . . 258, 277, 310
museum and art gallery . . . . 422
population.. .. .. 15,16,258
port of .. .. 258,345,347
telephones .. . . . . . . 366
University . . . . .. 164, 179
Britannia Royal Naval College . . 122
British:
Academy . . .. . . 171, 428
Airways .. . . 360, 361, 362-3
see also Civil Aviation
Army of the Rhine (baor) 1x7,120,123
Association for the Advancement
of Science .. . . .. 399
Broadcasting Corporation (bbc) 45, 56,
164, 414, 438-9, 440, 44L 442, 443,
444, 445
orchestras . . .. 414,41?
World Service . . .. 442, 443
see also Broadcasting
Calibration Service . . • • 265
Council 35, 54, i69, 17°, UL 245,
412, 414, 427
Scholarships .. .. 169,245
i-7
1
4- 5
6-7
5- 6
British—contd.
Isles—contd.
geology and topography
languages
soil and vegetation
See also Population
Library .. .. 51,
Museum ..
Natural History
Overseas Trade Board
Standards Institution 252, 263,265,395
For other organisations with British
as first word of their title see
relevant subject
Brixham . . .. .. .. 343
Broadcasting: television and radio 21, 22,
23, 56, 164, 414, 438-45
advertising on 439, 440, 441, 442,
443- 4
advisory councils and committees 439,
440, 444, 445
colour transmission 438,440,443,444
Councils, National .. • • 439
educational 164,438,439,441,442,
444- 5
Educational Development Over¬
seas, Centre for (cedo). . 171, 445
Eurovision . . .. .. 444, 445
films .. .. 164, 419,420
frequencies 440, 441, 442, 443, 444,
445
international relations .. 444-5
licences .. .. 56, 438, 439
line definition .. . . 440,441
local stations 369, 439, 440, 441, 442,
443,444
monitoring. . . . .. 443, 444
political .. .. .. .. 444
press and .. .. 429,430,437,440
programme companies
4i4,439>440,
441
433, 439
. . 298
439, 44i
4i7, 444
438, 440-3
publications
receivers industry .
religious
research
services
domestic television and radio 439,
440-1, 443
external . . . . 438, 439, 442-3
studios .. ..369,441,442,443
television 164,439,440,441,443
topical tapes .. 442,443,444
transcription .. .. .. 443
transmitting stations 439, 443, 444
technical developments . . . . 444
problems .. .. • • 445
See also British Broadcasting
Corporation and Independent
Television
Brush industry .. .. •• 3r3
Buchanan report . . . . .. 348
Buckingham Palace (Art Gallery) . . 422
Buckinghamshire .. .. .. 4°4
Buddhists .. .. .. • • 196
Budget .. .. . • 210, 211-7
Community . . .. 83-4, 201
Building:
Agency, National .. .. 187, 289
Agr6ment Board . . . . . . 289
and civil engineering 52, 178, 187,
254, 288-90,395
contractors’ plant .. .. 290, 294
INDEX
Page
Building—contd.
design and construction 52, 395, 424
Construction Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. 401
employment in .. 253, 254, 288
grants  265
industrialised . . 160, 188, 288, 289
by local authorities 72, 185, 186, 187,
288
new towns.. .. .. 176-8
offices . . 176, 178, 262, 268, 289
overseas . . .. .. .. 289
preservation notices .. •. 179
private .. . . 185, 189, 288
production. . . . . . 288-90
Property Services Agency . . 288
reconstruction . . . . 185, 190-1
Research:
Establishment (bre) 187, 289, 394,
395. 4°i
489
Page
Research—contd.
societies .. .. 188, 189, 223, 226
standards . . .. 186, 187, 189, 424
National House Builders’ Regis¬
tration Council (nhbrc) .. 189
Station .. .. .. 289, 395
Burghs see Law and Local Govern¬
ment
courts . . .. .. 92, 93
Burnham-on-Crouch .. . . 460
Burton-on-Trent .. .. . . 259
Bury 259
Bus and coach services 178, 217, 353,
t ^ r, x. 354-5.357,359
L,ondon Country Bus Services
Ltd. .. .. .. # 357
National Bus Company 354, 355, 357
Business Statistical Office .. . . 262
By-elections .. .. .. 34, 36
By-laws  54,85,138
COI see Information, Central Office of
Cabinet 27, 30, 31, 42, 44, 45-6, 49,
55, n6, 198
Office . . .. . . 48, 49, 199
Policy Review Staff 49, 198, 393
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . 56, 367^8
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated) industry 258,
259, 297
Calibration Service, British. .
Camberley
Cambourne ..
Cambridge:
Institute of Criminology . .
Library
museums .
Observatory
population .
sport
265
122
258
no
425
422
408
258
449,452,459,460
University 43, 164, 165, 407, 408, 425,
426, 449, 452, 459, 460
research at .. 1x0,258,407,408
Cambridgeshire .. 163,315,320
Canals . . 259, 285, 340, 348, 358
Cancer research .. 138, 146, 402
Campaign . . . . . . 146, 402
Canning industry, see Food, pro¬
cessing
Canoeing .. .. .. . . 452
Canteens . . .. .. .. 392
Canterbury, Province of 192, 193, 194
276
282, 405
421,
Canvey Island
Capenhurst (research centre)
Capital gains tax see Taxation
Cardiff:
broadcasting studio
museums and art galleries
national sports centre
newspapers
population ..
port. .
University College
Carlisle .. .. 260,361,443
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 168, 418
Carpets industry .. 259, 260, 305, 307
Carrington .. .. .. . . 277
Car tax .. .. .. .. 216
Catering trades .. .. 250, 374
443
422
.. 448
.. 432
16, 261
261, 345
435
Catering trades—contd.
education .. . . .. .. 167
Catholic, see Church, Roman
Cuts . . .. . , .. .. 22
Celtic language . . .. 8, 13
Cement:
and Concrete Association .. 290
industry .. .. 258,310,311
Censorship:
films .. .. .. .. 4I9
British Board of Film Censors 420
Plays  416
Census of:
Distribution 246, 247, 248, 249, 250
Population . . . . 8-9, 13-8, 56, 192
Production.. .. 253,254,319
Retail Distribution (Northern
Ireland) . . .. .. .. 248
Central:
Criminal Court .. .. 88, 97
Policy Review Staff 49, 198, 393
Statistical Office (cso) 49, 204, 262
Treaty Organisation (cento) 115, 120,
169
Cereals Industry .. .. .. 308
croPs •• 315,316,317,325,329
Chamber of Shipping .. . . 342
Chambers of Commerce . . . . 257
Association of British .. .. 257
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the:
Duchy of Lancaster . . 44, 99
Exchequer 44, 5°, 5L 54, 211, 212,
216
See also Finance, Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court) qx, qc
Channel Islands:
Airways and airports . . 362, 364
area.. .. .. .. .. x
broadcasting and television . . 440
language I3
legislature .. .. .. 27, 32, 43
population . . . . .. 8, 14, 440
press .. . . .. .. 432
relationship with UK and Crown 27,
28, 32,43,53
See also Guernsey and Jersey
Channel Tunnel .. .. 52, 351
490
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Chapel Cross. . .. . . .. 280
Charity Commission . . .. 127
Charter services (aircraft) 360, 362, 363
Cheltenham . . 258, 275, 356, 418, 428
Chemical:
industries . . 197, 206, 253, 254, 257,
258, 259, 260, 263, 302-3, 370, 395,
402
plant industry .. .. 260, 295
See also Engineering
Cheque cards .. .. . . 219
Chesham . . .. .. .. 122
Cheshire 259, 276, 277, 279, 282, 308,
353.354
Chesterfield .. . . . . . . 259
Chest Radiological Service . . .. 143
Chief of the Defence Staff . . . . 116
Chiefs of Staff Committee .. .. 116
Children:
adoption of . . 86, 90, 91,151
allowances for 132, 133, 134, 135, 136,
137.150
art, drama, films and music 71, 154,
158,416,417,419,420,421,423,426
child guidance centres .. . . 157
cinema attendance and clubs .. 421
deprived of home life, care of 71,
128, 129, 147, I49-51
employment . . . . . . 391
foster homes . . . . . . 150
handicapped . . 127, 147, 148, 158
National Society for Mentally
Handicapped . . . . 128
homes for . . . . 148, 150, 151, 159
National Society for the Preven¬
tion of Cruelty to . . 128, 151
nurseries . . . . 71, 129, 149
orphans 129, 133, 134, 137, 15°. I5i
school transport .. . . • • 159
voluntary child care organisations 128,
149.151
Children’s Film Foundation . . 421
China manufacture .. .. 258,311
Chiropodists . . . . 145, 147, 148
Chocolate and confectionery 260, 309
Chorley . . . . . . • • 259
Church:
Commissioners .. . . . . 193
in Ireland (Presbyterian). . 108, 194
in Scotland, Episcopal (Anglican) 193
in Wales (Anglican) .. • • 193
of England 30, 33, 35, 45, 108, 192-3
appointment of senior clergy 30, 45,
192
archbishops 33. 45. I92, 193. *94
bishops . . 33, 45. I92, I93> x94
Children’s Society
clergy .. .. 35.
colleges ..
ecclesiastical courts
finance ..
General Synod ..
Laity
Lambeth Conference
parishes . .
parochial councils
provinces and dioceses
relations with Monarchy
Church—contd.
of Ireland (Anglican) 35,
of Scotland (Presbyterian)
Page
108, 187,
193
35. 108,
192, 194
45, 194
.. 194
. . 128
195
General Assembly
relations with Monarchy
social work
of Wales (Presbyterian) ..
Roman Catholic 35, 108,192, 193,195,
196
Overseas Appointments Bureau 171
schools . . .. 155, 157, 195
social work . . .. .. 128
Churches . . . . .. 178, 192—6
British Council of. . . . . . 196
co-operation between . . .. 196
Council of Christians and Jews . . 196
Free (non-conformist) .. 108, 128,
J94-5, 196
Free Church Federal Council .. 196
welfare work . . 108, 127, 128
World Council of . . .. .. 196
Churchill Travel Scholarships . . 170
Cinemas .. .. .. 22, 419-21
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux .. 128, 252
Citizenship . . . . .. 12-13, 54
Civic Trust . . . . . . 175, 424
Civil Aviation . . . .359-65, 395
aircrew qualifications .. .. 361
airmail services .. . . • • 365
airports 57, 138, 259, 360, 364-5
Authority (caa) . . 3 60, 3 61, 3 64, 3 89
Airworthiness Division . . 361
British Airports Authority (baa) . . 364
British Airways Board (bab) 360, 361,
362-3, 364
Divisions .. . . .. 362
Associated Companies Ltd. .. 362
Engine Overhaul Ltd. .. 363
European .. .. 362,363
Helicopters Ltd. .. 362,363
International Aeradio Ltd. . . 362,
363
Overseas .. .. 362,363
Regional .. . . 362,363
British Caledonian Airways . . 363
British European Airways (bea) 359,360
British Overseas Airways Cor¬
poration (boac).. .. 359, 360
relations with State
schools . .
social work
128
192,193,194
• • 193
• • 193
• • 193
• . 193
193, 194
193-4
• • 193
• • 193
• • 193
30,192,
194
192, 193
192,193
108, 128
360, 362, 363
232, 362
362
362
361
364
155,
charter operations.
earnings
Eurocontrol
helicopter service .
independent airline companies . . 360,
361, 363
licences . . . . • ■ 360, 364
ministerial responsibility for 57, 360,
396
navigational aids ..
private flying
Business Aircraft Users’ Associa¬
tion
Research and Development Board 397
safety measures .. 361, 362, 389
traffic control .. . . 361-2
training colleges and schools 361, 364
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil:
Courts .. 85,90-2,94-5,97,98
Defence .. .. 54,71, I24_5
Royal Observer Corps .. .. 125
364
INDEX
Page
Civil—contd.
Defence—contd.
Warning and Monitoring
Organisation .. .. .. 125
See also Defence
engineering see Engineering
science . . .. .. ..154
Service . . 44, 47, 48, 49, 61-6, 112
Arbitration Tribunal .. . . 387
categories and classes . . 61, 62
College   49, 64, 65
Commission . . 49, 61, 63, 64
conditions of service . . .. 65
Department .. 47, 49, 64, 387
earnings.. .. .. 65,381
Fulton Committee . . .. 62
labour relations.. .. ..387
manual workers .. . . 63
political and private activities . . 66
recruitment and training 49,62,64-5
65,387
..62-3
184, 397
.. 24
. . 86
• • 34
• • 34
•• 4-5
•• 457
.. 402
.. 403
139,144,157
261, 296
258, 260, 261
staff associations
structure
Clean Air:
Council
National Society for
Clerk:
of the Court
of the House of Commons
of the Parliaments
Climate
Climbers’ Clubs
Clinical Research:
Board
Centre
Clinics
Clock and watch industry
Cloth industry
Clothing:
Export Council .. .. . . 308
industry 246, 257, 258, 260, 261, 262,
307, 308,371
shops . . .. . . .. 248
Clubs:
social . . .. . . .. 23
youth . . . . .. 163, 172
Clyde and Clydeside 15, 16, 261, 277,
301,333,345.346,347,460
Coal:
and Steel Community,
European (ecsc) .. 80-1, 270
Board, National (ncb) .. 253,254,
272-3,274,275,285,389,391
coalfields and mines 2, 259, 260, 272,
273-5
consumption .. 269, 273, 279
exports and imports . . 272, 273
industry 57, 80, 81, 254, 259, 260, 261,
263, 270-5
co-operation with European
Community .. .. . . 270
mechanisation . . .. 273-4
production and manpower 80, 253,
260, 272, 273-4
research
associations
establishments .
Utilisation Council
Coalminers:
numbers employed
Coastal preservation .
Coastguard:
School
275,
397
275
275
285
• 273, 370
72, 175, 180
343
491
Page
Coastguard—cottfrf.
Service . . .. .. . . 343
Coatbridge . . .. .. .. 284
Coinage . . .. .. 30, 218
Coke:
consumption and production 269, 273
Research Association, British . . 275
Colleges:
advanced technology 162, 164, 165,
290, 400
central institutions (Scotland). . 161
university status 165,332,423-4,400
agricultural .. .. 161,332
Air Training .. .. . . 361
art . . 71, 161, 162, 165, 167, 423-4
Instructor Training . . .. 378
of education 154, 155, 162, 164, 166,
167, 168, 171, 173, 423
residential (adult education) 162, 163
Services .. .. .. . . 122
technical 71, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166,
169, 171, 400
theological .. .. .. .. 193
village .. .. . . . . 163
See also Education
Colombo Plan .. .. ..169
Colonial Development and Welfare
Acts (cd & w) .. .. .. 245
Combine harvesters .. .. 317, 323
Commercial:
associations .. .. .. 257
banks . . 217, 219, 223, 235, 237
policy   233-5
premises, health and welfare in . . 391
radio .. .. .. .. 442
Commissioners:
of Irish Lights .. .. .. 343
of Police .. .. .. .. 112
Committees see relevant subjects
Commodity markets.. .. ..237
Common:
Agricultural Policy (cap) 50, 81,
324-5, 329
external tariff (cet) . . .. 81
fisheries policy .. .. • • 333
Market see European Community
Commons and village greens .. 182
Commons Commissioners .. .. 101
Commonwealth:
African Assistance Plan, Special .. 169
Agricultural Institutes and
Bureaux.. .. .. 410,411
aid to .. .. .. 53,244-5
Awards, Special .. .. .. 171
citizens .. .. 12,13,54,376
employment of .. .. 153, 376
co-operation:
broadcasting .. 442, 443, 444
education .. .. 168-70,245
financial and trade 230,232,233,234,
238,243,244-5
research.. .. 406,407,410,411
Development Corporation (cdc) 244,
245
Development Finance Company
Limited (cdfc) .. .. . . 223
education conferences .. .. 170
Education Fellowship Scheme .. 169
Education Liaison Committee . . 170
Forestry Institute .. .. . . 405
Games .. .. 450,453,462
immigration .. .. 12,54,152
492
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Commonwealth—contd.
member nations .. .. .. 26
Office, Foreign and see Foreign
Press Union . . .. ■ • 435
Queen as Head of. . .. 26, 28
reciprocity (national insurance) .. 130
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 169,
170
Travelling Scholarship Scheme 435
Scientific Committee (esc) . . 411
Study and Serve Scheme .. 170
Sugar Agreement . . . . . . 326
Universities, Association of 169, 171
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Communist Party (newspaper) .. 430
Community:
Associations, National Federation
of  163
Centres . . .. 129, 162, 163, 413
development .. .. 129, 157
Relations Commission .. ..152
Service volunteers .. 128, 173
Comptroller and Auditor General 165,
210,211, 365
Computers 295, 298, 350, 361, 364, 366,
374. 395. 401 > 4°2, 410. 434. 444
See also Data and Post Office
Computing Centre, National .. 265
Concert halls. . .. .. 414,417
Confederation of British Industry
(CBl) 200, 257, 382, 384, 388, 390,
391, 392
Conservative Party .. . . 36, 40
Consolidated Fund .. 39, 210, 217
Constabulary, Inspectors of .. 112
Construction:
equipment. . .. 288, 290, 294
industries . . 52, 262, 288-90, 294
research . . .. .. 289—90
Industry Research and Informa¬
tion Association .. 289,401
work overseas .. .. .. 289
Consulting Engineers, Association of 289
Consumer:
councils .. . . •. • • 252
expenditure see Expenditure
goods industries . . 257, 258, 298
see also individual industries
Groups, National Federation of. . 252
organisations
protection ..
research
sales promotion
Consumers:
Association (ca) ..
councils and committees
Contractors’ plant .
Conurbations..
Convalescent homes.
Conversion tables
Coolkeeragh . .
Co-operative:
marketing (agricultural)
Retail Services Ltd.
societies
Wholesale Society. .
Corby
252
252, 254
.. 252
.. 250
21, 252
256, 277,
278, 283
.. 294
15, 16,258
142, 392
463-4
.. 278
Cornwall
Coronation
.. 329
.. 248
246, 247-8, 249
246, 247,253
176, 259
2, 8, 258, 292, 3”. 320, 362,
368, 407
  27, 29
Page
95, 100
Coroners’ Courts
Corporation tax see Taxation
Coryton .. .. .. .. 276
Cotton:
industry .. . . .. 259,305
Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association .. .. 305
Councils of counties, districts, etc.,
see Local Government
Councils, Other, see relevant subject
Counsel, see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State. . . . 31» 42
Countryside, access to .. .. 182
Countryside Commissions .. 180—1
County:
Court Rule Committees .. .. 98
courts .. 90, 91, 94, 95, 101, 102
Court of:
Appeal 43,86,88,90,91,95,97,98,
101, 102
Common Council.
Inquiry (Labour) .
Justice
Session (Scotland)
.. .. in
•. 387
.. 85
74, 92, 94, 95, 96,
98, 99,101
97
101
Courts martial
Appeals Court .. .. 97:
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden Market .. 246, 329
Covent Garden Opera .. .. 418
Coventry .. .. .. 16, 258
Cowley .. . . .. • • 258
Crafts Council and Centres.. .. 264
Craigavon .. .. . • • • 176
Cranebank .. .. .. •• 361
Cranfield Institute of Technology .. 165
Credit Cards .. .. .. 219, 250
Cricket .. .. 157, 446, 452-3
Criminal:
Courts 86-90, 92-4, 95, 97, 101-2
Injuries Compensation Board .. 96
investigation departments 54, 113, 114
Law Revision Committee .. 103
records .. .. 101,105,113,114
Criminals, treatment of 53,103-4,109-10
Crofters’ Commission .. 324, 327
Cromarty .. .. .. • • 261
Croquet .. .. . • • • 453
Crown:
Agents for Oversea Governments
and Administrations .. .. 63-4
Courts 86, 88, 89, 90, 97, 98, 102, 103
Dependencies .. 1, 27, 28, 63, 115
Office, Edinburgh.. .. •• 59
Crown, The see Monarchy and
Royal Family
Cruden Bay . . .. • • 276, 347
Crystal Palace National Sports
Centre . . . . • • • • 448
Cumberland . . .. 163, 260, 280, 339
Currency .. . • 201, 202, 463
realignment .. . • • • 202
transactions 201, 235, 238, 239,
241
See also Finance and Monetary
Customs and Excise:
Board of .. 47,51,56,213,216
Department .. .. .. 216
duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 260, 302
Cycle and motor cycle industry 259, 299
Cycling .. .. • • • • 453
INDEX
Dagenham . . .. .. ..
Dancing . . .. 22> I98\ 4I8
English Folk Dance and Song
418
•• 4i9
401, 406
260, 430
3ii, 353
434
Society
Royal Ballet and School .
Daresbury (nuclear physics)
Darlington
Dartford
Data:
Exchange, Automatic
Processing .. .. 361, 368-9, 407
Cargo Electronic-data-pro-
cessing, London Airport
(LACES) . . 364, 369
Service, National .. 265, 369
See also Computers and Post Office
£eaf 128,145, 148,159
  45, 192
Death:
causes of 10, 24,95,137,138,343,355
duty see Taxation, estate duty
grant and allowances 131, 133, 134,
136
9-10,137
.. 8
.. 287
•• 454
115-26
120-5
.. 116
.. 121
.. 116
.. 122
. . 122
122-4
117,120
rate. .
registration of a
Dee estuary ..
Deer stalking. .
Defence
Armed Forces
boards
Cadetships
Chiefs of Staff Committee
Civil see Civil Defence
College, National ..
colleges
combat forces
Commands .. ..    
Committee on, and Overseas Policy 116
Council  55,ii6
deployment .. .. 117-20
engagements .. . . .. 121
expenditure .. .. 205,209
Forces’ vote .. .. • • 35
manpower .. .. .. 120-1
Ministry of and Secretary of State
for 44, 47, 51, 55, 56, 70, 75, in,
116, 121, 262, 361, 374, 396, 397,
__ . , _ „ 405,406,407
National Defence Industries
Council .. .. .. .. i2j
NATO strategy .. 115,117,123,124
nuclearpower 115,117,122,123,405
Strategic Force .. .. 122,123
Ordnance Factories, Royal .. 126
overseas commitments 115,117-20, 232
planning and control
policy and commitments .
pre-Service organisations.
Procurement
ranks
research and development
116-7
5i,115-6
.. 172
116,125-6
121,122
125-6,393,
396,405
.. 124
374
reserve and auxiliary forces
resettlement service
Secretary of State for see Ministry
of
Service organisation .. .. 120
Staff colleges
strategic force
Studies, Royal College of .
tankers
training
.. 122
122,123
.. 122
•• 34i
121-2
493
Page
Defence—contd.
warning systems .. .. ..125
weapons and equipment 122-4,253,405
collaborative projects .. 125-6
export controls .. ., . . 234
women’s services .. .. ..120
See also Army, Royal Navy, Royal
Air Force and Research
Delegated legislation. . .. ..40-1
Demography y-jS
Dental services 140,141, 145, 146, 157
British Dental Association .. 146
dentists .. 140,141,142,146,151
General Dental Council . . .. 146
Deposit banks see Commercial banks
Derby and Derbyshire 16, 259, 273, 275,
„ . 346,367
Design:
and Industries Association (dia) . . 264
associations .. .. . . 264
awards for 264,424
Centres .. .. 21,264,401
Computer Aided Centre .. .. 401
Councils .. .. 252,264,413,421
of Industrial .. .. 264,421
Index .. .. .. .. 264
Detention centres 102,103, 104,105,109
Detergents .. .. 302,303,305
Devaluation see Sterling
Development:
areas and districts .. .. 266, 268
Boards, Regional .. .. . . 266
Commission .. . . . . 269
Corporation for Wales .. -.235
corporations (new towns) . . .. 176
councils . . .. .. .. 269
See also Economic and Research
Fund .. .. .. .. 269
organisation see Industry
plans (towns) . . 174, 175,176-8
Devizes .. .. . . . . 356
Devon 2,258,311,319,320,343,453
Dewsbury . . .. .. . . 26o
Diesel traction .. 258, 349, 350,410
Dietitians .. .. . . .. 147
Dioceses see Church of England,
provinces and
Diplomatic Service .. . .63, 232, 235
Director of Public Prosecutions 55, 61, 88,
93
Disabled:
British Sports Association for the 448
Central Council for the .. ..128
education .. .. .. . . 159
employment of .. 148, 253, 370, 375
rehabilitation of .. 142-3,149, 375
vocational training .. 375,377
welfare services for 71, 128,137, 143,
147,148,149
Disablement:
benefit .. 131,134,135-6, 137,148
pensions (war) .. .. • • 137
Resettlement Service .. 143,375
Discount market and houses 218,220, 222
Diseases, control of 71, 138, 139, 142,
, 144, 145
research programmes ..138
Distributive trades .. 246,247,371
Divorce court .. ,. 90, 92, 94
Divorce rate .. .. 10-11
Dock workers .. ..346
National Dock Labour’Board .. 346
494
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Docks see Ports and
Dockyards, naval
Doctors:
appointed factory ..
British Medical Association
general practitioner services
140, 141-2, 143, 144, 145, 146, 152
in industry.. .. .. 391,392
in National Health Service
Doggett’s Coat and Badge . .
Dogs . .
Domestic:
electrical appliances industry .. 297
help .. 19,71,145,148,149
. . 126
• • 39i
146,392
95, 139,
140, 146
.. 460
. . 22
utensils industry
Doncaster
Dorset
Dounreay
Dover. .
Drainage authorities .
Drama
258,302
. . .. 260
275,280
.. 261,280
258,346,348,443
.. 71,327-8
413,414,415-7
Page
Drama—contd.
Conference, National .. ..416
schools and colleges .. .. 416
See also Theatres
Dramatic Art, Royal Academy of .. 416
Drax . . . . . . .. . . 279
Drinks industries 206, 257, 308, 309-10,
371,402
Drugs.. .. 54,137,143,234,303
Committee on Safety of Medicines 144
Dry cleaning . . . . . . . . 250
44,99
Duchy of Lancaster .
Duke of Edinburgh’s:
Award Scheme
Design Prize
Dumbarton . .
Dumfriesshire
Dundee
Dunstable
Durham
Dyestuffs
..173
.. .. 264
.. .. 278
.. .. 280
164,261,307,432
. . 258
no, 164,192,260,273
259,302
Easington .. . . .. .. 283
East Anglia 6, 15, 164, 258, 315, 317, 319,
320
Economic:
and Monetary Union .. . . 80
and Social Committee . . . . 83
Development Committees (edcs) 198,
262,264,323
Development Council, National
(nedc) .. .. 198,262,382
integration with Europe see Euro¬
pean Community
Management . . . . 198-201
Planning Regions . . . . .-199
Economy, national .. .. 197-207
gross domestic product 203,206, 263,
393
gross national product 84, 197, 203,
205, 209, 227, 232, 243, 314, 34°
incomes and prices .. 199,200
investment.. .. 199,204,206-7
personal incomes and expenditure
19,204
policy .. 49,58,198-201 266,268
structure . . .. .. 203-7
See also Balance of Payments,
Finance, Industry and Trade
Edinburgh:
administrative departments 59,60
agricultural research .. . . 4°4
airport
364,365
art, drama and music 415,417, 418,421
Assay Office . . .. .. 302
Botanic Garden, Royal .. ..396
broadcasting studio .. .. 443
Court of Session .. .. 74,92,94
industry . . .. .. • • 261
International Festival .. 415,418
libraries . . . . •. 425,426
Meadowbank Sports Centre .. 448
museums and art galleries 422,423
newspapers .. . . • • 432
opera . . . . •• •• 4J8
population .. .. . . 16, 261
Royal Observatory .. 401,407
universities no, 164,165,339,425,426
research at .. .. ..no
Education 19,20,71,72,73,75,127,
154-73,205
administration .. .. I54“5
adult . . 71, 157, 161,162-3,
426
National Institute of .. .. 163
agricultural .. .. 161,332
and Science, Department of and
Secretary of State for .. 47,51,53,
107,154,155,156,159,160,163,164,
165,167,168,173,262,339,393,394,
402,403,406,408,409,413,422,424,
426
architectural .. 165,167,424
art and design 71, 154, 158, 161, 162,
167,413,414,421,423-4
broadcasting to schools 164,439,441,
442
building programme 51, 154,157,424
Certificate of Secondary see exami¬
nations, below
colleges see Colleges
commercial and management 158,161,
162,165,167,168, 265
curricula and courses 156, 158,161,
162,163,164,165,265,423,424
block release
correspondence
day release
sandwich
secretarial
development
dramatic
evening institutes
examinations
finance of 71, 73
161,332
.. 162,165
161,332
161,162,167
.. .. 162
154, 157
.. .. 416
161,162,413
156,158,159-6°
152, 154, 155,156,
157,159,160,161,162,163,165,167,
168,193,332
forestry .. . • • • • • 339
‘further’ .. 154,155,160,161-3,167,
393,400,413,423
advanced courses 161, 164,167, 400
General Certificate of see examina¬
tions, above
grants see finance of, above
higher .. 154,155,156,164-6,17°
Inspectorate .. .. 156,159
INDEX
Page
Education—contd.
local education authorities 51, 71, 73,
106,148,155,156,159,160,161, 162,
163,167,168,171, 172,173
music .. .. 158,417,418,419
National Certificates and Diplomas
161, 162
physical  157,447
prisoners .. .. 106-7,109,110
religious .. 155,156-7,193,195,196
research on. . . . 156, 164,168
scholarships and awards 71, 156, 161,
167,168
schools .. .. 154,155-62, 178
building.. .. 154,155,157,160
community . . . . • • 157
comprehensive . . .. 158, 160
Council for Curriculum Exami¬
nations .. 156,159,168
denominational 155, 156-7, 192,193,
t95
tees .. .. 156,159,161
‘first’ . . . . . . . . 158
health and welfare 51,53,137,138,
I57
independent (public) 154, 155, 156,
159
Tribunal . . . . .. 159
leavingage 155,156,158,159-60
management .. . . 155-6
meals service . . 137, 154,157
‘middle’ .. .. . . . . 158
nursery . . .. 129,148,157
preparatory . . . . • • 159
primary 154, 155,156,157-8,160,163
pupil numbers 154,155,156, 158,
159,193
secondary 154,155,156,158,159,
160,163
special educational treatment 51,159
ten-year programme .. ..154
voluntary 154,155, 156, 157, 160,
192
teachers 152,154,155,156,157,159,
163,166,171
Inter-University Council for
Higher Education Overseas
170,171
training . .51, 129,154,155,166,167
Teaching Council, General .. 166
technical and technological 154,158,
161,162,164,166,168,400,401
See also Industry, education and
training for
trade unions and . . . . .. 386
Urban Programme .. 129,152
visual aids in .. .. ..164
Educational Foundation for .. 164
vocational . . 107, 161, 164, 263, 375,
377-8
See also Universities
Educational:
Commission, US/UK .. .. 170
Development Overseas, Centre
for (cedo) .. .. 171,445
Research, National Foundation for 168
Scientific and Cultural Organisa¬
tion (unesco) .. 170,410,417
Technology, Council for .. .. 164
Eggs Authority .. .. ..329
Egmanton . . .. . . . . 275
Eisteddfodau.. .. .. 418,428
495
Page
Elderly people see Senior Citizens
Elections:
local government . . .. 54, 69-70
parliamentary .. 32, 34-5, 36, 54
Electrical:
and Allied Manufacturers’ Associa¬
tion, British .. .. .. 297
appliances industries .. . . 297
engineering see Engineering
machinery industry 258,259,260,297
Research Association .. .. 297
Electricity 57,178,262, 269,270, 273,
277-82
area boards and councils .. 277-8,282
Authority, Northern Ireland Joint 278
Board for Northern Ireland .. 278
Board, South of Scotland (sseb) 277,
278,280,281, 282
consumption .. 277,278,281-2
Council .. .. 277, 278, 282
Generating Board, Central (cegb)
277-8,280, 281, 282
generation.. .. 277,278-81,405
manpower . . . . . . . . 277
power stations .. 277,278-81,289
hydro-electric .. 261,269,278,280
nuclear .. 260,269,278,279,280
production. . . . .. 262,263
research .. .. 278,282,397,405
Service (ni) .. . . 277,278
showrooms. . .. .. 247, 248
Supply Research Council.. .. 282
transmission lines . . .. 277,281-2
Electronic Engineering Association. . 297
Electronic equipment:
defence .. . . .. . . 125
industry 254,258,261,262,293,295,
298,395, 4°2
post office .. 365,366,367,368-9
Ellesmere Port . . .. .. 259
Emigration .. .. . . .. 12
Employers’ organisations 83, 257, 263,
378,379,382,383,384, 387, 388
Employment 61, 62,63,77, 197, 204, 253,
262, 263,265,268, 269,272,346,
,. . ... 370-92
arbitration and conciliation 386-7, 388
Conciliation and Advisory Service
52,265,386
Department of and Secretary of
State for 44, 47, 51-2, 136, 143, 153,
198,253,262,265,268,370,371, 373,
374,375-376,377,378,379,381, 383,
386,387,388,389,390,391
deployment of .. .. 37°-!
‘fringe’ benefits .. . . .. 382
industrial relations . . 382-8
Instructor Training:
Colleges . . .. .. .. 378
Units . . . . .. .. 378
manpower:
and Productivity Service .. 375
‘Jobcentres’ . . . . .. 374
mobility of .. ..81,201,375
research and planning .. ..371
Service Commission (msc) 373,375
National Joint Advisory Council.. 198
Occupational Guidance Service
^ 373,374
offices .. .. .. 373—4
of immigrants . . ..53,153,376
older workers .. .. .. 370
496
Employment—contd.
permits
protective legislation
redundancy
safety in
Services
Services Agency (esa)
sheltered .
training for.
boards .
centres .
colleges
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
.. 376
262,327,378-9,
381,388-9,391
132,374.378-9
388-91
372-6
373,375
•• •• 375
81, 371,377-8
..371
• •375
..378
vocational guidance and 374, 375,378
women 19, 370, 371, 379, 380, 381, 391
working conditions .. 80,378-82
Youth, Service . . . . 52,374-5
See also individual industries,
Manpower, Trade Unions, Un¬
employment, Wages and Work:
hours of
Engineering 52, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261,
262, 288, 289, 293-4,395
aeronautical .. .. 300-1,361
chemical .. . . .. 3°2-3
civil.. 254,288,289,390,395,396
electrical 254, 258, 259, 263,296-8,402
Institutions, Council of .. -.399
Laboratories .. .. . . 282
Laboratory, National . . .. 401
marine 258,259,260,261,299,301
mechanical.. .. .. 293-6,402
training in . . . . .. .. 167
Engineers, Association of Consulting 289
Engines, industrial .. .. 294,397
England:
area and counties . . .. .. 1
population, figures .. ..8-18
English:
Association .. .. • • 428
Channel .. .. .. 344,3s1
Opera Group . . .. . . 418
Tourist Board . . . . .. 232
Environment:
Department of the and Secretary of
State for the 47,52,67,75,79,97,
138,174,175,176,179,180,182,183,
184,185,187,198,199,217,254,262,
268,285,286,287,288,289,351, 353,
354, 355, 356, 389, 394-5, 397, 4°i,
408,413,424,426
Ministers for .. . . .. 52
Property Services Agency 52, 288
Research Council, National 51, 332,394
Environmental:
Conservation, Committee for 175
planning 52,71,72,81,138,174-84,
397
education . . . . . . 165
pollution .. .. 180,184,397
Royal Commission on .. • • 397
protection . . . . . • 180,183
Studies, Centre for .. 179, 395
Equal pay .. .. .. 380,381
Equity see Law
Essex.. .. .. 164,276,281,364
Estate duty see Taxation
Ethnic relations see Race Relations
Eurocontrol . . .. .. • • 362
Europe, trade with 80-4, 229, 230,270,
276,292,293,294,295,297,299,300,
303,304,306,312,313
Page
Europe, trade with—contd.
See also European Free Trade
Association (beta)
European:
Agricultural Guidance and Guar¬
antee Fund (feoga) .. 50,83
Architectural Heritage year .. 175
Atomic Energy Community
(euratom) .. .. 81,405-6
Broadcasting Union (ebu) .. 444
Coal and Steel Community (ecsc)
80-1,232,270
Communities .. 80-4,85,384
Economic Community (eec) 50,52,53,
57,80,81,229,233,242,294
Fellowship Scheme .. . . 168
Free Trade Association (beta) 230,
233,242
Industrial Federation, Council of 257
Investment Bank .. .. 83,201
Monetary Co-operation Fund .. 201
Nuclear Energy Agency (enea) 405,411
Organisation for Nuclear Research
(cern) .. .. 401,406,411
Parliament (Assembly) .. 32, 82,83
Social Fund . . .. .. 83
Space:
Conference .. .. 4°6,4°7
Research Organisation (esro)
401, 406, 411
Union .. . . • • .. 80
Vehicle Launcher Development
Organisation (eldo) .. .. 406
See also subject headings
European Community, The 26, 32,40, 50,
53, 57, 58, 80-4, 85, 97, 130, 139,
168-9, 201, 202, 226, 227, 232, 233,
234,235,241,266, 270,324,325,329,
333,335,376,384
Accession, Treaty of .. •• 80
Agricultural:
policy
80-1,
production
Assembly ..
coal and steel
Commission
Committees
Community law
Court of Justice
courts of appeal
co-operation
education
Council of Ministers
currency re-alignment
custom duties and levies
Customs Union
Defence Improvement Programme 115
Economic:
and Social Committee .. .. 83
integration .. •. 80,81
economy:
expansion of .. .. •• 81
gross national product (gnp) 84,232
finance:
aid to member countries 232,266
50,81,201,324-5,
329
•• 324
.. 82
232,270,273
82-3,226
.. 83
85.97
82,83
83.97
80, 81, 270
168-9
82,85
202,235
81,83,324
.. 81
capital movement
grants and loans
insurance
fisheries policy
institutions..
legislation ..
81
81, 210, 220
.. 226
333,335
..81-2
32,40,80,81
INDEX
Page
European Community, The—contd.
manpower:
mobility of .. 81, 83, 201, 376
training .. .. . . 81, 376
working and living conditions 81, 376
membership .. 26,80-4, 201
monetary policies .. 80, 81, 201, 202
nuclear energy activities .. 80,81
Parliament, European see Assembly,
above
policies, formulation and adminis¬
tration of .. 58,80,81,82,83
prices, control of .. . . 81, 324
reciprocal agreements, health .. 139
regional development .. 81,266
Fund .. .. .. .. 266
Representatives, Committee of
Permanent .. .. . • 83
research .. .. .. .. 81
revenue:
budget .. .. 83-4,201,232
sources of .. .. 83,84,213
schools and colleges .. 168-9
social:
development .. .. .. 81
fund .. .. .. .. 83
81,201,233,234,324
tariffs
technical:
and technological development 81
information .. .. .. 81
trade:
agreements 80,81,83,232,233,234,
. 324
development
exports, control of
free trade
area
imports
81, 233
324,329
•• 324
.. 80
81,83,324
497
Page
European Community, The—contd.
trade—contd.
market prices .. .. 81,324
overseas . . . . . . 81, 324
price controls .. .. 81,324
restrictive practices, control of. . 81
transport rates .. .. 81,292
treaties 32,80,81,82,83,216,226,
406
Evidence (rules) .. 89-90,93,94,99
Examining justices .. . . .. 86
Exchange control 51, 198, 201, 211, 218,
. 235,237
Exchange Equalisation Account (eea) 218
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
(Extel)  434
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Expectation of life .. .. ..10
Expenditure:
committees .. .. 40,209-10
consumer .. .. 199,200,204
public . . .. . .208-10,243
public authorities . . 129, 200, 204, 205
Surveys, Public .. .. 209-10
estimates .. .. 209,210
See also Defence, Finance, Re¬
search, Agriculture: subsidies,
and Housing: subsidies
Export 197, 198,199,200,201, 204,227,
229, 230, 233,234,238,421
controls .. .. 234,237,262,421
Credits Guarantee Department
(ecgd) .. .. 52-3,236,243
licensing and restrictions .. 51, 234,421
Overseas Trade Board, British .. 237
See also Trade and individual
industries
F Factories:
building
Inspectorate
legislative provisions
See also Employment and indi
vidual industries
Falmouth
Families:
average size of
welfare services for
176,178, 268
•52,389,392
381,389,390
258,460
.. 11, 18
53,127,128,129,
^ . 144,145,147,149
Family:
allowances . .53,127,129,130,134,136
Division (High Court) .. 91,98
Income Supplement 53, 129,130,141
129,144,145
128,151
. . 128
planning
Service Units
Welfare Association
Farming see Agriculture
Famborough .
Fashion
Fauna..
Fawley
Felixstowe
Fen district
Fencing
Fertilisers
300,407
. . 20
6-7, 182
276,277, 279
345,346
6,315
• • 453
302,303,304,3i7, 326, 334
Fertility trends see Population
Festival Hall, Royal .. .. 417
Field Sports Society, British .. 453
Fife 
Film:
Archive, National ..
Censors, British Board of..
Council, Scottish ..
festivals
National Panel for
Finance Corporation, National
261,279
.. 420
.. 420
.. 420
.. 420
.. 420
•• 419
Fund Agency, British .. 419,421
Industrial and Scientific Film As¬
sociation, British .. .. 420
industry . . .. .. 419,420
Institute, British .. 413, 420,421
library .. .. .. .. 420
production.. .. 419,420,421
Association of Great Britain .. 419
Theatre, National
Visnews Ltd.
Films:
distribution
documentary
educational
feature
licensing
of Scotland Committee
sponsorship
trade associations . .
Finance
aid to overseas countries
banking
420,421
.. 444
419,420,421
420.421.441
.. 164
414.419.441
419,420,421
.. 420
.. 420
419,420
83,208-25
53,235,243
217-23
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
F inance—contd.
capital issues
corporations
credit control
. .. 220
223,237,269
199,218
currency reserves .. 201,238,241
Exchequer 56,75,101,114,130,131,
140, 183,187,256,326,420,427,439
See also Treasury
financial institutions (other than
banks) .. .. 218,219,222-6
financing of international trade .. 220,
233-4,237
inflation, counter-measures 198,200-1,
213,379
local government 73-5,187-8, 205,
206,207,208
monetary reform . . . . . . 202
National Loans Fund .. 187,210
parliamentary control of finance . . 37,
38,39,208-12
public corporations .. 208,212
Special Drawing Rights (sdrs) 240,241
See also Balance of payments,
Budget, Exchange control, Ex¬
penditure, Income, Investment,
National Debt, Revenue, Sterl¬
ing, Taxation and Trade
Finnart
Fire:
Brigade Councils . .
Offices’ Committee
prevention research
Protection Association
Research Organisation, Joint
Research Station . .
Service Staff College
Service Technical College
Services 54,71,72,76-9,178
Fishing:
European Community:
Common Fisheries Policy .. 335
Involvement .. .. 333,335
fleets .. .. .. 333“4
freshwater . . 7, 286, 327, 334-5,4°4
Biological Association . . . . 403
grounds . . . . .. .. 333
Herring Industry Advisory Council 336
Herring Industry Board .. 335-6
industry 50,203,246,260,269,332-6,
370
employment in .. .. 334,335
processing .. 258,309,334
subsidies and loans .. 269,336
ports .. 258,260,333,345,347
research .. 3 3 5,4°3,4°4-5,4°8
and Development Board, Fish¬
eries .. .. .. .. 4°4
rights
sport
White Fish Authority
White Fish Industry
Council ..
Fleet see Royal Navy
Fleet Air Arm
Fleetwood
Flintshire
Float glass
Floor coverings
Flora see Vegetation
Flour Milling and Baking
Fog 
Folkestone
Page Page
Food:
biscuits . . .. .. . . 308
bread .. .. .. .. 308
chocolate and confectionery 13 9, 260,
309
consumption 20, 204, 227, 308, 309,
321
exports . . . . 229, 308,309,334
home grown supplies .. 315-21
imports 197,200,228,259,314,318,
329
industries 206, 257,258, 260,308-9,402
Manufacturing Industries, Re¬
search Association, British .. 401
processing 258,259,260,309,318,319,
320,321,325,404
purity 50, 71, 138-9,144, 252, 330, 331,
397
research .. .. 401,404,405
sales .. .. 246,248,249,250
See also Education: School Meals
Service and Welfare Foods Ser¬
vice
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao)  50,246,411
Football .. 22,23, 157,446,449-50
pools .. .. ..22,217,450
Rugby .. .. ..23,446,460
Footpaths and bridleways .. 181,182
Footwear:
industry 251,258,259,262,307,308,
346
Shoe and Allied Trades Research
Association . . .. .. 308
shops and repairers .. 248,251
Ford Foundation .. .. 168, 179
Foreign:
and Commonwealth Office and
Secretary of State for 44,47>53>54>
63,85,237,339,406,411
Overseas Development Admini¬
stration (oda)53,63,i7i , 3 78,403,
411
Exchange Market . . 202, 218, 237
Service see Diplomatic Service
Foreigners:
employmentof .. ••53>I53>376
naturalisation of .. .. 12-13,54
visitors .. . . . • • • 232
Forensic science .. .. .. 113
Forest:
area.. 6,182,314,336-7,338,339
parks . . . . .. 181-2
Products Research Laboratory 339,395
Research Stations .. .. .. 339
Forestry .. .. .. 203,336-9
Commission 6, 180,181, 337-8,405
333,335 committees and societies .. • • 338
446,454-5 education, training and research .. 165,
336,403 332,338-9,405
Advisory Princes Risborough Laboratory 339
• • 336 Training Council .. .. 339
employment in .. .. •• 337
.. 120 Enterprise, National .. .-338
276,333 Fund .. .. . • •• 338
.. 261 Institute, Commonwealth 339,4°5
.. 311 policy .. .. .. •• 337
.. 307 Forth:
bridge .. .. .. • • 353
259,401 river and firth .. 261,345,347
5,184 Fowl pest .. .. .. •• 33°
258,345 Foxhunting .. .. .. 453~4
276,347
76,77
78.79
52.79
.. 78
• • 79
79,395
78
78
INDEX
Page
Freezing (food) .. 258,309,333,334
Freight:
Corporation, National .. 351,354
Integration Council .. • • 351
services 344-5,348,349,350,351,353,
^ T , 354,357,358,363
Freightliners Ltd. .. .. 350,351
Friendly Societies, Registrar of .. 226
Fruit and vegetable:
Preservation Research Association 401
products and preserves . . .. 308
Fruit, production and distribution . . 246,
319-20,324,329
ruel and Power .. . .269-85, 397
Advisory Councils .. 270,397
consumption 269, 273, 276, 277, 278,
283-4
efficiency .. .. .. 284-5
499
Page
Fuel and Power—contd.
efficiency—contd.
research and development 270, 397
industries .. . . .. .. 270
employment in . . .. .. 270
European Community involve¬
ment . . .. .. .. 270
sources of .. .. .. .. 269
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas,
Hydro-electric, Petroleum, Re¬
search and European Com¬
munity, The
Fulbright Commission .. .. 170
Furniture and Timber Industry
Training Board .. .. .. 339
Furniture Development Council .. 313
Furniture industry . . .. 257,313
Research Association .. ..313
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic. . . . .. .. 13, 158
Mod, National .. .. .. 418
Gainsborough . . .. . . 275
Gambling see Betting
Game Conservancy .. . . .. 454
Games equipment industry . . • • 313
Game shooting . . .. .. 454
Gardens see Horticulture
Gas .. 57,178,262,269,273,282-4
Area Boards .. .. 283,284
Consumers’ Council, National . . 283
consumption .. .. 273,283-4
Corporation, British .. 283,284
Council .. .. .. 283,284
natural 258,269,270,273,275,278,
. 283,284
location ..
pipeline system
production and distribution
283
• • 283
262,263,
283-4
284,397
247,248
280,300
.. 260
364,365
• • 302
research and development
showrooms
turbines
Gateshead
Gatwick (airport)
Gauges industry
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(cxtt)   233,234
Electric Company . . . . . . 253
Register Offices .. .. ..8,59
Registrar 8, 56, 59
Geological Museum and Survey 409,422
Geology .. .. 2-4,408,409
Geophysics .. . . .. 397,408
Gin industry .. .. .. . . 309
Girl Guides Association .. 128,172
Giro, National 219,220, 365, 366, 369
Glamorgan
Glasgow:
airport and air services
art, drama and music
broadcasting studios
burgh courts
design centre
fire service . .
Hampden Park
housing and rebuilding
178,260
• •• 365
416,419,422
369,442,443
92
264
76
450
178
Glasgow—contd.
industry .. .. 261,307,310
museums and art galleries . . 42
newspapers .. . . 430,432
population .. .. 16,17,178, 261
transport .. .. 354,3 55,357
universities 110,164,165,166,426
Glass industry 251, 259,260,303,310,311
Research Association, British .. 311
Gliding  364,449
Gloucester and Gloucestershire 25 8,275,
, , 281,320,345,358,418
Glyndebourne (opera) . . . . 418
Gold and convertible currency
reserves 201,218,235,237,238,240
Gold and silver ware industry .. 302
Gold Market (London) .. .. 237
Golf .. .. 23,178,180,446,455
Goonhilly .. .. .. 368,407
Government . . .. .. 26-79,127
Actuary , Department of . . .. 48
composition of . . .. . . 44-5
departments of .. 27, 47-61,198
economic management .. 198-201
employment services .. 372-6
National Loans Fund (ni) 75, 187
relations with industry 57, 253, 255-6,
262,266,268,382,386-8,401
relations with overseas countries . . 53
Training Centres (gtc) 375, 377, 378
Training Opportunities Scheme
(tops) .. 373,377,378
See also Civil Service, Expendi¬
ture, Finance, Local Govern¬
ment Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Privy Council and
Research
Gramophone records 21,413,414,417,426
Grangemouth .. .. 276,347
Grants see Education: finance.
Housing: finance, and Local
Government: finance
Gravesend .. .. .. .. 311
Great Britain:
area.. . . . . . . .. 1
definition . . . . .. .. 1
population.. .. .. ..8-18
Greater London Council see London
Great Seal .. .. .. 30,33,55
Green Belts .. .. .. 16, 179—80
500
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Greenfield
Greenock (newspaper)
Greenwich
Greyhound racing
Grid, electricity
Page
.. 306
..432
.. 1,122,348
22,458
277, 280,281
Grimsby .. 260, 276, 306, 333, 347
Grocery trade .. 246, 247, 248, 249
Guardian’s allowance ... .. 134
Guernsey:
language .. .. .. • • 13
Page
Guernsey—contd.
newspapers .. .. .. 432
population .. . • • • 14
reciprocity (national health bene¬
fits)  130
See also Channel Islands
Guided weapons .. 122,123,126
Gulbenkian Trust .. .. ..168
Gymnastics .. .. .. .. 455
Gymnasts, remedial .. .. .. 147
H HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus
Hairdressing establishments
Halifax
Hall-mark (gold and silver)
Hamble
Handicapped persons see Disabled
and Welfare
Hand tools industry
‘Hansard’
Harbours see Ports
Harpenden
Harrogate
Hartlepool
Harwich
Hatfield
Health
89,93
250-1
260,307
.. 302
361
302
38
330,404
• • 356
260,345, 347
345,350,460
176,178,258
137-52
advisory councils and other com¬
mittees .. 140,143,146,147,392
and Social Security, Department
of 44,47,53,129,137,138,139,140,
143,151,402,424
and social services . . 53, 139-41, 144-6
authorities 127,138, 143,144,146,147,
148
centres 139,140,144,145,152,178
Commissioners .. .. . • 140
Community Services . . 144-6
control of infectious diseases 71,138,
139,142,144,145
education .. .. i45,I46, 147
home nursing 71, 139,141, 142,143,
144,145,391-2
in industry .. . . .. 391-2
Employment Medical Advisory
Service .. .. ■ • 391
in prisons .. .. •• •• 107
laboratories .. .. 140, 144
public 53,71,127, *38-9, I4°, I44
research .. .. 137,I4°,397,4°2
schoolchildren .. 137,140,148,157
Service, National 53, 59, 71, 107, 127,
137,138,I39-41,I42,143,144,146,
147,157,402
administration . . • • 53, 139_40
authorities .. .. .. 140
charges .. .. i39>I4I, x44
finance .. .. •■ 140-1
general practitioner services 139,140,
141-2,143,144,145
hospital services 127,13 9,140,
142-4,145
local services .. 139, 14°, r44-6
mental services 139,142,145,148-9
Northern Ireland .. 151-2
ombudsman .. .. .. 140
organisation .. .. 139,
reciprocal agreements .. ..139
Health—contd.
Service, National—contd.
specialist services 140,142-4, 147,
152
visiting .. .. 141,145,147,152
Supplementary Benefits Commis¬
sion  53,129,136
Heathrow (airport) 276, 289, 361, 364, 369
Heating and Ventilating Research
Association .. .. 290,401
Heating appliances .. .. 295,296
Hebrides .. .. .. ••4,5
Helicopters 120,122, 123, 126, 300, 343,
364,462
Henley on Thames .. .. 265,460
Herbariums .. .. .. . • 396
Hereford and Herefordshire 320,418
Herstmonceux .. .. . • 401
Hertfordshire .. •• 79,4°4
Hewett .. .. • • • ■ 283
Heysham .. .. 276,281,345,347
High Court of Justice 55, 86, 88, 89,90,
91,92,93,96,97,98
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) . . .. . • • • 95
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland) 92,
93,98,102
Highland Games .. .. ..451
Highlands and Islands, Scotland 2,4,5, 6,
8, 58, 69, 72, 261, 269, 277, 278, 280,
3i5,3i8,337,364,45i,454
aerodromes and airways 360,362,364
Development Board .. • • 269
Highway Code .. .. . . 356
Highway construction 71, 175,288,289,
351-3,395
Hindus .. .. • • • • 196
Hire purchase .. 218,223,251,252
finance companies.. .. 218,251
Historical Manuscripts Commission 425
Historic buildings and monuments .. 52,
175., 179,413,424
building preservation notices . . 179
Council .. .. • • • • 179
Monuments, Royal Commission on 179
Hobbies .. . • • • . . 21
Hockey .. .. 157,446,455
Holidays .. 19,23-4,129,381-2
Hollow-ware industry .. .. 302
Holyhead .. .. •• •• 345
Home-Grown Cereals Authority .. 329
Homeless people .. 127,147,149
Home Office and Home Secretary 32, 44,
53-4, 55, 66, 69, 70, 76, 77, 78, 79,
90, 96,97,98,103,104,105,106,108,
109, no, in, 112,125, 127,143,152,
210,409,421
Honours .. •• •• 3°, 45,54
INDEX
• Page
Hop growing .. .. .. 320, 325
Horsemanship .. .. .. 459
Equestrian Federation .. .. 448
Showjumping .. .. 446,450
Horserace:
Betting Levy Board .. .. 458
courses .. .. .. .. 458
Totalisator Board (htb) .. .. 458
Horse racing 22,23,458
Horticulture see Agriculture
Hosiery:
and Allied Trades Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. .. 307
and knitwear industry 259, 305, 306-7
Hospital:
Advisory Service .. . . .. 140
Boards, Regional ..
Car Service
Friends, Leagues of
schools
Hospitals
I43.403
.. 146
. . 128
140,159
127,139, HO, 142-3, 145,
424
142,289
142,145
•• 143
.. 142
.. 142
.. 107
.. 142
.. 142
141,142
140.141
.. 142
128.142
78,250,362
•• 347
18-19
construction
maternity services .
Northern Ireland .
number of . .
ophthalmic services
prisons
psychiatric. .
Scotland
staff
teaching
voluntary ..
voluntary help in
Hotels and Restaurants
Hound Point (oil terminal)
Households . .
House of Commons 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35',
36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 4L 42, 44, 45, 46,
47,49,50,51, 55,89,98,99,103,192,
193, 209, 211, 212,256,360,397,398
disqualification (clergy) .. 35,192-3
election to . . . . .. . . 34-5
financial control 37,38,39,209,210
officers .. . . .. 34,37
party composition .. . . .. 36
privileges .. .. .. --SS-h
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 30, 31, 32, 33-4, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 45, 47, 49, 55,
70, 88, 89, 90, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103,
192,360,398
as Court of Appeal 88, 90, 91, 93, 94,
101, 102
eligibility .. .. .. • • 33
5°I
Page
House of Lords—contd.
officers .. .. .. 32.24
privileges .. .. .. .. 36
Record Office .. .. .. 38
Housework .. .. .. .. 18
Housing .. 71,72,73,74,185-90
administration 71, 185-6,187,188,424
advisory centres .. .. 129,186
and Construction, Minister for .. 52
associations and societies 185,186, 188,
190
authorities, local .. .. 185,186
construction and design 185, 186,187,
188,189,288-9,424
Corporation .. .. .. 190
finance 186,187,188, 189,190, 191
furnished accommodation .. 190
home ownership 185,186, 187,188-9,
288
improvement 71, 185, 190-1, 289
investment.. .. 186, 188, 207
ministerial responsibility for 52, 185,
186, 187, 424
numbers of dwellings 18, 185, 187,
188, 288
policy .. .. 153, 185, 186-7
privately rented .. 185, 186, 188, 189
public authorities 71, 73, 185, 186,
187, 288
redevelopment programmes .. 186
rent rebates .. .. .. 187
rent restrictions .. .. 189, 190
research and development 187, 395
slum clearance 60, 71, 185, 186, 187,
191
standards . . .. 186, 188, 189, 424
subsidies 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 289
town development schemes 176, 178
unfurnished accommodation 189-90
Hovercraft . . .. 300, 347-8, 410
British Rail Hovercraft Ltd. 348, 349
Huddersfield .. .. .. .. 260
Hull .. 16,164,260,333,345,347,366
Humber and Humberside 15,260,276,
. 291,315,347,353,358
Hunting   453-4
Hydraulics Research Station (hrs) 287,
„ , , 395’ 401
Hydro-electric:
Board, North of Scotland (nsheb) 277,
278, 280, 281, 282
power 261, 269, 270, 277, 278, 280
See also Electricity
Hydrological research .. 287, 408
Hythe.. .. .. .. .. 304
I IBA see Independent Broadcasting
Authority
Immigration . . 8, 12, 40, 54, 129, 152-3
Community Relations Commission 152
Immingham . . . . 260, 345, 346, 347
Immunisation .. . . 71, 144
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. 253,
254
Imperial War Museum .. .. 422
Imports 83, 197, 198, 200, 201, 227,
228, 230, 233, 234, 238, 318, 421
licensing and restrictions. . 51, 234
See also individual industries and
Trade
326-7
186, 190, 191
..279
Improvement grants:
agricultural
housing
Ince . .
Income:
Government .. .. 213-7
personal .. .. .. 19, 204
sources of . . 19, 65, 73, 204,376-81
Incomes and prices . . .. 199, 200
Income Tax see Taxation
Indefatigable (gasfield) .. .. 283
Independent:
Broadcasting Authority (iba) 56,164,414,
430, 438, 439-40, 44L 442, 443,444
502
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Independent—contd.
Television:
Companies Association .. 444
network (itv) 438, 439, 440, 441, 443
News Ltd. .. .. 440, 445
programme companies.. 164, 414,
417, 429, 430, 439, 440, 441
Indictable offences . . 86, 88-9, 92, 93-4
Industrial:
and Commercial Finance Corpora¬
tion Ltd. (icfc) .. .. .. 223
Arbitration Board.. .. • • 3^7
Artists and Designers, Society of 264
association .. . . 256-7, 269, 395
Biological Research . . . . 401
building 160, 176, 178, 188, 262, 265,
268, 288, 289
councils, joint .. .. 382,389
courts  383. 387
design . . . . 236, 264, 421
Councils.. . . 252, 264, 421
Development:
Advisory Board. . .. . . 266
Boards, Regional . . . . 266
Executive .. .. .. 266
Minister for . . .. . . 266
disputes .. .. 349, 386, 387, 388
engines manufacture .. 293, 294
Estates Corporations .. . . 268
Federations, Council of European 257
films . . .. . . . • 420
Fuel Efficiency Service, National 285
Health Advisory Committee .. 392
information .. . . . • 234
injuries insurance and benefits 53,129,
130, 131, 135-6
negotiating machinery . . 386-7
plant and steelworks manufacture 293,
295
relations 52, 81, 198, 262, 264, 265,
379, 382-8, 408, 409
Commission on (cm) . . 383, 388
councils and committees .. 382
Court, National. . 96, 101, 383, 388
Practice, Code of 252, 264, 379,
383, 388
Research Unit .. . . . . 408
research establishments 289, 395, 401,
404, 410
Safety Advisory Council .. . . 390
Society . . .. .. • • 265
Special Register .. . . .. 385
statistics .. . . . . .. 262
tribunals .. . . .. . . 96
Industry 81, 197, 198, 203, 206, 253-313
advisory councils and committees 198,
236, 237, 265
associations . . .. 256-7
Central Training Council (ctc) .. 377
Confederation of British (cbi) 200,
257, 382, 384, 388, 39°, 39i, 392
development areas and districts 265,
266, 375
development organisations 266, 269
distribution policy . . 176, 266
education and training for 158, 161,
164, 262, 263, 265, 371, 375, 377-8
Council for Educational Tech¬
nology .. .. •• 164
Finance Corporation for . . . . 223
grants and loans to 256, 265, 266,
268, 269, 375, 378
Page
Industry—contd.
health and welfare services 391-2
human relations in .. • • 383
investment in see Investment
location .. .. 176, 253, 257-62
management . . . . 262, 265
British Institute of (bim) . . 265
training for . . . . 167, 265
manufacturing 197, 203, 206, 253-4,
258, 259, 262, 263, 273, 290-313
employment in . . 253, 290, 370, 371
organisation .. .. 253-69
ownership .. .. .. 253-7
production and productivity in 197,
199, 203, 204, 253, 254, 262-5, 288,
289
British Productivity Council . . 420
relations with Government 57, 253,
255-6, 262, 266-9, 382, 386-8,
399, 4°i
restrictive practices, control of 254-5,
262
safety measures . . .. 388-91
structure .. .. .. 253-4
training for 161, 164, 262, 263, 265,
268, 332, 377-8
boards .. .. 373, 377, 390
Centres, Government (gtcs) 375,
377, 378
Instructor Training:
Colleges .. .. • • 378
Units . . .. .. .. 378
Manpower Services
Commission (msc) .. 373, 375
Opportunities Scheme (tops) 373,
377, 378
Service, Industrial (its) . . 377
Services Agency .. 373, 377
Within Industry (twi) 377, 378,
390
See also Employment, Exports, in¬
dividual industries, Public cor¬
porations, Research and Trade
Infectious diseases:
control of 71, 138, 139, 142, 144, 145
mortality from .. .. 10, 138
Inflation see Finance
Information:
and advice to exporters .. .. 236
Central Office of .. .. 47, 54, 420
services overseas .. 54,236,237,411
telephone services.. .. ••367
Inland Revenue:
Board of . . 47, 54, 56, 74, 213, 215
sources of see Taxation
Inland transport .. 341, 348-59, 395
Inland waterways 52, 341, 348, 357-9
Amenity Advisory Council .. 358
285,345,
British Waterways Board
development
Inns of Court
Inquests
Insecticides ..
Inspectorates:
agricultural
constabulary
factory
fire service ..
mines and quarries
railway employment
wages
357,358
• • 358
100,101
95, 100
304, 410
.. 389
.. 1x2
389,392
• • 77
• • 389
.. 389
• • 383
INDEX
222, 225
•. 236
225-6
225, 342
Page
Institutes and Institutions see relevant
subjects
Insurance 224-6, 259
brokers
export credit
international services
marine
See also National Insurance
Intelsat .. . . . . 368, 407
Inter-Governmental Maritime Con¬
sultative Organisation (imco) .. 344
Internal Trade see Trade
International:
Agency for Research on Cancer
(lARC) 411
Atomic Energy Agency . . 405, 411
Biological Programme . . .. 398
Civil Aviation Organisation 360, 362
conventions on prevention of pol¬
lution of sea by oil . . - . . 344
Council of Scientific Unions (icsu) 398,
407
Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol)
Development Association (ida) . .
Fellowship Scheme
Festival of University Theatre . .
Institute of Applied Systems
Analysis
Labour Organisation (ilo)
Machine Tools Exhibition
Monetary:
Fund (imp) 202, 233
114
245
399
416
•• 395
378,384
.. 294
situation.
234, 238,
240, 241
201-2
Special Drawing Rights (sdrs) 240,
241
Music Council .. .. . . 417
Telecommunication Union (itu) 56,
445
Telecommunications Satellite Or¬
ganisation (intelsat) .. 368, 407
Telegraph Service .. . . 366
Television Federation (Intertel).. 444
Telex Exchange, London .. 366
Invention, National Reference
Library of Science and (nrlsi) .. 409,
425
Invergorden . . .. .. .. 261
Inverkip .. .. .. .. 279
Investment . . . . 199, 204, 206-7
Bank, European .. .. .. 83
in fuel and power industries 270, 273,
274, 282, 284
grants and loans .. 243, 265, 274
in industry.. 200, 206, 263, 265, 268
overseas .. 197, 198, 236, 242-3
in Britain .. .. 241, 242
private . . .. 206, 236, 242
public .. .. . . .. 207
trusts .. .. 222,223,224
See also individual industries and
Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich .. .. .. .. 258
Ireland, Northern {see also subject
headings):
area and counties . . .. .. 1
art, drama and museums .. 416, 422
Attorney General .. .. .. 61
Chamber of Commerce and In¬
dustry .. .. .. .. 257
503
Page
Ireland, Northern—contd.
Civil Service .. .. 60, 63
Courts of Law .. .. 95,98
education 72, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158,
160,161, 162,163, 164, 165, 167-8
Electricity Service .. 277, 278
family allowances .. .. .. 130
finance, public . . .. .. 217
Fire Authority and Services 76, 79
forest parks .. .. .. 182
forestry .. .. . . 337, 339
government departments 47, 48, 60-1
Exchequer and Audit Depart¬
ment . . .. .. .. 414
Ministry of Agriculture 182, 324,
325,327,328, 330,331, 332, 335,
_ 339,404
Ministry of Commerce 60, 235,
262,269, 372
Ministry of Community Rela¬
tions . . . . .. .. 60
Ministry of Development 60, 67,
72,75,138,181,182,185,287,359
Ministry of Education . . 155, 156,
163, 168
Ministry of Finance 60, 74, 75, 413
Ministry of Health and Social
Services 61, 129, 138, 151, 152,
0 , 370,373,388
Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission .. .. 129,136
Ministry of Home Affairs 76, 98,
101,103,105,106,107,108,109,
150, 151
Public Prosecutions, Director of 61
health and welfare services 72, 138,
140, 151-2, 392
General Health Services Board 152
holidays, statutory . . .. 382
Hospitals Authority 143, 146, 151
Housing Executive .. 186, 187
Housing Trust .. .. . . 186
industrial safety . . .. .. 392
industry 261-2, 268-9, 277, 278, 294,
304,306, 307, 332,372
Finance Corporation .. .. 269
Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council . . . . .. . . 147
Land Registry
language
law courts ..
legislation . .
libraries
60
8, 13
95, 98
.. 26
72, 427
local government 67, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75
maintenance of law and order 114, 117
44
418
130
181
436
54
Ministers of State..
music, opera and ballet .. 417,
national insurance. . . . 129,
national parks
Newspapers, Associated . .
Office .. .. .. 44
planning .. .. 72,176,178,186
police .. .. .. .. 114
population . . 8-17, 370, 372
ports (fishing) .. .. • . 333
press . .. 432,433,436
public finance .. 217, 218, 219
Public Record Office .. .. 60
Railways Company Ltd. .. • • 359
registers  60, 151
representation in UK Parliament 26
revenue .. .. .. .. 217
5°4
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Ireland, Northern—contd.
roads   72, 359
Secretary of State for 108, 154, 323,
. , . 335
social services .. .. .. 152
Tourist Board .. .. .. 232
transport . . .. .. .. 359
Transport Holding Company . . 359
unemployment . . .. 266, 372
universities and colleges .. i?4, i1?1?,
163, 164, 167-8, 427
water supply 72, 138, 287, 370, 372,
376
workers .. .. 370, 372, 376
See also Belfast and Ulster
Irish Republic .. .. 1, 26, 202
citizens’ status in UK .. .. 13
citizens’voting rights in UK 35,70
insurance reciprocity . . . . 130
population: migration .. .. 12
trade with UK 230, 232, 293, 303,
, 0 305, 307, 308
Iron and Steel:
industry 57, 80-1, 253, 259, 260, 261,
273, 290-2, 295
Page
Iron and Steel—contd.
research . . .. .. .. 292
Steel Community, European Coal
and (ecsc) .. .. 270, 292
Steel Corporation, British (bsc) 80-1,
232,253,291,292,346,397
Iron castings . . .. .. 290, 292
Isaac Newton optical telescope . . 407
Isle of Grain .. .. .. 276, 279
Isle of Man:
airport .. .. .. .. 364
area. . .. .. .. .. x
fisheries .. .. .. .. 333
language  8, 13
legislature .. .. .. 27, 32, 43
newspapers .. .. .. 432
population .. .. .. 8, 14
races(tt) .. .. .. .. 457
reciprocity (national health bene¬
fits) .. .. .. .. 130
relationship with UK Govern¬
ment and Crown 27, 28, 32, 43, 53
Tynwald Court . . .. .. 32
Isle of Wight.. .. 1, 45, 347, 460
Isles of Scilly.. .. .. 1, 320, 362
J
Jams and marmalades industry . . 309
jarrow .. .. .. . . 260
Jersey:
broadcasting studio .. .. 443
language .. .. .. ..13
newspapers . . .. .. 432
population .. .. .. 14
reciprocity (national health bene¬
fits) .. .. .. .. 130
See also Channel Islands
Jewellery industry .. .. 258, 302
Jewish:
schools . . .. .. .. 196
Welfare Board . . .. .. 128
Jewry . . . . .. .. 195-6
Council of Christians and Jews .. 196
‘Jobcentres’ .. .. .. .. 374
Jockey Club .. .. .. .. 458
Jodrell Laboratory .. .. 396, 408
Journalists:
Institute of (ioj) .. .. .. 436
National Association of .. .. 436
Journalists—contd.
National Council for the Training
of (nctj)  434,435
National Union of (nuj) .. 435, 436
See also Press
Judge Advocate General’s Depart¬
ment   55, 97
Judges 85,86,88,89,90,91,92,95,
96, 97, 98, 99, 103, 106
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council  43, 55
Judicial procedure 86, 90-1, 92, 94, 95,
. 97-8
Judiciary see Law
Judo 456
Jury see Law
Justice, Court of . . .. 82, 83
Justices of the Peace 55, 86, 88, 92, 93,
99, 105, xo8, in
Jute industry.. .. .. 261,307
Juvenile Courts .. 86, 95, 103,
149-50
K Kennedy scholarships .. .. 170
Kent 164, 273, 277, 279,311, 3i5,319,
T 320,343,353
Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens . . 396
Kidderminster .. .. 259, 307
Killingholme .. .. .. .. 276
Killingworth .. .. .. 178, 284
Kilmarnock .. .. .. .. 307
Kimmeridge .. .. .. .. 275
King George’s Jubilee Trust .. 173
King’s Lynn .. .. .. 415, 418
Kingsnorth .. .. .. .. 279
Kirkintilloch .. .. .. .. 281
Knitwear industry .. 259, 261, 306-7
L
Labour see Employment
Labour Party..
Lace industry
Lackenby
Lacrosse
Lanarkshire ..
36, 40, 386
259, 307
.. 292
157, 456
. . 261
Lancashire 15, 99, 176, 259, 273, 276,
281, 287, 294, 302, 305, 308, 315,
320, 330, 347, 354
Lancashire—contd.
See also coalfields, cotton, Liver¬
pool and Manchester
Lancaster:
Duchy of .. .. .. 44, 99
University .. .. .. .. 164
Land:
acquisition and disposal .. 72, 183
reclamation 179, 183-4, 286, 365
INDEX
Page
Land—contd.
Registry .. .. .. 56, 60
use 5-6, 52, 72, 174, 175, 176, 178,
179, 180, 183, 199, 262, 314, 316,
319, 395. 408, 411
Lands:
Improvement Company .. . . 327
Tribunals .. .. . . 74, 96, 101
Valuation Appeal Court .. 74, 101
Language 7-8, 13, 23, 82, 129, 158,
164, 165, 168, 169, 432, 433, 442
Larne.. .. .. .. .. 347
Lasham .. .. .. .. 407
Lasswade .. .. .. 330, 404
Laundries and launderettes.. .. 250
Law  85-114
arrest, law of .. 88-9, 92, 93
burgh courts .. .. 92, 93
Prosecutor .. .. • • 93
civil proceedings 85, 90-2, 94-5, 102,
. . 103
Commissions .. 55, 60, 85, 98, 103
common .. .. 27,32,85,95
Court of Justice .. .. 82, 83
courts (criminal and civil) 85, 86-97,
99, 102
criminal appeals .. .. 88, 91, 93
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Board .. .. .. ..96-7
criminal proceedings 88, 89-90, 92-4,
101-2,103,149,356
European Communities .. 80, 85
evidence, rules of .. 89-90, 93, 94, 99
General Council of the Bar 100, 101
Habeas Corpus .. .. 89, 93
Judges’ Rules .. .. 89, 93
judiciary 27, 30, 44, 55, 90, 94, 97-8,
99, 100, 106
jury 86, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 98,
99-100
legal aid and advice 53, 89, 101-2
Fund .. . . .. 101, 102
legal profession .. .. 100-1
Council of Legal Education .. 100
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Department .. .. 54
Officers of the Crown 44, 54, 55, 59
Official Solicitor . . .. .. 55
penalties . . .. .. i°3~4
press (legal requirements) 43°, 437
prosecutions 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92,
93, 94, 101, 102, 149
Reform Committee . . 102-3
Society . . . . .. 100, 101
Society of Northern Ireland,
Incorporated . . . . 100, 101
Society of Scotland 100, 101, 102
Supreme Court Committee . . 101
sources of .. .. .. .. 85
Statute Law Committee .. .. 56
trials and verdicts see prosecutions
above
Lawn Tennis. . . • 23, 157, 446, 456
Lawyers . . 86, 98, 100, 101, 103
Learned societies 393, 398-400, 409, 426
Leatherhead (laboratories) . . . . 282
Leather industry .. . . 307, 308
British Leather Manufacturers’
Research Association .. . . 308
Leeds 16, 164, 260, 308, 422, 426, 430,
443,46o
Lee Valley .. .. .. .. 320
505
Page
Leicester and Leicestershire 16, 163,
164, 259, 275, 294, 308, 422
Leisure activities .. 19-24,4x3,440
See also Encouragement of the
Arts, Recreation and Sport
Leman Bank .. .. .. .. 283
Letters patent .. 30, 31, 39, 43
Leverhulme Trust .. .. . . 168
Leyland .. .. .. .. 259
Liberal Party. . .. .. ..36
Libraries 51, 59, 71, 72, 154, 174, 394,
396,399,413,414,417,425-7
Aslib .. .. .. 409—10
mobile .. .. .. .. 426
private collections.. .. 425, 426
public 71, 72, 154, 413, 414, 425,
426-7
school .. .. .. 154, 426
Standing Conference of National
and University Libraries
(sconul) .. .. .. .. 427
university .. .. 425, 426, 427
Library:
Advisory Councils
associations
British .. 51,
co-operation
.. 426
..427
409, 413, 425, 427
.. 409, 427
..425
National Central
National:
of Scotland
of Wales. .
Licences:
aircrews, aircraft and aerodromes 360,
361, 364
animals
betting shops
broadcast receiving
cinemas and films .
clubs
driving
drugs
export
fishing
game and gun
import
issue of, by Post Office .. .. 366
motor vehicles 52, 213, 217, 348, 353,
354,356, 357
plants  234
public houses .. .. .. 90
race courses .. .. 456, 458
telephone systems (local).. .. 367
television transmitting .. .. 438
Life:
59, 425
58, 425
234, 366
90, 91
366, 438, 439
.. 419, 421
.. 90
52,356,357,366
..234
51, 234, 421
••455
••454
5i, 234
assurance . .
expectation of
imprisonment
peerages
Lifeboats
.. .. 224
10
104, 105, 106
• • 33
343
Royal National Life-boat Insfcitu
tion .. .. .. .. 343
Lighthouses . . .. .. • • 343
Lincolnshire 6, 260, 275, 283, 315, 317,
320
Linen and overalls hire .. .. 250
Linen industry . . 262, 305, 307
Literary societies and prizes 425, 428
Literature .. .. 4x3, 414, 425-8
associations and societies.. 425, 428
awards . . .. .. .. 425
festivals .. .. .. .. 428
Royal Society of .. .. .. 428
S°6
BRITAIN I974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
259,
•• 36s
176, 178
3°5, 3io
.. 422
• • 4i7
•• 430
16, 259
3°5, 345,346
346
356
350
164
Liverpool:
airport
housing
industries . .
museum and art gallery
music
newspapers
population ..
port of .. .. 259,
container terminal
traffic
underground railway
University ..
Livestock see Agriculture
Llandarcy . . .. .. 276, 347
Llanwern . . .. . . .. 292
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping . . 342
Lloyd’s, Society of .. 225, 226, 342
Local Administration:
Commission for .. .. • • 75
Commissioner for Complaints
Northern Ireland .. .. 75
Local Government . . . . 58, 67-76
and Development, Minister for .. 52
authorities, types of .. 27, 67, 69
councillors .. .. .. 69, 70, m
councils:
borough .. .. 67, 74, 138, 185
burgh .. 69,70,74,111,138
community .. .. . . 69
county and county borough 67,69,70,
71,72,74, in, 138,146,174,185,
186,353
district .. .. 67, 69, 72, 185
London see London
parish, rural and urban district 67,
69,70,71,72,74,75,138,174,185
regional authorities .. .. 69
town .. 69,71,74,111,186
elections .. .. .. 54, 69-70
employment in .. .. • • 73
Staff Commissions .. .. 73
finance 58, 73-5, 129, 187, 188, 189,
190,191,205,206,207,208,209,413
functions and services 70-2, 127, 139
grants and loans 73, 74, 75, 206, 207
internal organisation .. .. 72-3
labour relations .. .. 387-8
National Joint Councils . . 73, 76, 387
relations with central Government 67,
152
reorganisation 67-9,70,72,73,75,
138, 155, 186
responsibility for:
amenities 71, 72, 138, 139, 179,
180
arts, encouragement of 71, 413,
414, 415, 416, 423
child care 53, 71, 127, 145, 149-51
education see Education
fire services .. .. 71, 76-9
handicapped .. 53,71,127,148
health 53, 71, 127, 138, 139, 140,
144-6, 147, 391
housing and planning 71, 72, 74, 127,
139,148,174-9,185,186,187,188,
190,424
licensing of films .. 419, 421
mentally ill 71, 127, 145, 148-9
public libraries . . .. 71, 72, 426
roads .. .. 71, 72, 139,353
sport 447
Page
Local Government—contd.
responsibility for—contd.
water supply, purity of 71, 137,
139, 285
welfare 71, 72, 103, 127, 138, 144-6,
39i
youth services 171, 172, 173, 374-5
urban programme.. 129, 152, 157
See also Environment, Department
of the
Locomotives:
industry .. .. 253, 299, 300
types in use .. .. 349, 350
Locust research . . .. . . 411
London:
airports 52, 277, 289, 361, 364, 365
art, drama, music 413, 415, 416, 417,
418, 419, 421, 423
schools and colleges .. 416, 423-4
Assay Office .. .. . . 302
borough councils .. 69, 71, 138, 186
Bridge ..  353
broadcasting studios 369, 440, 441,
442,443
Business Studies, Graduate School
of  165,265
City of 28,69,71,86,88,97,111,
112, 114, 138, 186, 197, 218, 220,
237, 4i5
area .. .. .. .. 15
Common Council of the 112, 186
Corporation .. .. .. 71
police .. ..110,111,112,114
commodity exchanges .. . . 237
courts of law .. .. 86, 92
financial and trading centre 218, 219,
223, 224, 225, 237, 242
fire authority .. .. .. 76
fish market .. .. 246, 335
food markets .. .. .. 246
Gold Market .. . . . . 237
Greater London 9, 15, 16, 67, 69, 70,
71, 152, 176, 257-8,357, 432
Greater London Council (glc) 69, 70,
7L 74,75,76,95,185,348,357, 414,
423,448
helicopter terminal .. .. 365
housing and planning 152, 174, 180,
185, 186, 188, 189,191
industries 257-8, 293, 294, 299, 302,
308, 310, 419
libraries .. .. 409-10,425,426
Metal Exchange .. .. .. 237
museums and art galleries 409, 422,
423
newspapers .. .. 430,432
police .. no, in, 112, 113, 114
population 9, 16, 18, 152, 178, 258,
357, 440
port of and docks .. 257, 344, 345, 346
radio tower .. .. .. 367
School of Economics see Univer¬
sities, below
Stock Exchange .. .. .. 224
taxicabs .. .. .. 353,357
telephone information service . . 367
traffic .. .. .. 355, 357
Transport . . .. .. 355, 357
Transport Executive .. .. 357
Underground rail services 289, 357,
364
Universities .. no, 164,166, 423
INDEX
. . 426
..409
176, 278, 422
.. 95
..279
Page
London—contd.
Universities—contd.
libraries ..
Zoo
Londonderry..
Recorder of
Longannet
Lord:
Advocate 44, 49, 59, 93, 96, 98, 103
Advocate’s Department . . 49, 59
Chancellor 30,33,34,43,44,45,55,
56, 88, 90, 91, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 103, 192
as Speaker of the House of
Lords  34, 55
Chancellor’s Departments .. 55
Chief Justice (England) .. 45, 88, 91,
98, 106
Chief Justice (Northern Ireland). . 95
High Commissioner
Justice Clerk
45, 194
92, 94, 99
293-4, 395
.. 294
M Machine Tool:
industry
Trades Association
See also Tools
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’ courts 54,
86, 88, 89, 90,91, 95,98,99,102
Mail order:
houses .. .. .. .. 247
sales . . .. .. 246, 250
Direct Sales and Service Asso¬
ciation
Malting industry
Management see Industry
Manchester:
airport
art galleries and museums
broadcasting studios
Business School . .
design centre
housing
industries
. . 250
3io,317
361, 365
. . 422
369, 442, 443
165, 265
.. .. 264
.. .. 176, 178
259, 276, 277, 297, 305,
308,310
Science and Tech-
. . 165
417,419
..430
16,259
259, 345,346, 347
• • 259, 347
no, 164, 165, 407, 408,
426
81, 253, 255, 260, 262, 263,
265, 272, 370-2
and Productivity Service .. 283, 288
Conciliation and Advisory Service 265,
386
Economics, Office of . . 198, 382
Qualified .. .. .. .. 400
research and planning . . .. 371
Services Commission (msc) 373, 377
See also Employment and indivi¬
dual industries
Mansfield .. . . .. .. 259
Manslaughter . . • • 95, 97, 104
Mansion (helicopter base) .. .. 343
Manufacturers’ associations .. 257
Institute of
nology . .
music
newspapers
population . .
port of
Ship Canal. .
University
Manpower
5°7
Page
Lord—contd.
Justice General .. .. 92, 99, 106
Lieutenants of Counties .. .. 45
President of the Council . . 43, 44
President of the Court of Session 92,
94, 96, 99
Privy Seal .44
Lords:
Commissioner of Justiciary .. 92
Commissioners (Treasury) 37, 44, 45,
50
House of see House of Lords
Justices of Appeal. . 45, 88, 91, 95, 98
of Appeal .. .. 33, 43, 45, 91, 98
Spiritual .. .. .. 28, 33
Temporal . . .. .. 28, 33
Lothian .. .. .. .. 261
Lowestoft . . .. 258, 333, 460
Luncheon voucher schemes .. 392
Lutheran churches .. .. . . 196
Luton..  258,365
Manufacturing establishments, size
of .. .. .. .. 253-4
Manufacturing industries see Indus¬
try and individual industries
Maplin project .. .. 346, 365
Marchwood (laboratories) ..
Marine Biological Associations
Marine engineering see Engineering
and Shipbuilding
Marine safety and welfare ..
Marine Survey and Mercantile
Marine Offices
Marine technology . . . . 395,
Maritime Board, National
Market and street traders
Market gardening see Agriculture
Marketing:
Boards, agricultural see Agriculture
Institute of
Markets:
commodity..
discount
exchange ..
fish and fish meal
food (London)
gold
insurance ..
Marriage:
guidance centres
rates
registration
Marshall Scholarships
Master of Rolls
Maternity allowance
Maternity services
282
403
340
340
408
34i, 342
247
265
..237
212,218
218, 237, 343
242, 246,335
.. 246
•• 237
222, 224-6
131
7i,
.. 128
io-ii
.. 8
.. 169
91, 98
i33, 134, 135
137, Hi, 142,
144, 145, 149
Matrimonial:
Causes Rule Committee .. .. 98
proceedings (law) 90, 91, 92, 94, 95
Mayor’s and City of London Court.. 88
Mayors and Lord Mayors .. 28, 69
Meals, provision of:
at place of employment .. .. 392
for old people .. .. 128, 148
for school children 137, 154, 157
Meat and fish products . . 139, 309
Meat and Livestock Commission 318,329
S°8
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Mechanical engineering 293-6, 395, 403
handling equipment 260, 293, 294, 345
Medical:
Advisory Service, Employment 52,
391
Association, British .. 146, 392
Council, General . . .. 96, 146
Practices Committee .. .. 141
private insurance schemes .. 146
profession see Doctors
publications .. .. .. 412
research 137, 146, 396, 402-3, 410
Council (mrc) 51, 143, 146, 383,
392, 394, 397, 400, 402-3, 410
National Institute for .. .. 403
services:
in industry .. .. 391-2
in prisons .. .. 105,107
for school children .. .. 157
for ships at sea .. . . .. 368
social workers .. 143, 145, 151
Medicines Commission .. 144, 330
Medmenham.. .. .. . . 287
Medway .. .. .. . . 258
Mental health services 107, 128, 147,
148-9
Merchant:
banks .. .. 217, 220, 237
Fleet  340, 341
Navy:
Established Service Scheme . . 342
Establishment Administration 340,
342
Training Board . . .. 341
seafarers . . . . .. 341-2
shipbuilding .. . . .. 301
Merseyside 15, 16, 18, 176, 259, 266,
277, 299, 301, 347, 350, 353, 354
tunnel  289, 353
Merthyr Tydfil .. .. .. 261
Metal Exchange .. .. . . 237
Metal manufacture 206, 254, 258, 259,
260, 261, 290-3
Meteorological Office . . 287, 397
Meteorology .. .. 397, 406, 408
Metric system .. 395,396,463-4
Metrication Board .. .. . . 395
Metropolitan Police Force no, m, 112,
US, H4,357
Microbiological Establishment .. 402
Microscopes, electron . . . . 396
Midlands 15, 16, 18, 152, 258, 259, 266,
273,277,293,294,299,302,306, 308,
318, 347, 354
population .. .. .. 152
Midwifery 71, 141, 142, 144, 147, 374
Midwives:
Board, Central .. .. .. 147
Royal College of . . .. .. 147
Migration .. .. .. 12,14,15
Milford Haven 261, 276, 277, 333, 344,
347
Milk:
marketing .. 139, 317-8, 325, 328
Boards .. .. .. .. 318
production 315, 316, 317-8, 323, 325,
328
in schools .. .. .. 154, 157
Mineral oil refining equipment .. 295
Mines and quarries:
employment in .. 253, 254, 273
industry 184, 203, 254, 258, 262,270-5
Page
Mines and quarries—contd.
Inspectorate .. .. .. 389
mining machinery.. .. 260, 296
research .. .. 275, 397, 409
safety measures 275, 389, 391, 397, 401
See also Coal
Mining Research and Development
Establishment .. .. .. 275
Ministers:
Council of .. .. .. 82, 83
of the Crown 27, 30, 39, 41, 43-5, 67,
38i
ministerial responsibility 30,256, 262
salaries .. .. .. .. 45
of State .. .. .. 44, 47, 50
See also Prime Minister and indivi¬
dual government departments
Monarchy
accession ..
ceremonial. .
coronation ..
Privy Council
relations with:
armed forces
churches..
Commonwealth..
foreign governments
Home Office
judiciary.. .. 27
Parliament
26, 27-31,53
.. 28
 3i
.. 28-9, 32
28, 30, 31, 32, 42-3
.. 3°
30, 192, 194
26, 28, 31, 42
.. 31
• • 53
30, 97, 98, 99
30, 3i, 32, 35, 36, 37,
39, 4i, 42,43, 45, 46
30, 42, 43, 53
30, 32, 33, 43
.. 28
.. 27, 28, 31
Royal Prerogatives
Royal Proclamations
Royal title ..
succession ..
See also Royal Family
Monmouthshire . . 50, 163, 260, 281
Monopolies .. .. 254-5, 262, 430
and Mergers Commission 198, 255,
43°
Moray . . .. .. .. 261
Morecambe Bay . . . . .. 287
Morley .. .. .. .. 260
Motor:
car racing . . • • 446, 456-^7
cycle racing .. .. 446, 457
dealers and repair services .. 250
Industry Research Association . . 299
Manufacturers and Traders,
Society of (smmt) .. .. 299
shows .. .. .. .. 299
vehicles:
industry . . 254, 258, 259, 261, 292,
299-300, 402
numbers licensed 24, 348, 354, 359,
parking ..
research ..
taxation ..
tests
Motorways ..
Mountaineering
Mountains
Murder
453
113, 178,181,386
..299
216, 217
•. •. 356
289, 351-3, 359
• • 448, 457
.. 2,4,314
93, 95, 101, 104, 149
Museums 58, 59, 71, 154, 396, 409, 4x3,
414, 421, 422-3
admission charges.. . . .. 423
and Galleries, Standing Commis¬
sion on .. .. .. 421, 422
Association .. .. .. 423
Folk .. .. .. .. 422
private .. .. .. .. 422
INDEX
509
Page
Music .. .. 413,414,417-8
Amateur, Standing Conference for 418
choral societies
colleges and schools
Committees, County
concerts
Council, National..
festivals
417- 8
418- 9
. .. 418
22, 417, 4i9
•• 4i7
. .. 418
Music—contd
folk. .
libraries
orchestras
pop
Societies, National Federation of
Muslims
Page
.. 417,418
417, 426
4i4,4iS, 4i7,4i9
22,413,417,441
4i3,
418
196
N
National:
Debt .. .. ,. ., 217
Commissioners .. .. .. 222
Office .. .. .. 48, 222
Economy see Economy and Finance
Gallery .. .. .. ,. 422
Insurance .. 53, 127, 129, 130-7
benefits 53, 129, 130, 131, 133-5,
205, 209
contributions 53, 131-3, 139, 141
Fund .. .. .. . . 209
graduated pension scheme 131,
133, 134
reciprocal agreements .. 130, 139
stamps .. .. .. .. 132
supplementary benefits 53, 129,
130, 131, 134, 136, 141
Commission .. 53, 129, 136
Joint Advisory Council .. .. 198
product, gross (gnp) 84, 197, 203,
205, 227, 232, 243, 314, 340
Trusts 175,180,183,412,413,422
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having Na¬
tional as first word of their title
Nationalised industries 27, 57, 208, 212,
256, 257, 270, 401
boards .. .. .. .. 256
labour relations of .. . . 388
Select Committee on the.. 40, 256
See also individual industries
Nationality .. .. .. 12—13, 54
Natural:
beauty, areas of .. 180, 181, 183
Environment Research Council
(nerc) . . 51, 394, 395, 403, 408
History, British Museum 409, 422, 425
Naturalisation .. .. 12-13,54
Nature:
Conservancy .. 181, 182, 394, 395
Conservancy Committee . . . . 408
conservation .. . . 182-3, 4°8
voluntary organisations . . 183
Council for . . .. 24, 183
reserves . . . . 180, 182, 183
Naval General Service .. .. 120
Navigational Aids . . 298, 361, 366, 368
Navy see Defence, Ministry of,
Merchant Fleet and Royal Navy
Netball  157,457
Newburgh .. .. .. 278, 365
Newcastle upon Tyne 16, 164, 260, 310,
347, 365, 4i7, 424, 430, 443
New Forest . . .. .. 182, 338
Newhaven . . .. ., .. 258
New Opera Company . . .. 418
Newport .. 261,345,432
News agencies .. ,. 433-4
Newspaper:
Editors:
British Association of Industrial 436
Newspaper—contd.
Editors—contd.
Guild of British Newspaper 436
owners .. .. .. 429-30
Press Directory .. .. .. 429
Publishers Association 433, 435, 436
Society   435,436
Newspapers . . 312,429,430-3,434,440
Newsprint, supply of 312,429
New towns .. .. 52,175,176-8
authorities .. .. .. 186, 188
Commission for .. .. .. 178
Development Corporations .. 176
Noise:
abatement . . .. 139, 184, 397
Abatement Society .. .. 24
Advisory Council on 24, 184, 397
control of .. 52, 356, 360, 362, 364
Non-ferrous metals:
industry 254, 258, 290, 292-3, 295,
401
Research Association, British . . 293
Norfolk .. .. .. 283, 320
Northampton. . .. 176, 178, 259
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(nato) .. 115, 117, 123, 124, 401
Northern Ireland see Ireland,
Northern
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board (nsheb) 277, 278, 280, 281, 282
North Sea .. .. .. ,. 283
Northumberland .. 181,260,273,284
Norwich .. 16, 258, 308, 415, 422,
443
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire 16,
164, 259, 273, 275, 294, 299, 307,
, 3io,4i6,459
Nuclear energy:
establishments .. .. 405-6
international agencies 81, 405, 406
for marine propulsion .. 123, 397
power stations 260, 269, 278, 280-1,
289, 295, 405
reactors .. 261,280-1,405,406
Advanced Gas-Cooled (agr) 280,
281, 405
research 81, 282, 397, 401, 405, 406
weapons and equipment see Defence
See also Atomic Energy
Nuffield Foundation. . 146, 168, 402
Nurseries .. .. .. 129, 149
Nursing and nurses 141, 142, 145, 147,
374
associations ,. .. .. 147
General Nursing Councils .. 147
in Armed Forces .. .. .. 120
in the home 71, 139, 141, 142, 143,
144, I4S, 147
homes .. .. .. .. 142
Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service ,. .. 120
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
510
Page
Nursing and nurses—contd.
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army
Nursing Corps .. . . . . 120
Page
Nursing and nurses—contd.
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval
Nursing Service .. .. 120
Royal College of Nursing 147, 392
o Observatory:
Royal Edinburgh .. . . 401, 407
Royal Greenwich (rgo) .. 401, 407
Obstetricians.. .. .. 145,147
Occupational therapists 143, 147, 148
Oceanography . . . . .. 408
Office:
building .. 176, 178, 262, 268, 289
machinery industry .. 261, 295
Management, Institute of .. 265
Official Solicitor . . . . .. 55
Oil:
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by 180,
343. 344. 397
Oldham .. .. .. . . 259
Old people:
Age Concern (Old People’s Wel¬
fare Council, National) . . 128
homes for .. .. . . . . 148
housing for . . .. .. 148
See also Senior Citizens
Olympic Games 447,450,453,455,
456, 459, 460, 462
British Olympic Association 447, 455,
460
Open University . . 107, 165, 166, 441
Opera and opera companies 22,413,
418, 419
Royal Opera House .. . . 418
training . . .. . . 418-9
Ophthalmic services.. 141, 142, 147, 152
Opposition, parliamentary 36, 37, 40,
66, 210
Opticians . . . . 141, 142, 147, 152
General Optical Council . . . . 147
Orders in Council 30, 42, 43, 44, 49,
85
Ordnance Survey .. .. .. 55
Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (oecd) 50,
233,244,376,411
Orienteering (wayfinding) .. • • 457
Orkney Islands .. 1, 69, 72, 327
Outward Bound Trust .. 173, 457
Overseas:
Appointment Bureaux .. .. 171
banks . . .. 217, 219, 220
constructional work .. .. 289
dependent territories, public ser¬
vices .. . . .. .. 63
Development Administration (oda)
see Foreign and Commonwealth
Office
European Community, The 80-4, 168
scientific relations .. .. 411
Service Aid Scheme (osas) .. 245
students . . . . x66, 168, 169-70
Affairs, UK Council for .. 170
welfare . . .. . . .. 170
trade see Trade
Oxford:
Air Training School .. .. 361
art schools . . .. .. .. 423
Bodleian Library .. . . .. 425
Commonwealth Forestry Insti¬
tute 339
museums .. .. .. 409, 422
population .. . . . . .. 16
sport . . .. 452, 459, 460
University 43, xxo, 164,165, 166, 169,
339,425,426, 452, 459,460
P Packaging .. .. 251,258,312
Paint industry .. 260, 302, 303, 304
Paisley (newspaper) .. .. • • 432
Paper and board industry . . 251, 258,
259, 260, 261, 296,312
Parachuting .. .. .. .. 449
Parks .. .. .. 71, 72, 178
Countryside Commissions 180-1
forest .. .. .. 181-2
national .. .. 180, 181, 183
Parliament 26, 27, 30, 31-42, 43, 46,
47, 80, 85, 98, 116, 176, 192, 209,
210, 211, 255, 256, 273, 328, 360,
438, 439, 444
bills, parliamentary 30, 32, 33, 37-40,
49, 56,59, 212
procedure . . .. 37-41,49
Royal Assent to . . 30,34,39,212
committees 39-40,42,209,210,256
control of:
armed forces .. .. .. 116
finance .. .. 37,38,39,48
Government in power .. 36,41-2
local authorities. . .. . . 67
public corporations .. 255,256
dissolution of .. 30,31,32,33
Parliament—contd.
duration of. . . . . . .. 32
elections .. 32,34-5,36,54,69
European (Assembly) .. 32, 82, 83
functions .. .. . . • • 37
legislation 31-2, 38-9, 40-1, 47, 49, 85
Opposition.. .. 36,37,40,66,210
party system .. .. 32, 36-7
private members .. .. .. 38
privileges 35
procedure . . .. .. 37-41, 49
prorogation of .. .. 30,32,33
questions to ministers . . .. 41
relationship with the Church .. 192
relations with Monarchy 30, 31, 32, 35,
36, 37, 39, 4L 42, 43, 45, 46
sessions . . .. . . 32,33
standing orders . . . . 37, 40
State opening of .. .. 30,32
Statutory Instruments . . .. 41
Whips   37,45,5°
See also House of Commons and
House of Lords
Parliamentary:
and Scientific Committee.. .. 398
Commissioner .. .. 41,42,140
INDEX
Parliamentary—contd.
Counsel, Office of . .
Secretaries . .
Parole Boards
Patent Office Library
Pay Board
Paymaster General . .
Pegwell Bay
Page
49,56
44,45,47,49, 5°
105-6
..409
200,379,383
44,51,56,413
••347
Peers and Peeresses 30, 33, 34, 38, 54, 91
Pembroke and Pembrokeshire 276, 279,
3i5,320
Penal systems .. .. 103-10
Advisory Council .. .. ..103
Scottish Council on Crime .. 103
Pennine Way.. .. .. .. 181
Pensions:
graduated pension scheme 131, 133,
I34
invalidity allowance 131, 132, 133, 134
payment of, by Post Office .. 366
public service .. .. 56,65,130
retirement 129, 130, 131, 133, 134, 135
supplementary .. . . . . 136
war.. .. 53,129,130,137,141
widows .. 129,131,133,134,135
Penzance .. .. .. .. 362
Periodical Publishers Association .. 436
Periodicals 21,254, 312,425, 427, 429,
430,432-3
Permanent Boundary Commissions 34
Personnel management . . . . 265
Perth . . . . . . . . 319, 361
Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemi¬
cals, Advisory Committee on .. 331
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme 331
Pest Infestation Control Laboratory
330,404
Peterborough.. 163,176,178,258,310
Peterhead .. .. . . .. 279
Petroleum and petroleum products 228,
253, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 269, 273,
275-7, 278, 295, 303, 305, 346, 350
chemicals industry 257, 277, 302-3
equipment industry 261, 262, 295
exports . . . . . . . . 276
imports and consumption 228, 269,275,
276,279
indigenous production .. 5 8, 228, 275
oilfields .. .. 269,275,347,362
pipelines . . 273,276-7,347, 348
refineries and refining 254,258,259,
261,276,302,347
research .. .. .. 277,402
revenue duty .. .. 214,216
tankers 275, 276,301, 340,341, 342,347
terminals 345,347
monobuoy .. . . .. 347
Pharmaceuticals 145, 146, 147, 259, 302,
^ . 303
Committee on Safety of Medicines x 44
Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain .. . . .. .. 147
Pharmacists .. .. 140, 141, 142, 147
Philanthropic organisations. . .. 168
Photographic equipment .. 251,296
Physically handicapped see Disabled
Physiotherapists . . . . 143, 147
Pig industry .. .. 315,316,318,325
Pilotage   343-4
Pipelines:
gas 283
oil 275,276-7
.. in
.. 112
112,113
. . in
. . in
114
114
114
114
112
511
Page
Pitlochry  281,404
Planning:
Association .. .. • • 175
development areas and schemes
174-5,178,180,232,266-9
enquiry commissions .. ..175
environmental 71, 174-84, 268, 395
policies 174,183
public participation 174,175,176
regional .. .. 175,199,266,268
Plant health . . 50, 234, 330, 396, 404,408
Pathology Laboratory .. 330,404
Plastics .. 251,260,302,303-4
Playing fields . .72,157, 173,178,180,447
Association, National (npfa) 173,447-8
Plimsoll line 340
Plungar .. .. .. .. 275
Plymouth .. .. 16,258,443,460
Poetry festivals and societies 425,428
Poisonous wastes .. .. 183,344
Po/am vessels .. 117,122,123
Police 54,71, 72,73, 88, 89, 95, 98,110-4,
178
Authorities
cadets
civilian staff
committees
Council for Great Britain
Gazettes
Management and Planning Group
Research Services Branch
Scientific Development Branch .,
women
Political:
party broadcasts .. .. .. 444
party system .. .. ..36-7
Pollution, prevention of:
air . .52,58,71, 139,184,356,360,397
rivers 58,184,286,287,327,395,397
sea (by oil) .. .. 180,343,344,397
water supply 58, 139, 184, 285, 286,
287,397.401
Polo ..  457
Polytechnics 161, 166,167, 168,400,423
Pony club .. .. .. 458,459
Poole .. .. .. .. 258,460
‘Pop’music .. .. ..22,417,441
Population 8-9, 26, 67, 69,140,176, 178,
227, 258-61, 286
age distribution .. .. 11-12
birth and death rates .. 9-10,11
censuses .. •• 8,14,56,185,192
and Surveys, Office of .. 8,56,262
density .. .. . .9,13-18, 74
households.. .. .. 18-19
increase in.. .. .. 9,14,15
leisure .. .. .. .. 440
migration .. .. 12,14-5,152
mortality, causes of .. .. 10
nationalities .. .. 12-13
regional distribution 13-18, 257-62
sex ratio .. .. .. ..10
social organisation.. .. 18-25
trends .. .. .. 9, n
urbanisation .. .. 14-18
vital statistics .. .. . . 8-18
working .. ..11,253,264,370-2
Port of London Authority .. • • 345
Porton .. .. .. .. 402
Portrait Galleries, National . . .. 422
Ports and docks 30, 52, 138, 257, 258, 259,
260, 261, 292, 301, 331, 344-7
512
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Ports and docks—contd.
authorities . . .. 138, 344, 345
British Ports Association .. 345
Docks and Harbours Authori¬
ties Association .. . . 345
container facilities.. .. 345-6,350
Council, National . . . . .. 345
development .. .. 345-6
Dock Labour Board, National .. 346
employees . . .. . . 336,346
ownership . . .. .. 344~5
Portsmouth .. . . . . 16, 258
Port Talbot .. .. 292,346,347
Post Office 56,298,365-9, 396,407,437
broadcasting responsibilities 434,438,
439,443,444
cable and wireless services 56, 367-8
‘Confravision’ .. .. .. 369
counter services . . .. .. 366
‘Datapost’ .. . . .. .. 365
Data Processing Service, National
265,368-9
Datel Services . . .. . . 366
finance .. .. .. .. 365
Geostationary Technology Satellite
(gts)  407
mail services .. 178,340,365
mechanisation .. .. 365,367
National Giro 219,220,365,366,369
organisation .. .. .. 365
Postal Consultancy Service, British
365-6
private circuits .. .. 366,367
radio tower, London .. .. 367
research .. .. 367,369,396
satellites 367, 368, 406, 407, 444, 445
telegrams .. .. .. . . 366
telegraph services . . .. .. 366
Gentex service .. .. ..366
telephone services .. .. 366-7
special services . . . . . . 367
telex service . . . . . . 366
See also Telecommunications
Posts and Telecommunications,
Minister of anJ Ministry of 56,341,
365, 406, 407, 430, 438, 439, 443, 444
Potato production and marketing ..315,
316,317,325,328,404
Marketing Board
Pottery industry
Poultry:
diseases
industry
Power stations see Electricity and
Nuclear Energy
Premium Savings Bonds
Preservation:
councils and societies .. 24,175
..325
258, 3io,3H
• .403
315,316,319,325
55
of buildings
of coastal areas
of rural amenities
of trees
Press . .
Associated, Ltd.
Association Ltd.
Council
institutions. .
legal requirements
London suburban
‘National’ ..
ownership ..
regional
175,413,424
175,180
.. 175
181,183,338,339
429-37
••434
433,434
..436
..436
43°,437
..432
• •430
429-30
• •430
Page
Press—contd.
television and .. 429,430,436
training for journalism .. 434-6
Thomson Foundation .. 436, 445
Preston .. .. 259,306,345,361
Prestwick (airport) .. 361,364,365
Preventive detention.. .. ..109
Price:
Commission .. .. .. 200
guarantees (agricultural) 324, 325, 326
restrictions by traders . . .. 255
Prices and Incomes .. .. 199,200
Prime Minister 30, 33, 36, 37, 42, 44, 45,
46, 49, 64, 66, 97, 98, 99, 1x6, 192,
198,199
Printing:
and Kindred Trades Federation .. 436
and Publishing Industry Training
Board (ppitb) .. .. 434,435
industry 57,253,254,257,258,259,
261,295,312-3
London College of
Prisons and prisoners
chaplains ..
education ..
medical service
privileges and discipline
training and employment
visitors
boards of
National Association of
welfare and after-care
•• 435
53,105-9
105,107,108
106-7,io9
105,107
107
106
108
105
108
54,105,107-9
Privy Council 28,30,31,32,42-3,46
Committees .. .. 42,43,55
Counsellors .. .. 42,45,46
Prize Courts . . .. .. 43, 91
Probation 54,103,104,107,108,109,149
officers .. 107,108,109,149,150
Procurator General .. .. .. 56
Procurators Fiscal .. .. 59, 93, 95
Production and productivity see
Industry
Production Engineering Advisory
Service . . .. .. .. 410
Professional and Executive Recruit¬
ment (per) .  373,374
Property Services Agency .. 52, 288
Psychiatric social work 107, 142, 143
Public:
Accounts Committee . . 40, 21 o, 211
Administration, Royal Institute of 395
authorities . . 204, 205-6, 254, 387-8
corporations 207, 208, 212,253, 254,
255,256,388,393,402
See also Nationalisation and
individual corporations
holidays .. .. .. 19,381-2
libraries 21, 54, 7i, 72, 413, 4H, 425,
426-7
Prosecutions, Director of .. 55, 61, 88
Prosecutor (Scotland) . . .. 93
Record Office . . 46, 55,422,425
relations (industry and commerce) 251-2
The Institute of.. .. .. 252
services of overseas dependent
territories .. . . .. 63
utilities see Gas, Electricity and
Water
Works Loan Board 48,75,187,212
Publishers’Association .. 312,427
Publishing . . • • 57, 254, 3I2-3,427
Pumps and industrial valves. . .. 294
INDEX
5*3
r\ ■ . . Page
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying industry . . . . .. 254
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Elizabeth Hall .. .. 417
Queen’s:
Bench Division (England and
Wales) .. .. .. .. 91
Page
Queen’s—contd.
Bench Division (Northern Ireland) 95
Counsel .. .. .. .. 100
Courts
Printer
Prize (shooting)
Proctor
.. 98
■ • 57
.. 461
55> 57
R Race Relations 40, 91, 152-3, 373. 376,
379
Board .. .. .. 91,153
Ethnic Relations Research unit .. 408
Radar.. .. .. 298,346,361
Radio:
and Space Research Station (rsrs)
401,407
astronomy . . .. .. .. 407
communications .. 366,368,407
See also Broadcasting, Naviga¬
tional aids and Satellites
industry 251, 298, 444
Interference, UK Committee of
the International Special Com¬
mittee on (cispr) .. .. 445
telegraphy .. .. .. • • 341
telescopes .. .. .. 407-8
Radioactive Substances Advisory
Committee.. .. .. .. 397
Radiochemical Centre Ltd. .. 305,405
Radiography .
Radioisotopes
Radiological
National
Railways
Board, British
.. 143-4,147
253,305,410
Protection Board,
 397
52,253,273,340,348-51
300,345.348,349,350,
351,354,355,357
•348,349-50
349,350
349,350
development
diesel traction
electrification
Freight:
Corporation, National .. 351, 359
Integration Coimcil .. -.351
services .. 344-5,348,349,350,351
Terminal, London International 350
Freightliners Ltd... . . 350,351
grants  349
hotels
motorail
operations ..
Processing System, Total
organisation
349
350
349
350
348-9
passenger service .. 340, 348, 349, 350
safety measures .. .. .. 389
Technical Centre .. .. 350-1
underground (London) 289, 357, 364
vehicles industry .. 258, 260, 300
workshops .. .. 258,260,350-1
Rainfall .. . . .. 5,287
Ramsgate .. .. .. .. 347
Rates .. 54,73,74-5,187,190,209,213
water .. .. .. .. 285
Ravenscraig .. .. . . .. 292
Raw materials, trade in 197, 227, 237,
246,259
Rayon industry . . .. .. 306
Reactors see Nuclear energy
Reading .. .. 110,164,422,423
Recorders (law) . . 86, 88, 90,95, 99
Recreation . . 21-4, 52,175,180,440,
449-56
Recreation—contd.
facilities for 71, 72,129,178,182,286,
358,447
Physical .. .. 172,446,447
Central Council of (ccpr) .. 446
See also Clubs, Leisure and Sports
Redcar .. .. .. .. 346
Red Cross Society, British .. 128,146
Red Deer Commission .. .. 324
Redruth .. .. .. .. 258
Reference Library of Science and
Invention, National (nrlsi) 409,425
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods . . .. .. 311
Refrigeration machinery .. 261,296
Regent, appointment of .. .. 31
Regional:
economic planning machinery .. 199
boards .. .. .. .. 199
councils .. .. .. .. 199
policy, industrial and .. .. 266
Regions, standard .. 15,199,257-62
Registrar:
General of Shipping and Seamen 340
of Trade Unions and Employers
Associations .. .. . . 383
Registrars:
General .. .. 8,56,59,151
of births, deaths and marriages .. 8
Religion see Churches and also Broad¬
casting and Education
Remand homes .. 103,105,150
Remploy Ltd. .. .. .. 253
Renfrewshire.. .. 261, 279, 375
Rent restrictions .. .. 189,190
Rent tribunals .. .. ..190
Resale price maintenance .. • • 255
Rescue services, sea and air .. 343, 368
Research, scientific .. .. 393-412
advisory councils and committees
393,394,398,402,404
agricultural 50, 3 ^3, 3 3 2,4°o, 403 4,
409,410
consultative organisation .. .. 404
aircraft .. 125-6,296,397,402,409
application of results .. 409-10,411
associations 265,289-90,294,401
Conference of Industrial Re¬
search .. .. .. .. 401
astronomy .. .. .. 407-8
biological .. 396, 398, 399, 4°3,408
botanical .. .. .. .. 396
building and civil engineering 187, 289,
395,424
chemical .. .. .. 396,402
Commonwealth .. 403,405,406,407,
411-12
communications .. .. 394,396
councils 167, 262, 393, 394,397,400,408
Advisory Board for .. 393,394
Council, Science (src) 51, 171, 394,400,
406,407,408
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5H
Page
Research, scientific—contd.
criminology .. 110,113,113
defence .. .. I2S-6,393,405
Development Corporation,
National (nrdc) .. .. 395,410
ecological . . . . . . 404,408
electronics.. .. .. 400,402
engineering 395, 400,401, 404, 409
environmental .. .. 395,408
establishments .. 257,394,401
expenditure on .. 393, 394,400,406
fellowships and studentships 169,398,
399,400,403,408,412
fire prevention .. . . .. 79
fisheries .. . . . . 403,404
food .. .. 401,404,405
forestry .. .. 395,405,408
fuel and power 270, 275, 277, 282, 284,
339,397
Advisory Council on Research
and Development .. 270, 397
furniture . . .. .. .. 313
geological . . .... 408,409
Government responsibility for 393-412
industry . . 265,395,400,401, 408
See also individual industries
inventions .. . . .. • • 399
land use and planning .. .. 394
lectureships and awards .. 398,400
medical 137, 138,146, 396, 397,402-3,
410
meteorological . . .. • • 397
mining .. .. 275,397,409
nuclear . .81, 282, 397,401, 405,406
neutron beam . . . . . . 406
pest control .. .. 404,411
Centre for Overseas Pest Re¬
search. . .. . . .. 411
petroleum .. . . .. 277,402
pharmaceuticals .. .. . . 303
plant . . .. . . 396,404
Policy    393-4
private institutes for .. . . 402
radio-astronomy see Astronomy
resul ts, information on . . 409-10,411
roads  353
social . . .. . . 408-9
space .. 394,396,401,406,407
technological .. .. 393,400
telecommunications 298, 396,406,407
television and radio .. .. 444
textiles .. .. 305,306,307,402
tropical products
in universities and
leges
veterinary . .
water supplies
zoological ..
Restrictive practices
Court
Retail trade . .
types of
Reuters Ltd.
Revenue .. 83,
Rhodes Scholarships
Rhondda
Riding (horse)
Showjumping
Rifle shooting
Rights of way..
Ringway
.. 411
technical col-
110,166,394,400
318,404
287,401
..409
252,254-5,262
• • ^55
..246,247-52
organisation and development of 248-9
..247
433-4
213-7, 232,233,423
.. .. 169
.. .. 261
23,459
446,459
460-1
.. .. 182
.. 250
Page
Ripon . . .. .. .. .. 356
River authorities 285, 287, 327-8, 334
See also Water:
Boards and authorities
Road:
freight . . .. .. .. 248
Corporation, National .. 351,354
haulage .. 52,340,348,354,359
European Community rules .. 354
passenger transport 34°, 348, 354-5
authorities .. . . .. 354
Research Laboratory, Transport
and •• •• 353,395,401
Services, British (brs) .. .. 354
Roads.. .. 72,74,176,178,351-3
classification .. . . 52, 351, 359
development and construction 71, 178,
288,289,351-3,395
motorways and trunk roads 289, 351-3,
359
Northern Ireland .. . . • • 359
safety 71,73,353,355-7,389,395
transport 348,353-5
Rochdale .. .. .. .. 259
Rockefeller Foundation . . .. 168
Roman Catholic Church see Church
Rope-making.. .. 260, 262, 307
Rossendale Valley .. .. ..308
Rowing
Royal:
Air Force
Board
College
Regiment
•446,459-6o
116, X17, 120, 122,123-4
116
122
123
124
122
124
reserve and auxiliary forces
Staff College
Volunteer Reserve
See also Defence
Commissions:
appointment and functions of
39,48,103
Environmental Pollution 24, 184, 397
Fine Art . . .. .. . . 424
Historical Monuments . . 179
Industrial Relations
Courts of Justice ..
Dockyards . .
Family
Fleet Auxiliary Service
Reserve ..
Institution . .
Marines
Reserve ..
Medals (science) . .
Military Academy..
Mint
Naval:
College . .
Reserve . .
Staff College
• • 388
.. 91
126,258
29,31,210
123
124
399
120
124
398
122
48,218
. . 122
. . 124
.. 122
116,117,120,122-3,124
122
125
Navy
nuclear submarines
See also Defence
Observer Corps
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
Society 171, 393,394,397,398-9,400,
402,407,412
of Arts .. .. .. 264,399
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having Royal
as first word of their title
INDEX
515
Rubber industry
Rugby
football
Rule committees
Runcorn
Rural:
amenities, preservation of.. .. 175
community councils . . . . 269
Page
Rural—contd.
Councils . . .. .. .. 269
districts:
councils 67, 69, 70, 71, 72,74,75,138
population .. .. 15, 16
industries . . . . .. .. 269
Preservation Societies .. .. 175
Rutherford High Energy
Laboratory.. .. .. 401,406
258,259,313
259,297
.. 23,157,446,460
 98
176,259, 277
Sadler’s Wells Company and Theatre 418
Safety:
and Health Commission .. .. 389
Council, British .. .. .. 390
in Mines Research Establishment
(smre) .. .. 275,391,401
measures .. .. 379,388-91,392
training centres .. . . . . 390
Industrial Safety Training
Centre . . .. .. 390
Royal Society for the Prevention
of Accidents (rospa) .. 356, 390
See also Agricultural, workers,
Civil Aviation, Mines and
quarries, Railways and Roads
Sailing .. .. ..23,446,460
St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Service .. .. . . .. 146
St. Austell .. .. .. .. 258
St. Helens . . .. .. .. 259
St. Helier .. .. . . . . 443
St. John Ambulance Association and
Brigade .. .. .. 128, 146
Salmon fishing .. 334,404,454
Salt industry . . .. . . .. 259
Salvation Army .. .. 128,195
Samaritans .. .. .. .. 128
Sark (newspaper) . . . . .. 432
Satellites 367, 368,406,407,444,445
Geostationary Technology Satel¬
lite (gts) . . . . . . 407
Save as You Earn (save) . . 55,221-2
Savings .. ••55,204,206, 220-2
banks .. .. ..55,221,222
bonds .. .. .. 55,221
contractual .. .. 55,221-2
Department for, National 47, 55, 221,
222
Director of.. . . . . • • 55
National .. .. 207,212,220-2
Certificates .. ..55,215,221
Committee . . .. .. 220
stamps and gift tokens .. ..221
Stock Register .. .. .. 221
Science:
Advisory Board for Research
Councils.. .. .. 393.394
and Invention, National Reference
Library for (nrlsi) .. 409,425
and Technology:
Central Advisory Council for .. 393
Council of, Institutes .. ••399
Imperial College of .. ..165
Institutes of .. .. 164,165
National Lending Library for
(nll) .. .. .. 409,425
Select Committee on .. 397_8
Department of Education and see
Education
international prizes for .. . . 399
Science—contd.
Museum .. .. 51,409,422,423
promotion of .. 262,393-412
publications .. .. 398,399
Research Council (src) 51, 171, 394,
400,406,407,408
See also Research and Universities
Scientific:
and industrial instruments industry
260,296,402
Sira Institute . . .. .. 296
and Technical Information, Office
for (osxi) .. .. 394,410
co-operation:
between industry and univer¬
sities .. .. 393,394,400
Commonwealth Scientific Com¬
mittee . . .. .. .. 411
government and industry 393,398
with European Commvmity .. 81
with overseas countries 393, 398,400,
403,405,406, 411-12
Film Association, British Indus¬
trial and .. .. .. .. 420
museums .. .. 409,422,423
Parliamentary and, Committee . . 398
research see Research
Scientists:
number employed.. .. . . 400
training of 165, 393, 394, 399,400,411
Scotland (see also subject headings):
administration . . .. .. 26-7
aerodromes and airways 360,362,363,
364,365
area and counties .. .. .. 1
broadcasting councils . . . . 439
Conveners and Provosts . . .. 69
economic planning .. 199,269
education 154,155,156,157,158, 159,
160,161,162,163,164,165,167,168
Government departments 47,48, 58-60
Agriculture and Fisheries 58,323,
335,396,403,404
Development .. .. 58,67,187
Economic Planning Department 58
Education 58-9,107,151,155,167,
416,422,423
Home and Health 58,59,78,110,
138,143
Law Officers .. .. • • 59
Lord Advocate’s 44,49, 59, 60
Record Office .. .. • • 59
Registers of Scotland . . .. 59
holidays, statutory. . .. 19,381-2
industry 261,268,269,273,277,278,
284,291, 296,299,306,307,309
language 8,13,158
local government .. .. 67,69,71
Minister of State for .. 44,58
museums and art galleries 59,422,423
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Scotland—contd.
music and opera .. .. 417,418
National Library of .. 59,425
Parliamentary Draftsmen for .. 59
population . . .. .. 8-18, 261
ports (fishing)  333
press .. .. 430,432,433
Public Prosecutor .. .. • • 93
Secretary of State for 27,58, 60,70,75,
76, 77, 96, 97, 98, 99, 103, 105, 106,
no, in, 112,140,143,145, 146,150,
154,159,174,175,176,179,184,185,
270,278,286,289,323,327,335,337,
351,353,354,405,413
unemployment .. . . 266,371
Scotland Yard, New .. .. .. 114
Scottish:
Academy of Music and Drama,
Royal .. .. .. 416,418
Agricultural Securities Corpora¬
tion .. .. .. 326,327
Central Library .. .. .. 427
Chamber of Commerce .. .. 257
Community Drama Association .. 416
Council (Development and In¬
dustry) .. .. .. 235,269
Courts Administration .. 59,60
Daily Newspaper Society.. .. 436
Gallery of Modern Art .. . . 422
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 40
Health Services Council .. .. 143
Land Court .. ..94,101,328
Newspaper Proprietors Associa¬
tion .. .. .. .. 436
Office, definition of 44, 54,58,140,413
Opera Company .. .. .. 418
Small Industries Council for Rural
Areas .. .. .. .. 269
Special Housing Association (ssha) 186
Sports Council .. .. .. 59
Tourist Board . . .. .. 232
Transport Group .. 348, 349, 355
Universities 43,100,154,164,165,426
Water Advisory Committee . . 286
Scouts .. . . .. 128,172
Scunthorpe .. .. .. 260,292
Seamen:
conditions of employment 341-2
number and qualifications 340, 341
Sea transport. . .. .. .. 232
Senior citizens:
employment of . . . . . . 370
housing for.. .. .. .. 148
proportion in population .. .. 11
residential homes for .. ..148
welfare 53, 71, 127,128, 129,142,145,
147,148,149
See also Old People and Pensions
Service trades .. .. .. 250
Severn bridge .. .. ••353
Severn, river .. .. .. . • 4
Severnside . . .. . . .. 277
Sewerage 52, 58, 60,71, 72,137,138,178,
285,286,287,395
Sheffield ..16,164,260,292,302,311
Shellhaven . . . . . . .. 276
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts 92, 93,94, 95,
98,99,101, 102
Shetland Islands 1, 4, 5, 69, 72, 327, 333,
346
Shipbuilding:
British Ship Research Association 301
Page
Shipbuilding—contd.
Enquiry Committee .. .. 301
Industry Board (sib) .. .. 301
and marine engineering 258, 259, 260,
261,301,340,341,395
Shipowners .. .. .. .. 342
Shippers’ Council, British .. . . 342
Shipping . . . . .. 340-4,401
and International Services, British
Rail’s .. .. .. .. 349
and Seamen, Registrar-General of 340
Chamber of .. .. .. 342
chartering .. .. .. .. 343
coastal .. .. 341,344,348
companies and lines .. .. 342
conferences .. .. 342-3
container facilities and services .. 341,
342,343,346,350
cross-channel services 344, 345, 358
earnings of.. .. .. .. 232
employers’ and employees’ organi¬
sations . . .. .. .. 342
employment of .. .. 340,341
exports .. .. .. .. 301
Federation Ltd., British .. .. 342
fishing fleet .. .. 333_4
on inland waterways .. -.358
insurance .. .. .. .. 342
liners, passenger .. 258, 341, 342
Lloyd’s Register of .. .. 342
medical advice, service for .. 368
merchant fleet, composition 340, 341
merchant seafarers .. 341-2
Navy see Royal Navy
ore terminals .. .. 340,346
organisations .. .. .. 342
ports 257, 258, 259,260,261, 292,301,
331,344-7
radio communications . . . . 368
safety .. .. 340,343,368,389
tankers and terminals 275,276,301,
340,341,342,343,347
tonnage .. • • 301,34°,341,342
traffic control .. .. . . 344
tramps .. .. 341,342,343
weather reports for .. .. 368
Shooting: game and target .. 454,461
Shops.. ..178,247-51,289,389,391
cash and carry, wholesale .
co-operative societies
department stores
independent
mobile
multiple stores
number of ..
‘out of town’ (hypermarkets) . . 250
sales promotion .. 247, 248, 250
self-service.. .. 249, 250,251
supermarkets .. .. .. 249
turnover .. .. 247, 248,249
Sickness benefit .. 131, 133,134,135
Sikhs .. .. .. .. .. 196
Silver ware .. .. .. .. 302
Skating .. . . 178,446,461
Ski-ing .. .. .. 23, 461
water .. . . .. .. 462
Slough .. .. 330,404,407
Slum clearance 60, 71, 185, 186, 187,
191
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smoke control .. .. 139,184
Silviculture see Forestry
•• 247
247-8
247,248
247,248
.. 249
•• 247
247,248, 249
INDEX
Page
Soap production .. 259,302,305
Soccer see Football
Social:
Fund, European .. .. . . 83
Science Research Council (ssrc) . . 51,
168,383,394,408-9
research units .. .. .. 408
Security .. .. .. 129-37
Department of Health and Social
Security see Health
expenditure on .. .. ..127
reciprocal agreements with other
countries .. .. 53,130,139
Services .. . . • • 127,129-36
Services 53,71,72,127,144,147,151,
205
National Council of .. ..128
reciprocity .. . . 130,139
reorganisation of .. ..140
Secretary of State for 53, 140, 143,
150,397
voluntary organisations 128, 129, 137
Survey . . .. .. .. 409
welfare .. .. .. 127-52
Work, Central Council for Educa¬
tion and Training in .. 109,151
workers . . . . 143, 145,151
training of .. .. 109,151
See also Health Service, National
and National Insurance
Soft drinks industry .. .. ..310
Soil Survey .. .. .. .. 394
Solent.. .. .. .. . . 347
Solicitor:
General 44> 54> 55
for Scotland . . .. 44,59
Official .. .. .. • • 55
Solicitors 86, 95, 96, 98, 99,100,101, 102
Solihull .. .. . . .. 258
Somerset .. .. 163,281,453
Southampton 16, no, 164, 276, 279,282,
304,422,443
port of .. 258,344,345,346,347
container terminal. . .. 345-6
South Downs Way .. .. .. 181
South-East Asia Treaty Organisation
(seato) .. .. .. 115,117
South of Scotland Electricity Board
see Electricity
South Shields .. .. .. 260
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space Research:
Committee on (cospar) .. .. 407
European:
Conference .. .. 406,407
Organisation (esro) 401, 406, 411
Union .. . . . . .. 80
Vehicle Launcher Development
Organisation (eldo) . . .. 406
Station, Radio and .. 401,407
Space Technology Programme,
National .. .. .. .. 407
See also Research
Speaker:
House of Commons 33,34,35,37,38,
39,40,41
House of Lords 33,34,36,37,38,39,
40,55,99
Special constables .. .. ..03
Speech therapists .. .. . . 147
Speed limits 35L 355
Spenborough.. .. •. .. 260
Sport ..
facilities for
Sports
Association for the
British ..
centres, national ..
Councils
51?
Page
.. 52,446-62
178,447
22,23
Disabled,
..448
448-9
173,181,446,
447,448,457
• •3i3
equipment industry
See also Recreation
Squash rackets .. . . 446,461
Staff colleges (armed forces).. .. 122
Stafford and Staffordshire 258, 259, 273,
297,311
Stag hunting 453
Staines . . .. .. .. 276
Stamp trading .. .. 248,250
Standard of living .. 10,19—24, 200, 204
Standing Committees see Parliament,
committees
Stanlow . . .. 276,277,347
Stansted (airport) . . . . .. 364
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s
(hmso) .. 47,57,253,287,427
Statutory:
boards .. .. •. 27,47
bodies .. .. .. .. 257
Instruments .. .. . . 41
Publications Office .. .. 56
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelwork plant industry .. .. 295
Sterling and Sterling area 198,199, 201,
202,218, 221, 227, 229,230,233,235,
238,241
devaluation
Stevenage
199,201,202
.. 176, 287
75,222,223-4
..259
..16,258,311
345,396
259,428
Stock Exchanges
Stockport
Stoke-on-Trent
Stranraer
Stratford-upon-Avon
Strathclyde University (Glasgow) .. no,
158,166
Street traders.. .. .. 247,249
Strikes see Industrial disputes
Students 20,154,161,162,163,164,165,
166,167,168,169-70
from overseas .. 166,168-70, 245
travel grants .. . . .. 170
See also Education and Universities
Submarines . . .. 120,122,123
Subpoena see Law
Sugar 234, 259, 308, 326
Agreement, Commonwealth . . 326
beet .. .. 316,317,325
Board . . . . .. .. 326
British Sugar Corporation 317,325
Sunbury-on-Thames .. .. 277
Sunday Mirror Children’s Exhibition 423
Sunderland . . . . .. 16, 260, 345
Supreme Court of Judicature 9°, 95, 97,
98,101, 102
Supreme Court of Judicature in
Northern Ireland .. .. 95,101
Surtax see Taxation
Sussex .. .. 164,320,396
Swansea 261,276,345,347,432,442
Swimming . . . .72,178,446, 461-2
Swindon .. .. .. 178,258
Synthetic fibres 259, 261, 262, 305, 306
Synthetic rubber 258, 259,261, 262,302,
303,304,313
5i8
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Table tennis . . .. .. .. 462
Tankers and terminals see Shipping
Tanning .. .. .. .. 308
Tape recorders industry .. .. 298
Tariff policy . . .. 81,233-4,335
Task Force . . .. .. . . 128
Tate Gallery . . . . . . 422,423
Taxation 39, 54, 129, 130, 133, 199, 200,
204, 2x1, 212, 213-5
. .. 214,217
.54,213,214,215-6
. 54,212,213,214,
215
130
betting duties
capital gains tax
corporation tax
credit system
customs and excise duties 51,83,213,
216
double taxation agreements .. 215
estate duty.. 54,213,214,215,423
expenditure, taxes on 204,213,216
for non-residents .. .. ..215
income tax . . 54,129, 204, 212, 213-5
relief and exemptions 129, 130,137,
188,265
indirect, and subsidies .. .. 216
local see Rates
motor vehicles .. .. 216,217
Northern Ireland .. . . . . 217
PAYE .. .. 133,213,215
purchase tax .. .. 204,213
selective employment tax (set) .. 213
stamp duties .. ..54,213,214
surtax   54.213
value added tax (vat)
51,83,200,313,
216
217,353.357
.. .. 278
••353
Taxicabs (London) . .
Tayside
bridge
Teachers see Education
Technical:
assistance . . 169,170,171, 245, 263
assistance programmes, British 169-70
British Volunteer Programme .. 245
education see Education
Technology see Education, Research,
Science, Universities and relevant
industries
T eesside 15,16,260,276,277,292,345,347
Telecommunications:
equipment industry .. 262,298
Posts and, Minister of see Posts
and Telecommunications
private
satellites
submarine cables . .
telegraphs . .
telephones . .
specialised services
Telex
Telegraph and telephone equipment
industry .. .. 262, 297, 298
Telescopes, radio .. .. 407-8
Television see Broadcasting, Inde¬
pendent Television and Licences
Tennis see Lawn and Table
Tenpin bowling
Territorial and Army Volunteer
Reserve (t & avr) . .
Tetney Haven
Textile industries 197, 206, 246, 254,258,
259,260,261, 262,305^7,371
machinery industry 206, 261, 294
research .. .. 305,306,307,402
366,367
406,407
367-8
178,366
178,366-7
367
366
462
124
347
Page
Thames:
river 4,257,258,276,277,315,346,
353,364
tunnels .. .. .. .. 353
Theatre Association, British .. 416
Theatres .. ..22,413,414,415-7
amateur .. . . .. .. 416
for young people .. .. 416-7
National Theatre .. 414,415,416
repertory .. .. .. 415,416
Shakespeare Theatre Company,
Royal . . .. .. . . 415
See also Drama
Theddlethorpe .. .. .. 283
Thermometrical Table .. .. 464
Thermonuclear research see Nuclear
energy
Thornton .. .. .. .. 277
Tilbury  257,345
Timber:
Growers’ Organisation .. • • 338
Home Grown, Advisory Com¬
mittee on (hgtac) .. • • 338
industry .. .. 260,313,336-9
Research and Development
Association .. .. 290,401
Tinplate industry .. .. 251,261
Tobacco 20,206,229,254,258,259,262,
308,310,371,402
revenue duty .. .. 214,216
Toilet preparations industry 302, 305
Tolworth .. . . .. 330,404
Tools industries:
exhibition . . .. .. . . 294
hand .. .. .. .. 302
machine .. 254,259,260,293-4
Research Association .. . . 294
small (engineers) .. . . . . 302
Torry Research Station .. . . 405
Totalisators . . . . . . .. 458
Tourist:
Authority, British .. 232,420
boards .. .. .. .. 232
information .. .. .. 367
trade .. .. 232,258,259,269
Townswomen’s Guilds .. .. 23
Toy industry .. .. .. .. 313
Tractors .. 260,293,294,299,323
Trade.. .. 80,197,227-52,262
and Industry, Department (dti)
of and Secretary of State for 47, 52,
57, 60, 76, 198, 224, 225, 234, 236,
237,255, 262,264,265,266, 268, 270,
272, 273,274, 277, 278, 282,283, 293,
335,34°,34i,343,360,362,364,389,
39L 394, 395-6, 397, 401, 404, 405,
406,410,419,422,430
ministerial responsibility 52,57,262,
335
associations .. .. 252,257
Common External Tariff (cet) 81, 201
internal .. .. .. 246-52
overseas .. .. ..227-38,289
airborne . . .. .. 363-4
area distribution .. 229-30
balance of payments 199, 202, 238-46
Board, British .. .. .. 237
composition .. .. 227-9
exports 197, 198, 199,200,201, 204,
227,229,230,233,234,263-4,421
financing of .. .. .. 237
Government assistance to 235-6
INDEX
519
Page
Trade—contd.
overseas—contd.
imports 197, 198, 200, 201, 227,228,
230. 233>234.363,421
invisible transactions 197,199,201,
230,232
markets . . .. .. 236,237
tariffs .. .. 201,233,234
value and volume of .. .. 227
See also European Community
re-exports .. .. . . .. 363
restrictions and controls 81, 234,254-5
retail . . .. . . 247-52
wholesale . . .. . . 246-7
Cash and Carry Warehouses .. 247
See also individual industries and
Investment
Trade fairs . . . . . . 236-7
Trades Union Congress 200,382,383,
385,386,390,391,392
Scottish . . . . .. . . 386
Trade unions 83,112,256,262,378,379,
382,383,384-6,387
affiliations . . .. .. .. 386
Civil Service .. .. 65,387
educational facilities .. 263,386
press . . . . .. .. 436
Trading:
Agreements . . .. . . 254
Director-General of Fair .. 254,255
with European Communities 80, 81, 83,
232,233,324
Traffic:
Advisory Unit .. .. .. 356
air 348,359-65
congestion 348,356
control 174,179,344,348,350,353,
356-7,395
inland waterways 259,285, 340,344-59,
357-9
London . . .. .. .. 357
Northern Ireland .. .. • • 359
ports   345,346
rail and road .. 348, 349, 35°, 35i
research and development .. 395
sea .. .. 340,341,342,344,346-7
wardens .. .. .. 113,356
Training:
for industry 161, 165, 262, 263, 265,
268,377-8,390
boards .. .. 373,377,39°
Centres, Government (gtcs) ..375,
377,378
Industrial, Service (its) .. 377
Instructor, Training:
Colleges .. .. .. 378
Units .. .. .. .. 378
Manpower Services Commission
(msc) 373, 375
Opportunities Scheme (tops) .. 373,
o . 377,378
Services Agency .. 373,377
Within Industry (twi) 377,378,390
Page
Tranmere . . . . .. .. 276
Transport .. ..52,72,203,340-69
administrative reorganisation . . 348
air .. . . . . 300,340, 359-65
and Road Research Laboratory
(trrl)   395,4°i
Authorities, Passenger (pta) 3 54-5
boards .. .. .. 349,354
bus and coach 353,354-5,357,359
National Bus Company 354,355, 357
Commission, British (etc) .. 354
Docks Board, British .. . . 345
for school children .. ..157
Holding Company 351,354,355
Northern Ireland .. • • 359
Hotels, British .. .. . . 349
hovercraft . . .. .. 347-8, 349
Industries, Minister for .. .. 52
inland  34 L 348-59
waterways .. .. 348,357-9
London   347~9,357
nationalised .. .. 52,349
National Bus Company 354,355, 357
National Freight Corporation .. 351,
354
Northern Ireland
planning
police
private
rail ..
research
road
359
179
in
24
.348-51,357
348,353,395
348,351-3,395
safety measures 52, 343, 355-6, 389,395
Scottish Transport Group 348, 349, 355
sea .. .. .. .. 340-8
subsidies and grants 349,355,358
Tribunal .. . . .. .. 96
See also Civil Aviation and
Shipping
Travel see Tourist trade
Treason .. .. .. 93,97
Treasure trove .. . . 30, 100
Treasury 37,44,45,47,48,50,55,60,
198,209,210,211, 212,217, 218, 235,
256,262,269,278,360,423,427
bills.. .. 217,218,219,220,241
Chief Secretary to . . . . . . 50
Counsel .. .. .. .. 88
Solicitor’s Department .. 48,56,57
Treaty of:
Accession .. .. .. 80,216
Paris .. .. .. 80,81
Rome .. ..32,81,82,226,234
Tribunals 54, 55,95,96, 101, 159,190,
328,387
Council of .. . . .. . . 96
Trinity House, Corporation of .. 343
Tropical Medicine Research Board. . 402
Tropical Products Institute . . .. 411
Trustee Savings Banks .. .. 221
Tunnels see Bridges and
Tyneside and Tyne ports .. 15, 16, 260,
293,297,3OI>347,354,442
XJ Ulster:
Constabulary, Royal (ruc) .. 114
Drama Festivals, Association of .. 416
museums and art galleries . . 422
Orchestra .. .. .. . . 417
Savings .. . . .. .. 60
Ulster—contd.
New University (Coleraine) 163,164,
167,168
See also Ireland, Northern
Ulsterbus Ltd. .. .. .. 359
Underground railways 289, 350, 357, 364
520
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Unemployment 197,199, 200, 266, 371
benefit (insurance) 129, 132,133, 134,
135,373
United Kingdom:
area and composition .. 1,26,27
citizenship .. .. .. 12-13
geography 1-3
See also subject headings
United Nations organisations:
Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment (unctad) .. .. 233,234
contributions to . . .. 245-6
Educational, Scientific and Cul¬
tural Organisation (UNESCO) 170,410,
417
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao) .. .. 50,170,246,410
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation (imco) 344
International Telecommunication
Union (itu) .. . . .. 445
Programmes of Technical Assis¬
tance .. .. .. 170,245
relations with 50, 115-6, 170, 243,
410-11,445
World Health Organisation (who)
53,170,404,410
United Press International . . 434,445
United States:
educational and research co¬
operation .. 169,170,406,411
exchange rates . . . . 201-2
private investment in UK. . . . 243
reciprocity (national health benefit) 130
-UK Educational Commission . . 170
Unit Trusts .. .. 219,224,225
Universities 45, 51, no, 140,154,155,
163, 164-6, 167, 169, 265, 284, 290,
332, 339, 394, 398, 400-1, 409, 423,
424,426,427,435
agricultural degree courses .. 332
building programme .. ..165
Central Council on Admission .. 166
Page
Universities—contd.
degrees, diplomas and certificates
110,165-6,167,332,339
departments of education 162,166, 167,
168
drama clubs and societies .. .. 416
extra-mural courses 162,163,400
Film Council, British .. .. 420
finance .. .. 155,164,165
forestry courses .. .. . . 332
halls of residence . . .. .. 166
medical and dental schools 140,146,165
museums and libraries 422,425,426,
427
Open .. .. 107,165,166,441
Privy Council committees for .. 43
research no, 146,166, 168,179,277,
282, 284, 290, 394, 398, 400-1, 403,
405,407,408
scholarships and research fellow¬
ships 167,168,169,398,399, 400,
403,408-12
Special Commonwealth Awards .. 171
sport 20,449,450,452,456,457,459,
460,461
staff.. .. .. 163,165,166
students 155,161,163,164,165,166,
169
technological education in 164,165,
166,168,169,400
University:
colleges .. .. 163, 165,166
Grants Committee 51, 146,155,164,
165,168,394,400,402
interchange schemes
Officer Training Corps
Unmarried mothers ..
Urban:
district councils
planning
population ..
Programme
Studies, School of Advanced
171,412
.. 124
128,149
67,138
129,178-9
15,16,17
129,152,157
179
V Vaccination .. .. ..71,144,145
Vale of Evesham .. .. 319,320
Valuation for rating .. 54,58,60,74
Value added tax see Taxation
Valves industrial .. . . .. 294
Vegetable oil processing .. .. 260
Vegetables:
crops 246,315,317,319,320,324
processing.. .. 260,308,319
Vegetation .. .. 5-6,182,396
Vehicles industries 197, 254,258,259,
261,262,299-300,370
Vending machines, automatic 249,250
Ventilation equipment . . . . 296
Veterinary:
education and science . . 165,459
Laboratory, Central .. 330,403
Products Committee .. •• 331
service and research 329-30, 331, 404
surgeons .. .. .. .. 329
Viaducts .. . . .. .. 353
Victoria and Albert Museum 51,422,423,
425
Viking (gas field) .. .. .. 283
Village colleges .. .. .. 163
Virological laboratories .. .. 144
Visnews Ltd... .. .. .. 444
Visual arts .. .. .. 421-4
Vital statistics .. .. ..8-18
Vocational guidance and training 107,109,
263,374,375,377-8
Volley ball .. .. .. .. 462
Voluntary organisations:
childcare .. .. 128,150,151
education 154,155,156, 157,160,162,
169
preservation societies .. .. 175
prisoners’ aid .. .. .. 108
welfare 127,128,137,145,146,148,
149,150,151
youth services .. .. i7I~3
Volunteer Centre (social services) . . 127
Voting:
in House of Commons .. .. 38
in House of Lords .. .. .. 38
in local government elections 69,70
in parliamentary elections 34_5
INDEX
Page
Wages:
Board and Councils .. 383,388
Inspectorate .. .. . . 383
and salaries 19,65,198, 200, 201, 341,
379-8i
equal pay .. ..19,380,381
negotiations .. .. 383,384
statutory regulations .. 378,379
Wakefield .. .. . . .. 260
Wales:
administration .. . . 26,27,47
area and counties .. .. .. 1
broadcasting councils .. ..439
Development Corporation for 23 5, 269
holidays, statutory .. ..381
industry 50,260-1,268,269,273, 277,
279,291, 293, 299, 302,306
language .. 8,13,158,432,433,441
local government . . .. .. 67
Minister of State for .. 27 >44
National Library of .. 58,425
National Museum of .. 58, 422
National Sports Centre for . . 448
National Youth Orchestra .. 4x9
population .. .. 8-18, 176, 178
Ports .. .. 340,345,346,347
Press   432,433
Secretary of State for 27, 50,57, 140,
i43>150,151, 154, I59>174,175,176,
179,182,183,185,285,289,323,335,
337,353,354
Tourist Board . . . . . . 232
unemployment .. .. 266,371
University of .. .. 164,423
See also subject headings
Wallingford .. .. .. .. 287
Wallsend .. .. . . .. 260
Walton-on-Thames . . .. . . 276
War Museum, Imperial .. .. 422
War pensioners 53,129,130,137,141
Warrington .. .. 176,178, 259
Warwick and Warwickshire 164, 258, 273,
435,459
Wash, The .. .. .. . . 287
Watch committees (police) .. .. 111
Water:
Advisory Committee, Scottish . . 286
Boards and authorities 285,286, 287,
327
conservation .. .. 286,287
consumption .. .. . . 286
Council, National .. .. .. 286
Development Authority, Welsh
National.. .. .. .. 286
Development Board, Central Scot¬
land .. .. .. 286,287
fluoridation .. .. 139, 145
pollution 58,139,184, 286, 287, 395,
401
rate . . .. .. . . . . 285
Research .. .. .. 287,401
Association .. .. 287,401
Centre .. .. . . .. 287
Laboratory, Pollution (wprl) 287,
395,401
Resources Board .. 285,286
services reorganisation .. 285-6
sources of .. .. .. 285
Space Amenity Commission . . 286
storage .. .. 285,286,287,289
supply 24,52,58,71,72,137,138,
139,178,262,263,285^7,358
.. 442
•• 4-5
.. 368
367,368
• • 353
•• 3°4
462
521
Page
Water skiing .. .. .. .. 462
Waterways Board, British 285,345, 357,
358
Wearside
Weather
bulletins for ships ..
forecast services
Weaver River viaduct
Weedkillers ..
Weightlifting. ...
Weights and measures 72,252, 395,463-4
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled 5 3 > 71, 128,
136,137,142,143,145,147,148,149,
379
centres .. 139,140,144,145,152
children 128,129,130,133,134,135,
137,145,149-52
family 53, 127, 128,129,144,145,147,
„ 149
foods service .. .. .. 128
immigrants .. 127, 129,152
industrial .. .. .. 391-2
mentally ill 71, 139, 142, 147, 148, 149
mothers .. .. 144,145,147,149
overseas students .. .. 169,170
prisoners and probationers 107,108,136
senior citizens 53,71, 127, 128,129,
136,142,145,147,148,149
services .. .. 53,71,144-52
See also National Insurance and
Health
Welsh:
Council . . .. .. 58,199
Folk Museum .. .. .. 422
Grand Committee.. .. .. 40
language .. 8,13,158,432,433,441
Council .. .. .. .. 13
National Opera Company .. 4x8
National Water Development
Authority .. .. .. 286
Office 27,44,47,54,57,67,138,140,
151,155,159,160,180,184,412
See also Wales, Secretary of State for
Planning Board .. .. 58,199
Wembley Stadium .. 450,455,460
West Drayton .. .. .. 361
Western Isles. . .. .. 58,69,72
Westmorland.. .. .. .. 260
West Sole .. .. .. .. 283
Weybridge . . . . 258, 330,403
Whisky industry .. .. 261,309
Whitechapel Art Gallery .. .. 423
Whitley Councils .. .. 65,73,387
Whole House, Committee of .. 39
Wholesale trade .. .. 246-7
Widnes . . .. .. .. 259
Widows’ benefits and pensions 129,131,
133,134,135,136,137
Wigan. . .. .. .. .. 259
Wigmore Hall .. .. .. 417
Wildfowlers’ Association .. .. 454
Wiltshire .. .. .. .. 402
Winkfield .. .. .. .. 407
Wires and cables (insulated) industry
258,259,297
Wolfson Foundation.. .. ..168
Wolverhampton .. .. 16,258
Women:
in Armed Forces .. .. .. 120
employment 19, 3°5> 37°, 37L 379,
380,381,391
BRITAIN 1974: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Page
Women—contd.
equal pay for
in Fire Service
in police force
in the Church
periodicals for
proportion in population
Women’s:
Institutes . .
Royal Air Force . .
Royal Army Corps
Royal Naval Service
Royal Voluntary Service
Rural Institutes .. _
Woodland owners’ association
Schemes . . • • „ • • q
Woodlands .. 6, 180,183, 314. 337> 33o>
339
Woodstock (Kent) .. •• ' ■
Woo! ... •• ••
Industries Research Association . • 3
industry •• i97> 2^°> 3°5
Marketing Board, British .. • • 325
380,381
• • 78
.. 112
193.!94
• • 433
10
23,162
. . 120
. . 120
.. 120
128,146
.. 23
• • 338
338
Wool—contd.
See also Knitwear and Textile
industries
Worcester and Worcestershire 259, 307,
320,418
Work, hours of .. ••I9>354>38i
See also Employment
Workers:
manual .. •• I9> 268,378 82
professional, managerial and
clerical .. •• 265,374>
Workers’ Educational Association
162,163
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes 23
Works councils and committees .. 382
Works Managers, Institution of . . 265
World Data Centres .. . • • • 4°7
World Health Organisation (who)
53,170,404,4t0
Worplesdon .. •• •• 330>4°4
Worsted industry .. 260, 305, 30b
Wrestling  
Wrexham 201
Yachting . • • • • • ' *
Yarmouth, Great .. •• •* 3
York .. •• 164,179,260,415,422
Province of. . •• •• I92,i93
Yorkshire 15,16,260,273,276,279,283,
291,294,302,307,308, 330,355, 358,
425
East Riding •• •• 260,315
North Riding • • • • • • 2bo
WestRiding •• 260,305,307,320
See also individual industries and
towns . .
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca)  ^ I28’162
Young offenders ..25,54,86,95,103,
109-10,149
Young Volunteer Force Foundation
128,173
Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion (ywca)  128
Youth: .  
centres and clubs . . 163,172,17
National Association of Youth
Clubs I72
Employment Service .. 374
Hostels Associations .. 172,45
orchestras .. • • • • • • 41?
organisations:
pre-service . • • • " l
voluntary 138,171,172, t73,44
44,
171-
services .. •• •• ‘
National Council for Voluntary
(ncvys)  
Theatre,National.. •• i’ * '
workers .. •• •• i63>
z Zoological Society
409
Zoos and safari parks
40
ISBN o ix 7006238
