Shetland Is
9 &
Y
Orkney Is.
PHYSICAL FEATURES
1800 feet c,ix . u.
1 200 feet
600 feet
Sea level
Peaks
Rivers
National Boundaries
0 20 40 60 80 100 Miles
i i 1 1——i 1
6 40 80 120 Kilometres
River Spey
Grampian Mts.
River lay
River Forth
River Tweed
River Tyne
River Tees
Scafell Pike
The Pennines
River Aire
River Humber
River Trent
Little Ouse
Great Ouse
River Severn
River Thames
River Wye
English Channel
REGIONS, MAJOR URBAN
CENTRES AND NEW TOWNS
National Boundaries  
Regional Boundaries  
Centres of Conurbations
New Towns
Other Towns
0 20 40 60 80 100 Miles
 1
1 20 Kilometres
Newcastle upon
Tyne
Manchester
Leeds
Bradford
Nottingham
Wolverhampton
Peterborough
Corby
Birmingham
Northampton
Milton Keynes
Stevenage
Welwyn Gdn City
Harlow
Hatfield
Basildon
London
Bracknell
Crawley
Hemel Hempstead
BRITAIN 1972
An official handbook
BRITAIN 1972
Corrections
Chapter 10 — National Economy
p.193. The first paragraph should read:
Britain ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world,
with about 0.18 per cent of the world’s land area. In population,
approaching 2 per cent of the world’s inhabitants, it ranks
eleventh. In density of population it is fifth: of the developed
countries only Belgium, the Netherlands, Japan, and the Federal
Republic of Germany are more crowded; and there are ten times
as many people to the square mile in the United Kingdom as in
the United States. In terms of national income per head it ranks
about fifteenth, below the United States, Canada, France and the
Federal Republic of Germany, among other countries. In world
trade it ranks third, accounting for over 7 per cent of the total.
It takes 9 per cent of the world’s exports of primary products and
provides 11 per cent of the world’s exports of manufactured goods.
Chapter 16 — Trade and Payments
p.360. The first paragraph should read:
Although relatively small in area and accounting for less than
2 per cent of the world’s population, the United Kingdom is the
world’s third largest trading nation, conducting over 7 per cent of
international trade in 1970.
from: Reference Division, Central Office
of Information, London. November 1971
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
r< >qx3 bi < h ,fi • to 1ri3 j isq 9 r.a'Asi }i
Britain 1972
Supplement
Northern Ireland: Recent Developments
The affairs of Northern Ireland are dealt with, as appropriate, in various chapters
o/Britain 1972. This Supplement is added to cover important recent developments
up to iyth November igji not treated in the main text.
Action Against Terrorism
Since August 1969, when long-standing differences between the Protestant
and Roman Catholic communities in Northern Ireland gave rise to violence,
British troops have been involved, at the request of the Northern Ireland
Government, first in a peace-keeping role during clashes between the com¬
munities and, more recently, in protecting the public against the activities of
‘Irish Republican Army’ (IRA) terrorists. The regular troops of the British
Army work in concert with the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the Ulster
Defence Regiment, a locally recruited part-time military force responsible in
the same way as the regular Army to the United Kingdom Government.
Threats and campaigns of violence in Northern Ireland since 1922 have led
to the keeping on the statute book of the Special Powers Act introduced in that
year to meet a state of unrest verging on civil war. While it has no peace-time
counterpart in Great Britain the Act is comparable to enabling legislation in
numerous other countries. In general the powers conferred by the Act are
used sparingly, although some, for instance the powers to stop and search
vehicles and persons suspected of carrying arms, and to impose restriction on
movements of traffic, have constantly been needed in the existing security
situation. In August 1969, 24 people were detained in custody without judicial
process under provisions of the Act; four were charged with criminal offences
and the others released from detention within, at most, 14 days.
On 9th August 1971, as a result of evermore ruthless IRA terrorist tactics,
the Prime Minister of Northern Ireland announced his decision to invoke the
powers of detention and internment vested in him, under the Act, as Minister of
Home Affairs. Up to 10th November a total of 980 people had been arrested, of
whom 508 had subsequently been released. No internment order is made
without careful scrutiny of the case by the Minister of Home Affairs, who
must be satisfied that its subject is a continuing threat to the preservation of
the peace and the maintenance of order. By 10th November internment orders
had been made against 299 of those detained; 104 were being held under deten¬
tion orders and 69 pending the decision on the making of detention orders. An
advisory committee, with specified legal qualifications, has been set up under
the chairmanship of a county court judge to consider all cases of internees,
whether or not they themselves appeal, with a view to assessing whether an
internee’s release may be safely permitted in the light of any undertakings he
may give, and to make recommendations to the Minister of Home Affairs. Ten
people have so far been released under this procedure.
In the House of Commons on 22nd September 1971 the United Kingdom
Home Secretary said that while internment, imprisonment and detention
without trial were ‘repugnant to anyone in the House’ the object was ‘to hold
in safety where they can do no further harm, active members of the Irish
Republican Army, to obtain more information about their activities, their
conspiracy and their organisation and to help the security forces in their job of
protecting the public as a whole against their activities’. People were interned
solely because they were active supporters of the organisation which was using
violence for political ends.‘. . . in dealing with an armed terrorist organisation
of this scale the normal processes of law just are not adequate for the security
of the public. Simply alone for the reasons of intimidation, it is impossible to
proceed by the normal methods which everyone would infinitely prefer if it
were possible.’
Reform and Development
During the past three years determined efforts have been made by the
Northern Ireland Government and the United Kingdom Government to
ensure the same equality of treatment and freedom from discrimination for
every citizen in Northern Ireland as obtains in the rest of the United Kingdom.
These efforts have to a large extent been concentrated in a programme of
legislative and administrative reform, initiated by the Northern Ireland
Government. Steps taken include the appointment of a Parliamentary Com¬
missioner for Administration to investigate complaints of maladministration
against government departments and of another commissioner to deal with
citizens’ grievances against local councils and public bodies; the devising and
general adoption of an equitable points system for the allocation of all public
authority housing; the institution of universal adult suffrage for local council
elections (where franchise had previously been restricted to ratepayers); the
introduction of an anti-discrimination clause in all Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment contracts to ensure equality of employment opportunity; the setting up
of a Ministry of Community Relations and of an independent Community
Relations Commission; the establishment of the Royal Ulster Constabulary
(RUC) as a civilian force under a police authority, to bring it into line with the
other police forces of the United Kingdom; and the replacement of the
Ulster Special Constabulary by the RUC Reserve and, for security duties, an
Ulster Defence Regiment of the British Army.
Further, one central housing organisation to take over all responsibility for
public authority house-building and allocation has been appointed under the
Housing Executive Act (Northern Ireland) 1971. A plan has been published
and endorsed for a radical re-shaping of all local administration, under which
major functions of a regional character are to be transferred to the central
government, while local and district functions will be exercised by 26 newT
district councils, which will replace the existing 67 local authorities. In
furtherance of this plan the Local Government Boundaries Act (Northern
Ireland) 1971 provides for the division of Northern Ireland into 26 districts
for local government purposes, and other legislation has been proposed to
put the remaining parts of the plan into effect. To relieve the police of the
burden of prosecuting in all summary offences other than minor ones a mea¬
sure for the creation of the post of Director of Public Prosecutions and the
establishment of his department has been proposed. The director will be
responsible to the Northern Ireland Attorney General who will, in turn, be
responsible to the Northern Ireland Parliament, following the pattern
obtaining in Great Britain.
Parliamentary Changes Proposed
Political initiatives taken by the Northern Ireland Government include
proposals made by the Prime Minister for a radical change in the parliamentary
system, which would involve the creation of three new functional committees
of the Stormont House of Commons, covering the fields of social services,
environmental services and industrial services. These committees would be
charged with considering major proposals of policy, with reviewing perform¬
ance, and, possibly, with looking at certain legislation. They would consist of
not more than nine members broadly representative of party strength in the
House, and the chairmen of two of them would be members of the Opposition.
The Government of Northern Ireland has also published a consultative
document setting out proposals for introducing proportional representation
into the electoral system of Northern Ireland, for increasing the size of the
House of Commons, for changing the composition and size of the Senate to
include representation of interests not adequately represented in the House of
Commons, and for broadening the basis of executive government.
Economic and Social Progress
To promote the economic and social welfare of the people of Northern Ireland
the Northern Ireland Government, with the full support of the United
Kingdom Government, has published a Development Plan covering the years
1970-75. The major themes of the programme are the general improvement
of living conditions, especially in relation to housing, and the easing of the
persistent problem of unemployment through the provision of additional
employment opportunities. Its cost has been estimated to involve the expendi¬
ture of some £75 million more than was involved under the original public
expenditure programme for the period.
A progress report on the first year of the programme (which ended on
31st March 1971) recorded the promotion of 5,580 new jobs compared with
a previous five-year annual average of 4,800. It also recorded that 13,147
houses had been completed, in line with expectations; that the hospital, and
health and welfare services’ projects were on target (in addition to the pro¬
vision of nearly 2,000 more beds in existing hospitals, 27 health centres, one
health clinic, 12 day centres, two special care schools and 18 old people’s
homes were being built or planned); that 27 new primary schools and five
new secondary intermediate schools had been completed in addition to a
large number of extensions to primary, secondary and grammar schools; tha
opportunities for apprentice training for industry had been increased; and
that airport and railway facilities were being improved.
The report also outlined a number of other steps taken by the Government
to encourage and assist industry, including the extension by the Ministry of
Commerce of its after-care service for new industries, particularly foreign-
based and large projects; the establishment of a Local Enterprise Development
Unit; the introduction of a training and development scheme for trade union
officials and shop stewards in consultation with the Northern Ireland Com¬
mittee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions; and the opening of a Develop¬
ment Advice Centre to stimulate mobility of labour.
November igyi
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
Printed in England for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office by W & J Mackay Ltd, Chatham, Kent
Dd 501723 K164 11/71
BRITAIN
1972
An official handbook
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office: 1972
© Crown copyright 1972
Published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
To be purchased from
49 High Holborn, London wciv 6hb
13A Castle Street, Edinburgh ehz 3AR
109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff cfi ijw
Brazennose Street, Manchester m6o 8as
50 Fairfax Street, Bristol bsi 3DE
258 Broad Street, Birmingham bi zhe
80 Chichester Street, Belfast bti 4JY
or through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from Pendragon House Inc.,
899 Broadway Avenue,
Redwood City,
California 94063
Price jCi'So net
>' q ' q,
% 1^, C~'
qn'
'O
SBN 11 700109 o
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE i
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 6
Social Life 17
2. GOVERNMENT 25
General Survey 25
The Monarchy 26
Parliament 30
The Privy Council 41
Her Majesty’s Government 43
Government Departments 46
The Civil Service 60
Local Government 66
The Fire Service 74
3. LAW AND ORDER 78
The Law 78
Treatment of Offenders 95
The Police Service 103
4. DEFENCE 109
Policy I09
Planning and Control no
NATO Commitment 113
Deployment 114
Combat Forces 1x3
Defence Procurement and Support 119
Use of Manpower and Resources 120
5. SOCIAL WELFARE 123
State and Voluntary Services 123
Social Security 125
Health 133
Immigration and Community Relations 148
6. EDUCATION 149
The Youth Service 167
7. TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING 170
8. HOUSING x8o
9. THE CHURCHES ^7
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 192
Background X92
The Framework of the Economy 193
v
Page
11. INDUSTRY 200
Organisation and Production 200
Fuel and Power 215
Water Supply 23°
Construction 233
Manufacturing Industries 235
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 261
Agriculture 2^1
Fisheries 2^1
Forestry 2^4
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 288
Sea Transport 2^^
Inland Transport 29^
Civil Aviation 3°^
The Post Office 3I4
14. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
15. FINANCE 337
Public Finance 337
The Central Bank 349
Banking and Private Finance 35°
16. TRADE AND PAYMENTS 359
Overseas Trade 359
Balance of Payments 372
Internal Trade 3^°
17. LABOUR 389
Manpower 3^9
Employment, Training and Productivity Services 392
Terms of Employment and Working Conditions 397
18. ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 4^
19. THE PRESS 429
20. TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING 43s
21. SPORT 446
APPENDIX 463
Currency 4^3
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures 4^3
BIBLIOGRAPHY 4^5
INDEX 484
DIAGRAMS
MAPS
PHOTOGRAPHS
Page
Birth Rates and Death Rates in Britain 8
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 9
Age Distribution of United Kingdom Population 11
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 28
Functional Analysis of Defence Personnel 1971-72 121
Functional Analysis of Defence Expenditure 1971-72 122
Organisation of the National Health Service 136
Housing Stock 181
Personal Income and Expenditure 1970 199
Index of Industrial Production 1970 210
Energy Trends 1960-70 217
National Savings 1958 and 1970 353
Commodity Composition of Imports and Exports in 1970 361
Area Pattern of Trade in 1970 362
Earnings, Wage Rates, Retail Prices and Salaries 1958-70 399
Physical Features
Regions, Major Urban Centres and New Towns
Fuel and Power
Motorways and Principal Trunk Roads
front end-papers
front end-papers
back end-papers
back end-papers
Botanical Gardens
Topography
Some British Birds
Transport Technology
Hospital Equipment
Anti-pollution and Safety Equipment
Steel
facing page
38
between pages 38 and 39
39
134
between pages 134 and 135
135
230
vn
Steel Application
Steel Research
Shipping
Cargo Handling
Training of Seamen
Television
S.W. Region
Sport
facing page
between pages 230 and 231
231
294
between pages 294 and 295
295
422
between pages 422 and 423
423
Acknowledgment is made for photographs to: International Computers Ltd. for part of the central processor
of a 4-72 computer (cover); The British Travel Authority for Belfast botanical garden (facing p. 38),
Pembrokeshire coast, South Downs (between pp. 38 and 39); Airviews A 1C Ltd. for midland plain
(between pp. 38 and 39), cellular container vessel (facing p. 294); Eric Hashing for Snowy Owl, Peregrine,
Greenshank, Puffins (facing p. 38); S. C. Porter for Osprey (facing p. 38); Nursing Mirror for trollies
(between pp. 134 and 135); Hawker Siddeley for wheelchair tilter (between pp. 134 and 135); Imperial
Chemical Industries for steam curtain (facing p. 135); Johnson-Progress Ltd. for semi-automatic filter
(facing p. 135); Wellman Engineering Corporation Ltd. for heat exchanger (facing p. 135); Davy-Ashmore
Ltd. for oxygen furnace (facing p. 230); British Steel Corporation lor kitchen, razor blades, jewellery
(between pp. 230 and 231), electron microscope, infra-red unit, universal testing frame (facing p. 231);
Whessoe Ltd. distillation column (between pp. 230 and 231); Firth-Brown Ltd. for rotor shafts, forged
steel roll (between pp. 230 and 231); Tube Investments for steel tubes (between pp. 230 and 231); Upper
Clyde Shipbuilders for timber/ore carrier (facing p. 294); British Transport Docks Board for oil terminal
(between pp. 294 and 295); British Crane & Excavator Corporation Ltd. for timber loading by mobile
crane (between pp. 294 and 29s); Greater London Council for planetarium (facing p. 295); British
Petroleum for tanker safety course (facing p. 29s); British Broadcasting Corporation for television opera
(facing p. 422); Thames Television for school programme (facing p. 422); United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority for Winfrith (between pp. 422 and 423); The Nuclear Powers Group Ltd. for Hinkley Point
(between pp. 422 and 423); Dixon Partners PR for china clay pit (between pp. 422 and 423).
INTRODUCTION
Britain 1972 is the twenty-third official handbook in the series prepared
and revised each year by Reference Division of the Central Office of In¬
formation with the co-operation of other government departments and of
many national organisations. The handbook is widely known as an established
work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided by
the British Information Services in many countries. It is available overseas
in a limited free edition and is on sale throughout the world.
This 1972 edition, which covers events up to September 1971 gives a
factual account of the administration and the national economy of Britain.
It describes the activities of many of the national institutions, both official
and unofficial, and shows the part played by the Government in the life of
the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt
to cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The
factual and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and
other authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to
Britain as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland are also given separately when relevant.
Readers who require more detailed information should consult the Annual
Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of Statistics, issued by the Central
Statistical Office, and also other government publications and standard works
of reference, some of which are listed in the bibliography towards the end of
the handbook. Readers are asked to note that in Britain the Central Office
of Information reference documents listed in the bibliography and marked
with an asterisk may be obtained, on payment of a small charge, from
Reference Division, Central Office of Information; and that overseas they
may be obtained from British Information Offices.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September igji
ix
ADDENDUM
BRITAIN AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (see p. 367)
On 28th October 1971 a motion before Parliament ‘That this House
approves Her Majesty’s Government’s decision of principle to join the
European Communities on the basis of the arrangements which have
been negotiated’ was carried in the House of Commons by a majority
of 112 and in the House of Lords by a majority of 393.
29th October 1971
1 THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
Britain, formally known as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, forms the greater part of the British Isles, a group of islands lying off
the north-west coast of Europe with a total area of about 121,600 square miles
(314,940 sq. km.). The largest islands are Great Britain (comprising the main¬
lands of England, Wales and Scotland) and Ireland (comprising Northern
Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the southern coast of England is the Isle
of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the Isles of Scilly; off North
Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by numerous islands and to the
far north are the important groups of the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these
form administrative counties or parts of counties of the mainland, but the
Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain
and France have a large measure of administrative autonomy and are not part
of England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
England (excluding the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border) has a
total area (including inland water) of 50,333 square miles (130,362 sq. km.)
and is divided into 39 geographical or 46 administrative counties; Wales
(including Monmouthshire), with a total area of 8,017 square miles (20,764
sq. km.), has 13 counties; Scotland, including its 186 inhabited islands, has a
total area of 30,414 square miles (78,772 sq. km.) and is divided into 33
counties; Northern Ireland, consisting of six counties, has a total area of
5,452 square miles (14,121 sq. km.). Together, these countries constitute the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (or Britain), with a
total area of 94,216 square miles (244,019 sq. km.). The total land area of the
United Kingdom (excluding inland water) is 93,025 square miles (240,934 sq.
km.): England, 50,052 (129,634); Wales and Monmouthshire, 7,968 (20,637);
Scotland, 29,799 and Northern Ireland, 5,206 (13,484).
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they
refer to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together
for many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which com¬
prises England, Wales and Scotland, or to Britain (the United Kingdom) as
a whole. The position is further complicated by the fact that the county of
Monmouth is occasionally included with England. United Kingdom statistics
and other data sometimes include the Isle of Man, 227 square miles (588 sq.
km.), and the Channel Islands, 75 square miles (194 sq. km.), which strictly
are not part of the United Kingdom but are dependencies of the Crown.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British
mainland (the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the
Shetland Islands. The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet
Head, near John o’ Groats, is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o°
passes through the old Observatory of Greenwich (London), while the
easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45' East and the westernmost point
of Northern Ireland is 8° 10' West. It is just under 600 miles (966 km.) in a
straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and rather
Geology and
Topography
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
over 300 miles (483 km.) across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous
bays and inlets no point in Britain is as much as 75 miles (121 km.) from tidal
water.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less
than 50 fathoms (300 feet or 91 metres)—because the islands lie on the con¬
tinental shelf. To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor
plunges abruptly from 600 feet (182 metres) to 3,000 feet (914 metres). These
shallow waters are important because they provide excellent fishing grounds
as well as breeding grounds for fish. The North Atlantic Current, the drift
of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out
over the shelf and its ameliorating effect on the air is thus magnified. The
effect of tidal movement is also increased by the shallowness of the water.
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main
geological periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant
to weather and have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south
and east, and the island can therefore be divided roughly into two main
regions, Lowland Britain and Highland Britain.
In Lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern
England have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and
rising to chalk and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet
(305 metres) above sea level. Its boundaries run roughly from the mouth of
the Tyne in the north-east of England to the mouth of the Exe in the south¬
west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and
moors of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands,
which extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the
Lake District in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the
Pennines, almost the whole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of
England coinciding approximately with the counties of Devon and Cornwall.
Highland Britain contains all the mountainous parts1 of Great Britain and
extensive uplands lying above one thousand feet (305 metres). This high
ground, however, is not continuous but is interspersed with valleys and plains.
Geologically the mountains and hills consist mainly of outcrops of very old
rocks (archaean and palaeozoic), while the upper strata in the valleys and plains
are mainly more recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those in the northern
and western parts of Lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal measures
which have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion. The out¬
crops and shallow seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted were
found on the edge of the plains and up the valleys leading to the high land.
Most of the present deep coal workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors
of present-day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice Age,
and at one period or another during this time the whole of Britain north of
a line joining the river Thames and the Bristol Channel was covered by ice
caps and ice sheets. The ice naturally accumulated on the higher ground and
swept from the mountains of Scotland, northern England and Wales any
loose rock or soil which had previously been formed, so that, when the ice
eventually disappeared, the hills stood out as barren rocky areas, while a
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet (1,342 metres); in Wales,
Snowdon, 3,560 feet (1,085 metres); and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District,
Cumberland), 3,210 feet (978 metres).
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
3
thick mantle of glacial debris—boulders, boulder-clay, sands and gravels—
lay distributed widely over the lower ground. The ice had blocked up previous
drainage channels and left large lakes, which have since gradually dried up,
leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of great ferti¬
lity.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by
the ice sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption
of the previous natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses1 are irregu¬
larly placed around central lowlands; the rocks of Ireland are of the same types
as the Highland zone of Great Britain, and in the higher parts the moorland
vegetation resembles that of the higher parts of Highland Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety
of scenery and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances, partic¬
ularly on the coasts. The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach the
coast in towering cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as
along much of the west coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are
notable features in other parts of the varied coastline: the granite cliffs of
Land’s End; the limestone masses and slates of the Pembrokeshire coast in
south Wales; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast;
and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa in the Inner
Hebrides. Even around Lowland Britain there are striking contrasts. In some
parts the soft, white limestone—the chalk—forms the world-famous white
cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight; while other parts of the
south and south-east coastline have beaches of sand or shingle. The eastern
coast of England between the Humber and the Thames estuary is for the
most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches of it have been
protected against the sea by embankments.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of
the sand and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the
short British rivers2 valuable as natural harbours.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. It lies in middle latitudes
to the north-west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but the prevail¬
ing winds are south-westerly and the weather from day to day is controlled
mainly by a succession of depressions from the Atlantic which, moving in a
generally easterly or north-easterly direction, pass over or near the British
Isles. The climate is subject to frequent changes but to few extremes of
temperature. Although it is largely determined by that of the eastern Atlantic,
occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may bring a cold, dry,
continental type of weather which, once established, may persist for many days
or even weeks. During the summer months the Azores high pressure system
usually extends its influence north-eastwards towards north-west Europe, and
the depressions take a more northerly course, often passing entirely to the
north of the British Isles.
In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from an
easterly quarter the least; such winds occur about one-third as often as south¬
westerly ones although easterly winds are appreciably more frequent in the
spring than at any other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction may
differ markedly from the general direction owing to local topography. Winds
1 The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet (852 metres).
2 The longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only about 220 and
215 miles (354 and 346 km.) long respectively.
4
Temperature
Rainfall
Sunshine
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are generally stronger in the north than in the south of the British Isles, stronger
on the coasts than inland, and stronger in the west than in the east. The
strongest winds usually occur in the winter; the average speed at Lerwick,
Shetland Islands, varies from about 19 m.p.h. (31 km.p.h.) in January to about
14 m.p.h. (23 km.p.h.) in August, while at Kew Observatory, on the western
outskirts of London, the average speed varies from about 10 m.p.h. (16
km.p.h.) in January to about 7 m.p.h. (11 km.p.h.) in August. The stormiest
region of the British Isles is along the north-west coast with over 30 gales
a year; south-east England and the east Midlands are the least stormy, with
gales occurring on about 2 days a year inland and on some 15 to 20 days on the
Channel coast.
Near sea level in the west of the British Isles the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C. (47°F.) in the Hebrides to ii°C. (52°F.) in the extreme
south-west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the eastern
part of Britain. The mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at
Lerwick (Shetlands), ranges from 4°C. (39°F.) during the winter (December,
January and February) to i2°C. (54°F.) during the summer (June, July and
August): the corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south,
are 5°C. (4i°F.) and i6°C. (6i°F.). The average range of temperature between
winter and summer varies from 7°C. to i2°C. (i50-23°F.), being greatest
inland in the eastern part of the country. During a normal summer, the
temperature occasionally rises above 27°C. (8o°F.) in the south, but tempera¬
tures of 32°C. (9o°F.) and above are infrequent. Extreme minimum tempera¬
tures depend largely on local conditions, but -fC. (20°F.) may occur on a still,
clear winter’s night, -i2°C. (io°F.) is rare, and -i8°C. (o°F.) or below has been
recorded only during exceptionally cold winter periods.
The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches (102 cm.),
while England alone has about 34 inches (86 cm.). The geographical distribu¬
tion of annual rainfall is largely governed by topography and exposure to the
Atlantic, the mountainous areas of the west and north having far more rain
than the plains of the south and east. Between 150 and 200 inches (381 and
508 cm.) of rain fall on the summits of Snowdon and Ben Nevis during the
average year, whereas some places in the south-east of England record less
than 20 inches (51 cm.). Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year,
but, on the average, March to June are the driest months and October to
January the wettest, the former period of four months having about 60 per
cent of the rainfall of the latter. A period of as long as three weeks without
rain is exceptional, and is usually confined to limited areas. In successive
years, however, remarkably contrasting weather conditions are sometimes
experienced.
The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general decrease
from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the
mean daily duration of sunshine varies from five hours in north-west Scotland
to eight hours in the Isle of Wight; during the months of shortest daylight—
November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum, with an
average of half an hour a day in some parts of the Highlands of Scotland and
in the Peak District (Derbyshire) and two hours a day on the south coast of
England.
In fine, still weather there is occasionally haze in summer and mist and fog
Visibility
Soil and
Vegetation
Fauna
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 5
in winter.1 Fogs have become less frequent and less severe in recent years as a
result of changes in fuel usage and the operation of clean air legislation.
Many parts of the surface of Highland Britain have only thin, poor soils, with
the result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands of
Scotland, the Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in
parts of north-east and south-west England. In most areas the farmer has
cultivated only the valley lands and the plains where soils are deeper and richer;
villages and towns are often separated by uplands with few if any habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of poor soil or rocky land, almost the
whole of Lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area
except where there are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land drain¬
age systems have been developed through the centuries to bring under cultiva¬
tion the fertile soil of the low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and part of East
Anglia.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of
natural vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably
covered the greater part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands,
forests of Scots pine on higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open moor¬
land. In the course of the centuries the forest area was progressively diminished
and, in spite of planting by estate owners in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and the establishment of large forests by the Forestry Commission
in the past 50 years, woodlands now occupy only about 7 per cent of the surface
of the country. The greatest density of woodland occurs in the north and east
of Scotland, in some parts of south-east England and in Monmouthshire on
the Welsh border. Midland Britain appears to be well wooded because of the
numerous hedgerows and isolated trees. The most common trees are oak,
beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of
woods, fens and marshes, foreshores and cliffs, chalk downs and the higher
slopes of mountains; the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country,
which consists mainly of heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton
grass in the wetter parts. Most of Britain, however, is agricultural land, of
which over a third is arable and the rest pasture and meadow, a varied semi¬
natural vegetation composed of indigenous grasses and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges, stone walls or wire fences and,
especially in the mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents a
pattern of contrasting colour. The cool temperate climate of Britain and the
even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry
up, grassland is green throughout the year with many wild flowers from spring
to autumn; in most years there is scarcely a month in which some flowers may
not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western
Europe, though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals, includ¬
ing the wolf, the bear, the boar and the reindeer, have become extinct; but red
deer, protected for sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish Highlands and on
Exmoor in the counties of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are found in Scotland
and in the wooded areas of southern England, and fallow deer (which are
probably not indigenous) have been introduced into parks and are wild in
some districts. The badger, a nocturnal animal, is rarely seen; there are foxes
1 The number of mornings with less than i,xoo yards (1,005 metres) visibility ranges
from less than 5 a year in areas of lowest incidence to about 55 in areas of the highest.
6
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in most rural areas, and otters are found along many rivers and streams. Both
common and grey seals may be seen on various parts of the coast, though not
usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals include mice, rats, voles,
shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey more numerous than
the native red), hares, rabbits, weasels and stoats.
There are about 430 species of birds, including many song-birds. About
230 species are resident and the rest are regular visitors to Britain. The
chaffinch and the blackbird are numerous and are widely and evenly distributed,
but sparrows usually predominate near houses, and huge flocks of starlings,
which gather at certain seasons, sometimes congregate in London and other
large towns. These and some other species of small birds have been on the
increase for several decades owing to their success in adapting themselves to
man-made surroundings, and to the improvement in the environment resulting
from anti-pollution measures—138 species were recorded in London in 1970,
more than twice the number there ten years earlier. The number of large
birds, on the other hand, has tended to decline, except for game birds which
are specially preserved, such as pheasants and partridges, and the red grouse
which is found in moorland areas.
Many species of gulls and other sea-birds nest round the coast and gulls
often fly far inland in search of food or shelter in rough weather. The drainage
and reclamation of marshlands have diminished the natural habitat of ducks,
geese and other aquatic birds. Such birds, however, now frequent reservoirs,
gravel pits and sewage farms in addition to the nature reserves and bird
sanctuaries which have recently been established on an increasing scale. Nearly
all British wild birds are protected; the principal exceptions are those con¬
sidered injurious to agriculture and birds shot for sport in the open season.
River and lake fish include salmon, trout, sea-trout, perch, roach, dace,
grayling and pike.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three
species of snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of
lizards, including the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented
by three species of newts and five species of frogs and toads. Of these, only
one species of newt and the common viviparous lizard are indigenous; the
other species of reptiles and amphibians that are now firmly established came
to Britain from Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small,
in the British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly (3 to
4 inches or 8 to 10 cm.) and the stag beetle (2^ inches or 6 cm). The insect
fauna in Britain is less varied than that of continental Europe and lacks a
number of common European species. With modern methods of pest control,
extensive insect damage to crops or timber and serious outbreaks of diseases
commonly spread by insect vectors are exceptional in Britain but there is some
anxiety among naturalists that chemical protection against insects may be
reducing the population of creatures which feed on them, and of their predators
in turn. These and other effects of agricultural chemicals on wild life are the
subject of special safeguards.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the
people who inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long suc¬
cession of invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of
Europe were the Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian Vikings
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
Vital Statistics
and Population
Censuses
who, after settling in northern France, intermarrying with the French, and
assimilating the French language and customs, crossed to England and con¬
quered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the
relative importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans, Anglo-
Saxons and the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the present
English, Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over most of
England and the Lowlands of Scotland the language which soon came to
predominate was English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and Norman-
French, while the use of Celtic languages persisted in Wales, Cornwall, the
Isle of Man, the Highlands of Scotland and in Ireland.
The available records do not enable any precise estimates to be made of the
size of population or of the extent or direction of population movement until
the beginning of the nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the
end of the eleventh century the population of Great Britain was about 2 million,
while at the end of the seventeenth century a reasonable contemporary estimate
put the population of England and Wales at 5! million and that of Scotland
at about 1 million. The main factor in this gradual growth of population was a
slow natural increase, the rate of which was retarded in Britain, as in all countries
before the development of medical science, by high death rates and, in parti¬
cular, by very high infant and maternal mortality. Immigration from the con¬
tinent of Europe has been an influence at certain times and immigration from
Commonwealth countries more recently.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British
people—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths, mar¬
riages, occupations, language and family structure—is relatively plentiful and
reliable. Most of it is derived from two main sources: the regular flow of vital
statistics (that is, statistical information based on statutory registration of
births, marriages and deaths) and the periodic censuses of population which
give a national snapshot at a particular moment of time.
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is
carried out by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as registrars
of marriages. In England and Wales there are nearly 500 superintendent
registrars in charge of registration districts and some 1,200 registrars in charge
of sub-districts. Registrars and superintendent registrars are appointed by the
county, county borough and London borough councils but they act under the
instruction of the Registrar General for England and Wales, who is in charge
of a central government department, the Office of Population Censuses and
Surveys, whose functions include regulating the registration of births, deaths
and marriages, with planning and carrying out population censuses, and with
the compilation and analysis of population and vital statistics. There are cor¬
responding authorities1 and similar arrangements in Scotland, Northern Ire¬
land, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
Censuses of the people of Great Britain have been taken regularly every ten
years since 1801, except that there was no census in 1941 because of the
second world war. The latest full census covering the United Kingdom was
taken in 1971 and the first provisional figures were published during the year
Censuses were taken throughout Great Britain (on a sample basis) and North¬
ern Ireland in 1966.
1 The various authorities are: the General Register Office, Edinburgh; the General
Register Office, Belfast; the Governments of Jersey, of Guernsey and its associated
islands, and of the Isle of Man.
Total
Population
Future Growth
Birth and Death
Rates
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The short demographic account given in this chapter is based mainly on
census reports and on the regular returns of births, marriages and deaths,
though some use has been made of other special investigations, including the
Reports of the Royal Commission on Population.1
According to the preliminary figures of the census the population of Britain
(excluding the populations of the Isle of IVIan and the Channel Islands) was
55,346,551 in 1971 compared with 52,709,000 in 1961, 38*2 million in 1901,
and over 6-5 million in 1700. The main causes of this great increase in numbers
were a progressive reduction in death rates and a continuance of high birth
rates into the beginning of the twentieth century.
Britain’s population density is one of the highest in the world: it was approxi¬
mately 587 persons per square mile (227 per sq. km.) in 1971, but in England
and Wales there were approximately 833 persons per square mile (322 per
sq. km.), and in Greater London 11,979 persons per square mile (4,626 per
sq. km.).
On the basis of present trends in birth and death rates and migration, Britain’s
population is expected to continue growing to the end of the century, reaching
58,885,000 in 1981, 62,328,000 in 1991, and 66,488,000 in the year 2001.
For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate was about 35 per
thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just over 20 per
thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 20 years of the century,
but natural population increase changed little.
BIRTH RATES AND DEATH RATES
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age
groups, produced a population of low average age. But when death rates in all
age groups fell by an average of about a third, as they did between 1880 and
1910, the results were a very low general death rate, which helped to maintain
the population increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and a gradual
increase in the average age of the population. By the 1930s the birth rate had
fallen to less than half the nineteenth century rate. The population continued
to increase slowly, but its average age rose more rapidly.
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained
nearly stationary since 1920 at around 12 per thousand of the population
though death rates have continued to fall heavily in every age group, particu-
1 This commission was appointed in 1944; its main report was published in 1949.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Mortality
Causes
Sex Ratio
9
larly among pre-school-children, school-children, and adults in their thirties
and forties, with a consequent lengthening of the expectation of life from about
48 years at birth for a boy born in 1900 to 1910 and 52 years for a girl, to
nearly 68-5 years at birth for a boy born in 1967 to 1969 and 747 for a girl.
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH Years
Since 1933 the steady fall in the number of births has ceased. During the
second world war the birth rate began to rise and reached a temporary post¬
war peak of 207 per thousand population in 1947. It receded to slightly above
the pre-war level in the early 1950s, but from 1955 onwards began to rise,
reaching a peak of 187 per thousand in 1964. It has since been falling and was
16-2 per thousand population in 1970. The proportion of illegitimate births,
which reached a peak of 9-1 per cent of all live births in 1945, the last year of
the second world war, fell between 1945 and 1955, when it reached 4-5 per
cent; since then it has risen, but fell again latterly to about 8-i per cent in
1970.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising standards
of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities,
improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain on
mothers and enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant
and maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main
acute infectious diseases of childhood is less than a two-hundredth and mor¬
tality from tuberculosis is about one-fifty-fifth of the rate prevailing in the
mid-nineteenth century. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under
one year old per thousand live births) has fallen from 142 in 1900-2 to 18-5
in 1970 and maternal mortality from 471 per thousand live births in 1900-2
to o-18 in 1970. The reported mortality from some of the diseases of middle
and old age, such as cancer of the lung and coronary thrombosis, has risen
during the twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the improve¬
ment in diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet discovered
effective measures to combat some of these diseases, and improvement in
positive health does not always bring increased immunity or resistance to them.
Total births of boys naturally exceed those of girls by about 6 per cent, but
stillbirth rates and mortality rates at almost all ages are higher for males, so
that in nearly all countries—and in Britain since records began—women pre¬
ponderate among the elderly and outnumber men in the total population. In
1970 there were 106 females to every 100 males in Great Britain. Formerly
Marriage
and Divorce
Fertility Trends
Age
Distribution
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
women outnumbered men in every age group from adolescence onwards.
Recently, however, the fall in stillbirths and infant mortality has reduced the
influence of these factors on sex ratio so that the age at which women begin
to outnumber men has advanced and is now about 45. On the other hand, the
lengthening of the expectation of life, which has been rather more marked for
women than for men, has increased the preponderance of women among the
elderly—there are now some 29 women over 70 years old to every 15 men—
and made it a weightier factor in the sex ratio of the whole population.
Over the past 30 years the proportion of the population of Great Britain who
are married has risen from 42-1 per cent in 1938 to 58-1 per cent in 1970, while
the proportion of single persons in the population over 15 years of age has
fallen from 36-1 per cent to 18 per cent. This change has been due mainly to
an increase in marriage rates among men and women in their late teens and
early twenties; whereas in 1938 only 25 -4 per cent of young women aged 20 to
24 were married, in 1970 the percentage was 58-1. Earlier marriage has led
to a large increase in the number of children born to women under 30 years of
age and in recent years has contributed to a substantial acceleration of the total
flow of births into the population.
There were 4-6 decrees of divorce made absolute in 1970 for every 1,000
married couples in England and Wales; a substantial proportion of divorced
people marry again. Divorce is highest for girls marrying in their teens, the
ratio being twice as high as for women aged 20 to 24 at marriage.
The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and the early part
of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of the family
(that is, the number of children born per married couple) caused by the spread
of deliberate family limitation. Couples married a hundred years ago produced
on the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline seems to
have set in with those married in the 1860s, and continued until, for couples
married in the decade 1934-43, the average family size for Great Britain fell
to below 2*i. It rose again for those married in 1944 to 2-13. Later data
suggest some increase, though the present position is not wholly clear, in view
of the latest trends in the birth rate.
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20
and 30 years later, had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to
replace the original generation, while those born at the beginning of the present
century had only about 70 per cent of the number of children needed for
replacement. Since then the figure has been rising again and seems likely to
exceed full replacement with the generation born during the second world
war. The rise has been due mainly to the increased proportion of women
getting married and of children surviving to adult life.
The effect of the fall in the birth rate beginning in the latter part of the
nineteenth century was to reduce the ratio of children and old people to
adults of working age. This ratio was at a minimum in 1930. After 1936 the
number of children leaving school for work fell sharply owing to the drop in
the birth rate after 1921, but the population aged over 64, born during an era
of high fertility and representing successive generations of steeply rising
numbers, increased very rapidly; the population aged over 40 was also in¬
creasing relatively faster than that between 15 and 40. The higher birth rates
after 1942 arrested the compensating fall in the number of children and further
reduced the proportion of people of conventional working age.
Migration
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE II
Because of this high proportion of the young and the old in the present
population, which is expected to increase still further (see diagram), there is a
special need to make the best use of national human resources. In 1966 about
93 per cent of men and 50-5 per cent of women between 15 and 64 in Great
Britain were economically active in remunerative work (this includes those
temporarily out of work or sick). In addition some 23-5 per cent of men and
6-7 per cent of women aged 65 or more were still economically active. At the
other end of the scale, some 25-7 per cent of both boys and girls between 15
and 19 were continuing their education. The scope for recruiting more men
and women into the paid working force is therefore limited, and emphasis is
laid on technological improvements and wider training to raise productivity.
AGE DISTRIBUTION OF UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION
million
IflU Under 15
15-64
65 and over
From the beginning of the nineteenth century until the 1930s the balance of
migration was markedly outward. Between 1815 and 1930 well over 20 million
people left Britain for destinations outside Europe, mainly in the Common¬
wealth and the United States. Many emigrants later returned and large num¬
bers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles, Germans and Hungarians, entered
the British Isles. Nevertheless, the net loss by migration from Britain’s present
area amounted to some 4 million between 1871 and 1931. Since then the
balance of migration for Britain as a whole was inward until 1967, after which
a small net outflow has been recorded. Scotland and Northern Ireland have
throughout continued to have a net outward movement of population to
countries overseas as well as to England and Wales.
There have been two main periods of net inflow into Britain since 1931. The
first was in the years 1931 to 1940 when emigration was very low, many former
emigrants returned, there was considerable net immigration from the Irish
Republic, and extensive immigration from Europe, including about a quarter
of a million refugees seeking sanctuary in Britain. The second, from the 1950s,
resulted from a large increase in net immigration from Commonwealth coun¬
tries, particularly West Indian countries, India and Pakistan. In the three
years 1960-62 total net immigration amounted to some 388,000 people, about
three-quarters of them from the Commonwealth. It was in these circumstances
that the Government introduced the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962,
which gave it power to restrict the number of people from the Commonwealth
12
Nationality
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and, in principle, the Irish Republic who did not have citizenship of the
United Kingdom and Colonies and who might immigrate into Britain without
assured prospects of employment or adequate means of self-support. The
Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 extended immigration control to citizens
of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had no close links with Britain:
broadly speaking, those neither born, naturalised, adopted or registered in
Britain nor having a parent or grandparent who was. The Immigration Bill
(presented to Parliament in February 1971) proposes a single system of control
over Commonwealth citizens and aliens entering Britain. It will establish a right
of abode—and exemption from control—on citizens of the United Kingdom
and Colonies who are connected with Britain by birth, adoption, naturalisa¬
tion or registration or were children or grandchildren of such persons, on
citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies from overseas who had been
resident in Britain for a continuous period of five years, and on Common¬
wealth citizens with a mother or father born in the United Kingdom. (For
welfare of immigrants see p. 148 and for conditions of entry see p. 395.)
The net emigration of United Kingdom citizens to Commonwealth countries
in 1970 was 75,000 and to foreign countries 44,000. Nearly 30,000 Common¬
wealth citizens were admitted to settle in Britain in 1970 of whom some 23,000
were dependants of Commonwealth citizens coming to reside in or already
resident in Britain.
In 1969-70 about 66,000 foreigners entered Britain for a period of a year or
more.
Under the British Nationality Act 1948, with insignificant exceptions, persons
who are born, or whose fathers were born, in the United Kingdom or in a
territory which was a colony of the United Kingdom on 1st January 1949? or
at the date of birth if later, or in a United Kingdom registered ship or aircraft,
are citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies. Citizenship may also be
acquired: by descent (subject to certain requirements) from a paternal grand¬
father born in the United Kingdom or Colonies or from a more remote
paternal ancestor in the male line; by registration, for citizens of Common¬
wealth member countries or of the Irish Republic, for minor children and for
women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies; in conse¬
quence of an adoption order; and by naturalisation. The requirements for the
grant of a certificate of naturalisation include five years’ residence in the
United Kingdom or Colonies or five years’ Crown service, good character, a
sufficient knowledge of English and the intention to reside in the United
Kingdom or a colony or to remain in Crown service; nearly 37,000 persons
acquired citizenship in 1970.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizen¬
ship by acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another
country; nor does a woman who is a citizen of the United Kingdom and
Colonies lose her citizenship by marriage to an alien. Indeed, a citizen cannot
be deprived of his citizenship against his will except in very exceptional
circumstances (for example, if he has obtained naturalisation or registration
as a citizen by fraud). Any man or woman who is a citizen is, however, at
liberty to renounce citizenship if he or she possesses or acquires the nationality
or citizenship of another country.
Citizens of the other independent Commonweath countries are, in United
Kingdom law, British subjects or Commonwealth citizens.
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language
Language
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE ^
predominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic,
is the first language of the majority of the population in most of the western
counties and was spoken by 26 per cent of the population at the time of the
1961 census. (The Welsh Language Act 1967 affirmed the equal validity of
Welsh with English in the administration of justice and conduct of govern¬
ment business throughout Wales.) In Scotland, in 1961, nearly 81,000
persons, mainly in Ross and Cromarty, Inverness, Argyll and Lanark, spoke
the Scottish form of Gaelic,1 * while a few families in Northern Ireland spoke
the Irish form of Gaelic. The Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic are no
longer effectively living languages, although, in the Isle of Man, Manx is used
in addition to English for certain official pronouncements.
TABLE 1
Populations
1901-1971
England
(excluding
Monmouth¬
shire)
Wales and
Monmouth¬
shire
Scotland
Great Britain
Northern
Ireland
Totals Great
Britain and
Northern
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
Guernsey and
Associated
Islands
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
1901“
30,514,967
14,717,155
15,797,812
2,012,876
1,011,458
1,001,418
4,472,103
2,173,755
2,298 348
1931“
36,999,946
17,902,368
19,097,578
1,236,952
589,955
646,997
38,236,898
18,492,323
19,744,575
54,752
25,496
29,256
52,576
23,940
28,636
43,042
21,140
21,902
37,359,045
17,839,205
19,519,840
2,593,332
1,293,805
1,299,527
4,842,980
2,325,523
2,517,457
44,795,357
21,458,533
23,336,824
1,243,0006
601,0006
642,000&
46,038,357
22,059,533
23,978,824
49,308
22,443
26,865
50,462
23,424
27,038
42,743
20,675
22,068
1961“
43,460,525
21,012,069
22,448,456
2,644,023
1,291,764
1,352,259
5,179,344
2,482,734
2,696,610
51,283,892
24,786,567
26,497,325
1,425,042
694,224
730,818
52,708,934
25,480,791
27,228,143
48,133
22,034
26,099
63,550
30,715
32,835
47,099
22,718
24,381
1971“
(provisional)
45,870,062
22,284,947
23,585,115
2,723,596
1,323,210
1,400,386
5,227,706
2,515,140
2,712,566
53,821,364
26,123,297
27,698,067
1,525,187
748,420
776,767
55,346,551
26,871,717
28,474,834
49,743
23,007
26,736
72,532
35,423
37,109
52,708
25,382
27,326
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
“ Census figures.
6 Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1937, but not in 1931).
1 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included
in the counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
Distribution of
Population
TABLE 2
Population
Distribution
1961-1981“
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French
patois is still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official
language of Jersey, used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French
and English are used in the courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now used
for almost all official proceedings.
The population of England is, and has been for centuries, greater than that
of all other parts of Britain. The distribution of the British population by
country, as enumerated by selected population censuses back to 1901 (or
nearest possible estimate), is shown in Table 1, which also gives figures for the
Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. The populations of England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland were in every case greater in 1961 than in 1931
and in 1931 than in 1901, and they rose again between 1961 and 1971.
The high rate of increase in England is partly due to migration from the other
three countries.
Standard regions of England:
North  
Yorkshire and Humberside
North-West
East Midlands
West Midlands
East Anglia
South-East . .
South-West
Wales ..
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Area 6 in
square
km.
square
miles
19,350
14,198
7,986
12,176
13,013
12,566
27,400
23,659
20,761
78,767
14,120
7,470-9
5,481-8
3,083-3
4,701-1
5,024-4
4,851-6
10,584-8
9,134-9
8,015-8
30,412-1
5,451-8
Thousands
1961
3,249-0
4,628-1
6,546-6
3,107-0
4,762-9
1,489-8
16,350-5
3,436-1
2,635-2
5,183-8
1,427-4
1971
(pro¬
visional)
3,292-3
4,793-6
6,726-3
3,385-8
5,104-7
1,666-0
17,133-3
3,768-1
2,723-6
5,227-7
1,525-2
1981
(pro¬
jected)
3,433
4,959
7,040
3,742
5,516
1,941
18,281
4,099
2,822
5,347
1,646
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
“ The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given relate in England to areas defined at 1961 and at
26th April 1971.
6 Area at the date of the 1966 census.
Geography, history and economic factors have given rise to the differences
between the four countries and to an uneven distribution of the population
within them. Table 2 shows the areas and populations of the eight standard
administrative regions of England in 1961 and 1971, as well as those of Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, with forecasts for 1981. Table 3 gives figures
of Britain’s larger urban populations (over 250,000). About half the British
population lives within the area of an ellipse drawn across England enclosing
south Lancashire and west Yorkshire at one end, and the London area at the
other, having the industrialised Midlands at its heart. Other areas with large
populations are the central lowlands of Scotland; 1,000 square miles (2,589
sq. km.) in the north-east of England from north of the river Tyne down to the
river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
!5
from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the
eastern fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the
far south-west. Most of the mountainous parts of Britain, including much of
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and the central Pennine Chain in
northern England, are very sparsely populated.
These differences in average density between different regions have been
widening. Though in most places the population has been increasing, there
have been local differences in the rate of increase. Many places in the Midlands
and south-east England, some south-coast areas and some of the most
prosperous parts of northern England, Wales, and Scotland have had increases
well above the average national rate, while many of the older industrial towns
and remote country areas in northern England, Wales and Scotland and some
coastal resorts have had relatively small increases. The differences result from
the combined effect of natural increase in almost all areas and net migration
towards the expanding employment opportunities of the Midlands and south
and towards certain retirement areas, mainly on the south coast.
TABLE 3
Selected
Urban
Populations0
1951-1971
Belfast
Bristol ..
Cardiff
Central Clydeside
Glasgow
Coventry
Edinburgh
Greater London
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Merseyside
Liverpool
Nottingham
Sheffield
South-East Lancashire
Manchester
Stoke on Trent
Teesside®
Tyneside
Newcastle upon Tyne
West Midlands
Birmingham
W olverhampton
West Yorkshire
Bradford
Leeds
Area in
square
km.
64-0
109- 5
61-2
780-0
157-0
81- 5
135-0
1,595-0
58-4
73- 3
390-0
112-7
74- 2
160-2
980-3
110- 2
82- 5
177-5
230-4
44-7
678-0
208-8
690
1,257-0
103-2
164-5
square
miles6
24-7
42- 3
23-6
300-2
60-5
31-4
52-0
616-4
22-5
28-3
150-3
43- 5
28-7
61 -9
379-6
42-6
35-8
68-5
90-2
17-3
261-8
80-6
26-6
484-6
39-9
63-5
Thousands
1951
(census)
444
443
244
1,758
1,090
258
467
8,201
299
285
1,386
789
306
513
2,423
703
275
836
292
2,237
1,113
163
1,693
292
506
1961
(census)
416
437
257
1,802
1,055
306
468
7,997
303
273
1,384
746
312
494
2,428
662
265
855
270
2,378
1,107
151
1,704
296
511
1971
(pro¬
visional
census)
359
425*
278*
1,731
898
335*
449
7,379
285*
284*
1,262
607
300
520*
2,387
541
265*
395
804
222
2,369
1,013*
269*
1,726
294
495
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
“ The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given for cities in Scotland and Northern Ireland relate in
general to the areas as these were defined in the year noted at the head of each column.
Other figures relate in general to approximately the same areas throughout, except
that the figures marked with an asterisk take account of boundary changes since 1961.
Area at the date of the 1966 census of population.
c New unit created April 1968.
i6
TABLE 4
Population
Distribution
between Town
and Country
1931-1971“
Urban Dispersal
Mobility
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England and Wales:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Scotland:
Cities and burghs
Landward areas
Northern Ireland:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Areab in
square
km.
21,503
129,619
1,218
75,955
240
13,880
square
miles
8,302-2
50,046-3
470-3
29,325-8
92-8
5,359-0
1931
31,952
8,000
3,362
1,481
678c
602c
Thousands
1951
35,336
8,422
3,563
1,534
728
643
19616
36,872
9,233
3,646
1,533
771
656
1971
(pro¬
visional)
38,025
10,568
3,704
1,524
841
684
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
“ The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given relate in general to the areas as these were defined
in the year noted at the head of each column.
6 Area at the date of the 1966 census.
c 1937 census figures.
Throughout Britain the population is predominantly urban and suburban,
although there may be access to large parks, commons and other expanses of
open country within the urban area. Table 4 shows the distribution of the
people of Britain between areas classified as urban for administrative purposes
and those classified as rural.
During the nineteenth century the labour demands of newly developing
industry drew great numbers from the countryside; by the end of the century
three-quarters of the British population was living in towns and the large
conurbation was already the dominant type of British community. During the
twentieth century the suburbs of the towns in these population centres have
continued to spread and merge. One-third of the population lives in the seven
great conurbations whose centres are the cities of London (Greater London),
Manchester (South-East Lancashire), Birmingham and Wolverhampton (West
Midlands), Glasgow (Central Clydeside), Leeds and Bradford (West York¬
shire), Liverpool (Merseyside) and Newcastle upon Tyne (Tyneside).
In recent years there has been a decline in the numbers of people living in
inner urban areas, balanced or surpassed by the increase of population in and
beyond the outer suburban fringes (limited in certain areas by the green belt
policy where little development is permitted). This applies most strikingly to
London, also to the outer areas of the West Midlands and Merseyside
conurbations and to Bristol, Derby, Leicester, Norwich, Oxford, Portsmouth
and Sheffield. These two trends, the movement out of the centre and develop¬
ment on the fringes, help to explain why the figures in Table 3 show apparent
decreases in most urban populations in recent years.
Factors in the further dispersal of the last few years have been the spread of
car ownership, expansion in public transport serving journeys to work, private
property developments to meet the demand for housing, and planned transfers
of population to the new towns around London, Glasgow, the West Midlands
and Merseyside and to selected expanding towns near to the great cities.
The extent to which people in Britain move about the country for work,
housing or study purposes is shown by the finding that 10-7 per cent of
Households
Dwellings
Housework
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 17
residents in Great Britain in 1966 had changed their address in the preceding
year and 33 per cent in the previous five years; 4-2 per cent had moved
between England and Scotland or Wales, or from one region to another,
during 1961-66.
SOCIAL LIFE
This section gives some points of general interest about the structure of
households and social habits in Britain as a background to the information
given in later chapters of the handbook, in particular those on housing,
transport and town and country planning.
The majority of people enumerated in the 1966 sample census in Great
Britain (over 97 per cent) were living in private households (usually in families
or on their own). The remainder included such people as residents in hotels,
people in hospital, in the Armed Services and in educational or other institu¬
tions. Of i6'9 million private households in Great Britain in 1966 about 15 per
cent consisted of one person only, 30 per cent of two persons, 21 per cent of
three, 18 per cent of four and 16 per cent of five or more. The number of
households (which had increased by 96 per cent since 1911) and their small
average size (three persons) reflect a number of factors including lower birth
rates, the higher proportion of married people in the population, and the
increased tendency for young people, married and single, and for independent
elderly people to have their own separate homes. Social factors such as the
greater general availability of housing, the rehousing of slum dwellers outside
city centres, and the greater readiness of people to change their place of work
have helped to weaken the family unit and increase the dangers of loneliness,
particularly for the elderly. The persisting strength of family ties is, however,
reflected in the frequency of home visiting at weekends and holiday times.
In 1970, of 19’2 million dwellings, about one-half were owner-occupied,
about one-third rented from public authorities, and one-sixth privately rented.
Towards the centre of large towns new housing is often provided in the form
of multi-storey blocks of flats, but in the suburbs most people live in streets of
semi-detached or detached two-storey houses with gardens. Altogether some
85 per cent of families in Great Britain live in houses, and about 14 per cent
in flats. Standards of new housing have improved considerably in recent years
and the degree of overcrowding is lower than in most other European coun¬
tries. There has also been an increase in the number of houses with modern
conveniences; of some 16-3 million households enumerated in the 1966 sample
census in Great Britain, about 85 per cent had exclusive use of a hot water
system and 81 per cent (in England and Wales) had a fixed bath, with an
additional increasing number having showers.
Much of the drudgery of housework has been reduced by changes in habits
and equipment, for instance, the increased use of easily cleaned plastic sur¬
faces in place of materials which need scrubbing or polishing, and of non-iron
fabrics and babies’ disposable napkins; the availability of convenience foods
(processed foods requiring little additional preparation before consumption),
and hot, ‘take-home’ meals (including the traditional fish and chips); and the
spread of labour-saving devices. More than four households in five have a
vacuum cleaner, two out of three a washing machine and a refrigerator, nearly all
an electric iron, one in four an electric clothes dryer, and one in five an electric
food mixer. An increasing, though still comparatively small, number possess a
jg BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dish-washing machine. Nearly one household in three has completely
eliminated the traditional coal fire in the principal living room. There is a
trend towards conversion to ‘whole house’ or central heating by means of oil,
gas, or solid fuel systems or by off-peak electric storage heaters; of all new
dwellings in England and Wales nearly 90 per cent have central heating.
Most women, and many men living alone, do their own catering and house¬
work; probably less than five per cent of households employ any regular paid
help, and less than half of one per cent in England and Wales have a resident
servant. A few households (estimated at one in 750, and those mainly ones
with small children) have a foreign girl living with them au pair. Some
households get help through the local authority home help service because
of particular need, for example, if there is an invalid or elderly person in the
house or because a mother is having her baby at home.
Women who go out to work (about half the women of working age are in
employment) benefit, among other things, from launderettes with extended
opening hours and from shops, particularly departmental stores and super¬
markets, which stay open late at least one evening a week.
Income, Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend
Leisure and it, greater educational opportunities and higher real incomes than had
Opportunities previous generations.
Agreed hours of full-time work are usually from 40 to 42 a week, although
men actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime working,
while the hours worked by women and girls average a little less. Some five or
six hours a week are spent by the majority of people in travelling to and from
work. Almost all employees are entitled to a minimum of two weeks’ paid
holiday a year in addition to public holidays, and nearly half have three.
Britain has fewer public holidays than nearly all other European countries.
Probably more than half the working population already enjoy a five-day week
—most people employed in factories and offices have Saturdays and Sundays
free—and a further extension of five-day working in distributive trades offering
a six-day week service is in progress.
In the last decade average earnings have risen more than prices. Women s
earnings have risen rather less than men’s. Although the principle of equal
pay for equal work applies in many occupations and is being extended under
legislation passed in 1970, the average earnings of women in industry are still
under half the average earnings of men. The real incomes of manual workers,
especially unskilled workers and young people under 18 years old, have risen
both in absolute terms and in relation to the incomes of non-manual workers.
The weakest groups economically are retired people wholly or mainly
dependent on pensions, households in which the father is dead or absent, and
low wage earners with a number of young children.
Illustrative of the widening opportunities for education and training is the
increase in the proportion of young people benefiting from non-compulsory
education. In 1968-69, for instance, 40-4 per cent of 16-year-olds were in
some form of full-time education, compared with 29 per cent in 1963-64.
The proportion of 18-year-olds continuing full-time education in universities,
colleges of education and technical colleges is also steadily increasing. A
large number of undergraduates in Great Britain are, moreover, first genera¬
tion’ students, neither of whose parents had a university education. Although
the children of professional parents are still more likely to go on to higher
education than the children of manual workers—a reflection of the continuing
influence of parental education and encouragement—a higher proportion of
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
r9
the children of manual workers in Britain receive higher education than in
most other European countries.
Over the last decade social differences between manual and other workers
have become less pronounced. Increased prosperity and modern production
and marketing methods have allowed many workers to adopt ways of living
formerly regarded as ‘middle-class’. The increased diversity of market pro¬
ducts and lower prices have permitted a much freer expression of personal
taste for everyone, irrespective of class. Styles in clothes, for example, vary
more according to age group than according to income group or occupation.
The general level of nutrition is high and is still rising. Because most
housewives have more money to spend, and because those at work have less
time for cooking, the sale of better quality cuts of meat and the more expensive
prepared foods has substantially increased. Poultry, vegetables, butter and
cream are among the other foodstuffs consumed in greater quantities than a
decade ago while the consumption of bread and flour has declined. Tea
remains the most popular beverage, but many more people are drinking coffee,
including ‘instant’ coffee, than before. The consumption of considerable
quantities of sweets and chocolate (some 7 • oz.—213 gr.—per person a week)
remains a notable feature of British eating habits. Many more people are now
interested in ‘good eating’, both of traditional English food and exotic dishes.
Restaurants providing the national dishes of other countries are to be found
throughout Britain; Chinese restaurants predominate but there are also many
which specialise in Indian, Pakistani and Italian food, while the growth in the
number of French bistros has widened the available range of French cuisine.
The quality of domestic cooking has also improved and menus have become
more imaginative, helped by cookery journalism, including television demon¬
strations, and a great variety of paper-backed recipe books. Increased affluence
and tastes acquired abroad have likewise increased the demand for wines, spirits
and liqueurs—during the 1960s sales of wines nearly doubled. Beer remains
the most popular alcoholic drink in Britain, consumption per head in 1970
being 178 pints.
Although more cigarettes were smoked in 1970 (nearly 128,000 million or
about 41 a week per head of population) than ten years previously, the increase
was due to a trend towards smaller (and cheaper) cigarettes and not to an
increase in the total consumption of cigarette tobacco, which has fallen since
1959. During the same period, while sales of pipe tobacco also declined, sales
of cigar tobacco increased nearly threefold. In a consumer survey carried out
in 1969, 68 per cent of men and 43 per cent of women described themselves as
smokers.
The share of expenditure on food in total consumer expenditure on goods
and services has declined from 24-3 per cent in i960 to 20-4 per cent in 1970.
Clothing and footwear account for about 8 per cent. The most noticeable
developments have been in the growing range of leisure clothes, in the more
adventurous styling in men’s wear, and in the large turn-over in mass-pro¬
duced fashions for young people, with frequent (and sometimes startling)
changes of style. In this branch of fashion, British designers are among the
leading designers in the world.
The greatly increased diversification and output of consumer products have
been accompanied by a growth of activity to protect and help the shopping
public. Which?, the magazine of the Consumer’s Association, a non-govern¬
mental organisation, publishes appraisals of selected consumer goods and has
some 600,000 subscribers with an estimated readership of over three million.
Over a million people a year visit the Design Centre in London where con-
Home Interests
Entertainments
Outside the Home
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sumer goods in current production, which meet its criteria of good design, are
displayed.
In Britain, as in many other countries, a considerable proportion of people’s
free time is spent in their homes; on a weekday evening, for instance, seven
out of eight of the adult population are likely to be found at home, watching
television, reading newspapers or books, listening to the radio or the record
player, playing musical instruments (guitars are particularly popular among
young people), or entertaining friends. Many of them also have hobbies,
some of which demand considerable skill and financial outlay, their varied
interests being catered for by magazines and periodicals of all kinds, including
papers dealing with sport, magazines about current ‘pop’ music, do-it-yourself
and gardening weeklies, and illustrated instructional periodicals which build
up into encyclopedias of art, science or general knowledge.
Almost all families in Britain have a television set and it is thought that more
leisure time is spent watching television than on any other pastime; average
viewing time per head of population is over 14 hours a week. Audiences for
the most popular programmes exceed 20 million.
Nearly one-third of the total population are registered members of public
libraries. Book sales have increased—a widening range of titles, including
works of scholarship, being bought in the comparatively cheap ‘paper-backed’
form, which constitutes about a third of total book production. More ‘comics’1
are produced per head of the child population than in any other European
country; their sale reaches about eight million a week, and each comic is read,
on average, by about eight children.
Sales of long-playing records (LPs), including ‘pop’ albums, have increased
sharply during the past decade, partly in response to lower prices; the 1970
production figure of 66 million was almost four times greater than in i960. The
production of ‘extended play’ and ‘single’ records—on the weekly sales of
which the ‘pop’ music popularity placings, known as the ‘Top Ten’ and the
‘Top Twenty’, are calculated—reached its peak in 1964; the 1970 production
figure was 47 million.
About four out of five families do most of their own decorating, and the
large sales of hand-tools and of small power tools testify to the extent and
range of home carpentry and other crafts. Gardening is another major interest;
in spite of the high proportion of the population living in urban areas, at least
half the families in Britain have some garden, and the general standard of
cultivation in both town and country gardens is high. Over 3,000 local
horticultural societies are affiliated to the National Allotment Garden Society,
and there are a large number of unaffiliated societies. Probably about 20
million people do some gardening in their spare time. The numerous flower
and vegetable shows held in town and country are very popular, and there is a
large attendance at the more important of them, including the annual Chelsea
Flower Show.
In Britain, many households have a pet; the favourite pets are budgerigars,
cats and dogs. Annual registrations of pedigree dogs at the Kennel Club have
more than trebled since 1938—reaching a total of 175,000 in 1970; the leading
breed in numbers, is the Alsatian. There are 3>500 <^0§ shows every year, of
which Cruft’s is the best known, and between 20,000 and 25,000 breeders.
The increasing diversity of entertainments outside the home includes, for
young people, discotheques and ‘pop’ concerts, and, for wider age-groups, the
1 Comics are papers for children (normally appearing weekly) which consist largely of
picture stories and cartoons. Horror comics are illegal.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
many and varied coffee bars. The cinemas, many of which show international
as well as British films, are popular among young people, although audiences
in general have been declining for several years. Theatres continue to appeal
to all age groups throughout Britain; although the theatre-going public is not
a large one, the new theatres opened during the last decade in and around
London and in the regions are well supported. Ballet, opera and concerts of
classical music also have an enthusiastic and growing public. Amateur dra¬
matic and music-making societies flourish, encouraged by the increasing
number of local and national festivals which have become a feature of British
cultural life. Special art exhibitions often attract large audiences.
Dancing is very popular, especially with those under 35 years of age; it is
thought that over 6 million people go dancing each week. There are between
3,000 and 4,000 regular dance halls throughout the country, including public
dance halls and halls operated by the major dance schools (which are open at
least three times a week), and about 4,000 other schools of dancing. Public
dances are often held in other halls, while many of the clubs and societies
which abound in Britain hold dances occasionally in their own or hired
premises. For younger people formal ballroom dancing is fast being super¬
seded by dances involving spontaneous movement to the rhythms and moods
of ‘pop’ music. However, ballroom dancing, together with Scottish, English
and Irish traditional dances, retains a following particularly among the over¬
thirties. The three-day folk dancing festival at the Royal Albert Hall in
London attracts a daily attendance of some 6,000 every year.
The public house—the ‘pub’ or the ‘local’—has for many years been a
centre of social life for a large number of people (especially men) in Britain.
Pubs, besides offering a wide variety of alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks and
providing (in increasing numbers) hot and cold food, serve as places for meet¬
ing friends and for entertainment; many have, for instance, television sets,
amusement machines and juke-boxes and provide facilities for playing darts,
billiards, dominoes and similar games. Some also employ musicians for even¬
ing entertainment, such as piano playing, folk singing and modern jazz.
‘Bingo’1 is widely played in converted cinemas and in club rooms and village
halls; legalised by the gambling Acts of the 1960s, it provides a form of social
entertainment of particular value to the elderly and lonely, and does not
involve large sums of money. There are some 150 commercial gaming clubs,
operating under strict legislative control. Betting shops number some 14,500.
The turnover of money staked by the public on horse and greyhound racing
is of the order of £1,200 million a year, about three-quarters of which is
staked on horse-races. Betting on football matches, both at fixed odds and
through football pools, is widespread, but usually for smaller stakes.
Increasing prosperity and leisure have affected interest in playing and
watching both outdoor and indoor sports—an interest which has been stimu¬
lated by frequent television broadcasts of sporting events. According to the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) audience research figures, the sports
most popular with viewers, are, in order: football, boxing, athletics, show-
jumping, horse-racing and tennis. Large crowds continue to be attracted to
the major sporting spectacles, such as the association football ‘Cup Final’ at
Wembley, the international rugby matches at Twickenham, the Lawn Tennis
Championships at Wimbledon, and the ‘classic’ horse-races. A growth in
active participation is reported by the governing bodies of almost every sport.
With more money to spend more people are able to enjoy minority sports,
1 Bingo is a traditional game of chance played by groups of people for prizes. It is
also known as ‘lotto’ or ‘housey-housey’.
22 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
such as golf, sailing, riding and ski-ing. The steadily rising sales of sports
goods indicate the increased enthusiasm for open air leisure activities,
especially among younger people.
Clubs and Groups A number of people in all age-groups and occupations spend much of their
free time in the more serious group activities associated, for instance, with the
churches, the trade unions, local or national politics, social welfare and reform,
and in educational and cultural pursuits—every year some one and a half
million people attend non-vocational adult education classes in a very wide
range of subjects. A feature of recent years has been the forming of new groups
outside the official welfare bodies to meet newly recognised needs—the Cam¬
bridge Literacy Group, for instance, which helps illiterate adults to learn to
read and write. Novel methods of fund-raising, such as sponsoring long¬
distance walks, have been introduced. . .
Some of the longer-established clubs and societies are organised on a
national basis and have branches throughout the country; these include the
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes, the Townswomen’s Guilds and the
Women’s Institutes. Working Men’s Clubs, affiliated to the Working Men’s
Club and Institute Union, number some 3,000 and have over three million
members (mainly but not entirely men); primarily social and recreational m
nature, the clubs aim at providing amenities comparable with the comtorts ot
members’ homes and at arranging events, including lectures and classes, ot
sufficient interest to compete with the entertainment provided by television.
Over 2 700 Townswomen’s Guilds, with a total membership of some quarter
of a million, are affiliated to the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds.
The guilds are educational as well as social in purpose, and they co-operate
in many public welfare activities. The declared objective of the National
Federation of Women’s Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; in
villages throughout England and Wales there are nearly 9,000 institutes with
a total of nearly half a million members. In Scotland and Northern Ireland
there are Women’s Rural Institutes with similar aims and interests.
Holidays
Private Transport
At least 35 million people in Britain take an annual holiday and many now
take two holidays a year. Most people spend their holidays away from home;
one in two travel by car (three in ten going abroad), most of them preferring
to tour. The number of people who go abroad for their holidays has risen from
a million in the early 1950s to nearly 6 million in 1970. The popularity o
foreign travel is attributable to several factors besides rising incomes: the
attraction of the sun which makes Spain and Italy the most sought-after
destinations for the British tourist; the many charter and other air-hne services
provided; and the readiness of the travel trade to provide inexpensive in¬
clusive holidays. A by-product has been an increase in the number of adults
who, with the help of radio and television programmes and by attending adu t
classes, are studying foreign languages to add to what they learned at schoo .
Of those who stay in Britain an increasing number enjoy active holidays, such
as canoeing, sailing and pony-trekking; camping under canvas, in caravans and
in specially equipped vehicles, is becoming increasingly popular among
holiday makers.
More people in Britain own cars than ever before and the number is still
rising. There is an increasing number of ‘two-car’ families and some families
have more. In mid-1970 there were about 11-5 million cars licensed on the
roads in Great Britain, compared with 5-5 million in i960. There is still a arge
number of motor cycles (including motor scooters)—i-i million in 1970—but
The Changing
Face of Britain
Changes in
British Society
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 23
fewer than in 1962, when the licence figure was 1-9 million. Sales of bicycles
to the home market fell from 952,000 in 1959 to 571,000 in 1970.
Although the number of motor vehicles has continued to increase, the
number of total casualties from road accidents has not risen proportionately.
The 1970 figures of 7,501 killed and 93,500 seriously injured, though higher
than those of 1969, were still lower than those of five years ago. The rate of
deaths per 1,000 vehicles licensed has been progressively reduced from 3-2
in 1930 to 0-5 in 1970 partly through advances in medical and surgical
techniques as well as in vehicle design, road construction and road safety
legislation, for instance the introduction of the ‘breathalyser’ (a means of
administering a breath test to indicate the level of alcohol in the blood).
Increasing population and social developments are affecting the physical
appearance of Britain. The spread of car ownership, which has changed the
whole pattern of leisure activities, has also led to a new and more scattered
distribution of houses and to different siting for factories, shops and offices. It
is also one of the main reasons for the large-scale urban reconstruction and
road development programmes which are now being carried out. In general,
towns and cities are being altered to accommodate more traffic and house more
people; experiments are being tried in remodelling town centres with pedes¬
trian precincts; multi-storey blocks of flats and offices pierce the skyline. In
addition to new roads and motorways, more reservoirs are needed to supply
the growing demand for water and more lines to carry electric power for the
growing volume of appliances.
In modern industrial society in a densely populated country there is much
scope for conflict between the need for new communal facilities and the desire
to preserve existing beauty or places of historic interest, and between potential
users of a new service and people whose way of life is threatened by the need
to accommodate it. As a result the activities of the established amenity societies,
such as the Council for the Protection of Rural England, the National Trust
and the Georgian Society, are being supplemented to a growing extent by
those of groups formed expressly to study the implications of particular pro¬
posals and to give publicity to the views of the people they represent.
Growing public concern about the dangers both to health and to the natural
environment caused by the unregulated disposal of industrial and human
waste, by exhaust fumes and by the rising volume of noise is reflected in the
appointment by the Government of a standing Royal Commission on En¬
vironmental Pollution and an Advisory Council on Noise. European Con¬
servation Year 1970 gave an impetus to the activities of societies such as the
National Society for Clean Air, the Noise Abatement Society and the Council
for Nature.
In the past 20 years the traditional pattern of life in Britain has undergone
considerable change. Not only have distinctions of class and social habits
become less rigid, but subjects formerly taboo in public discussion are now
openly considered in books, plays and films and in ordinary conversation. A
more informed tolerance of behaviour which deviates from the usual pattern is
reflected, for instance, in the growing popular sympathy for the difficulties of
the unmarried mother. The passing of new laws on such matters as abortion,
divorce and homosexuality, although disliked by many people (particularly of
the older generation), is nevertheless indicative of public unwillingness to
penalise individuals with particular personal problems. Similarly, changes in
the law applying to young offenders reflect the view that it is unreasonable to
24
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
treat children who have broken the law as fundamentally different from other
children in trouble.
This liberalising trend is balanced by a recognition that, in some areas,
restrictions on some freedoms must be extended in the interests of society as
a whole—hence legislation on race relations and the control of dangerous
drugs and firearms.
Relationships between the generations are also undergoing considerable
change, with the result that there is today a greater readiness than there has
ever been on the part of children and young people to criticise traditional
institutions and to seek more influence in shaping society. This desire for
personal involvement is manifest not only among those prepared to demon¬
strate for or against certain courses of action and to bring pressure on the
responsible authorities, but also among the increasing numbers of young
people who offer their services, both as individuals and as members of
voluntary organisations, to help the old, the immigrants, the disabled, the
illiterate, and others in need.
2 GOVERNMENT
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical State, whose origins and traditions
are to be found in the history of each of its four component parts: England,
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. England was unified under a Saxon
king in the ninth century; Wales became part of that kingdom and Ireland
was joined with it before the end of the thirteenth century; and the English
and Scottish thrones were dynastically united in the person of James I and VI
in 1603. In 1707 the Treaty for the Union of England and Scotland provided
that the two countries ‘should be forever united into one kingdom’, and one
Parliament (the Parliament of Great Britain) became the supreme authority
in both countries. In 1801 the Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland
1800, which joined the Irish Parliament to the Parliament of Great Britain,
established the United Kingdom. In 1922 the 26 counties of Southern Ireland
(now the Republic of Ireland) became a self-governing country, outside the
United Kingdom. Meantime, the Government of Ireland Act 1920 had en¬
acted a constitution for Northern Ireland which, while preserving the supreme
authority of the United Kingdom Parliament and reserving certain matters to
that Parliament, provided Northern Ireland with its own legislature and
executive, to deal with domestic ‘transferred’ affairs.
The United Kingdom is a unitary, not a federal, State but methods of
government are flexible and, to some extent, adapted to the needs of the
constituent countries. England and Wales on the one hand, and Scotland on
the other, continue as before the Union to have different systems of law, a
different judiciary, different educational systems, different systems of local
government, national churches on a different footing, and, for most domestic
matters, different government departments. In Scotland these departments
have headquarters in Edinburgh and are grouped under the Secretary of State
for Scotland, who is a member of the Cabinet.
There is also a considerable measure of devolution in the administration of
Welsh affairs to the Welsh Office, under the Secretary of State for Wales—
a Cabinet Minister who is assisted by a Minister of State. In Northern Ireland
the law on transferred matters is enacted by the Northern Ireland Parliament
(see p. 41), but is derived from, and is generally similar to, the law of England.
The judiciary is separate. The Northern Ireland government departments are
responsible to the Northern Ireland Parliament. The Channel Islands and the
Isle of Man (which are Crown dependencies, not part of the United Kingdom)
have their own legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and
of law, and their own courts. At the same time, they have a special relationship
with the United Kingdom because of their proximity to the mainland and the
antiquity of their connection with the Crown, and Her Majesty’s Government
is responsible for their defence, their international relations, and ultimately,
their good government.
The United Kingdom Parliament has the ultimate responsibility for the good
government of the British overseas dependencies which are administered
by territorial governments and are at various stages of development towards
full self-government. The United Kingdom is also one of the independent
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
member nations of the Commonwealth,1 which all acknowledge the Queen as
the symbol of their free association and, as such, the head of the Common¬
wealth.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by
common law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions,
which are not part of the law of the land since violation of them would not
lead to proceedings in a court of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable
to the machinery of government. The rules of the constitution have never
been codified; principles and practice are both alterable, and the rules of the
constitution can be adapted to changing conditions at any time by the passing
of an Act of Parliament, or by the general acceptance of a new convention,
without serious disturbance to existing organs and forms.
The organs of government in the constitution are readily distinguishable
although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They are:
1. the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the
supreme authority in the realm;
2. the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other ministers of the
Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(b) government departments, most of them under the control of ministers
and all staffed by civil servants, which are responsible for administration
at the national level; (c) local authorities, which administer and manage
many services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards, which are
severally responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries
or public services, and which are subject to ministerial control in varying
degrees; and
3. the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes, and is
independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The following pages describe these three organs of government in some
detail in order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.2
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years, and in
spite of interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle
upon which it was founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II
is a descendant of the Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the
year 829, and of Malcolm II, whose reign in Scotland (1005-34) was cor"
respondingly important in that part of the realm.
According to the Royal Titles Act 1953, the royal title in the United
Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms
and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith .
The form of the royal title is varied for the other member nations of the
1 The other members are: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Ceylon,
Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Malta, Zambia, The Gambia, Singapore, Guyana,
Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados, Mauritius, Swaziland, Tonga, Western Samoa and Fiji.
In addition, Nauru is a special member, participating in functional activities but not in
meetings of Heads of Government. , . , .
2 A Commission on the Constitution is considering whether any changes are desirable
in the present constitutional relationships between the several countries, nations and
regions of the United Kingdom and also between the United Kingdom and the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
Succession
Accession
Coronation
GOVERNMENT 27
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, to suit the particular
circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom, the Queen being
represented by a Governor in Northern Ireland. For the performance of
royal functions in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is
represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown the Queen’s representative
is the Governor-General, who is appointed by the Crown on the advice of the
ministers of the country concerned and is wholly independent of the United
Kingdom Government. In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is
usually represented by Governors who are appointed by the Crown, have
varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United
Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement 1701, which
provided that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most
excellent Princess Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’. Sub¬
sequent Succession to the Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration; and
although succession is not bound to continue in its present line, it cannot now
be altered (under a provision of the Statute of Westminster 1931) except by
common consent of the member nations of the Commonwealth which owe
allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide
that the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the Throne accord¬
ing to their seniority; if there are no sons, the daughters succeed in order of
their seniority. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant and
the powers of the Crown are vested in her as fully and effectively as though she
were a king. By convention, the consort of a king takes the rank and style of her
husband; the converse, however, does not apply and the constitution has never
attached any special rank or privileges to the husband of the Queen-Regnant
although in practice he may fill an important role in the life of the nation.
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession
of another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new
Sovereign is proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of the
Privy Council are summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Lord
Mayor, aldermen and other leading citizens of the City of London, and the
High Commissioners in London of the member nations of the Commonwealth
are also invited to attend.
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which
may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the same in
substance for nearly a thousand years although the details have frequently
been modified to bring it into conformity with the customs of the time. The
service used at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was derived from
that used at the coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of
representatives of the Lords, the Commons and all the great public interests
in the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the
other Commonwealth countries and of representatives of foreign States.
1 The Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I of England.
28
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
<1
-3
§
W
X
a
o
O
o
o
M*|
ow
M rt
O' ^
M O
00O
rt m
Pg"
Po
> i
ag
ja
<
v
Q
.s
Ph
5° rt
vh p
-<y ti
•S-s
2^-
^5
CO
CO i) ^
h4 P
I 3 OT
cop, <D
ThWtp
00
-M d**-
g*l M
301
I 'o ^
-si
-.2 h'H-
^ bS O
ili
ill§
o
■S 'mP-' 3;
/S 9 d tJ wH
O _D s n rd M
a r7i
, _ JximW
-a.S„-Sp«
g-taiiN
^ o « J
■Q W
O^i ^"2 4) M B U
■Mcof,t3cb
c^-o&ll^as
«1 O^W m 'g^<* §
g 4) <u ,u $ S”3
r U O O U
o.S.S.S.S.S ^ «>«
■s-S-S-Si^isiip
^ E-1 H H H P > J Q
Hi
j|l5li|?
Zx^g£S,
4) 4)
c c-2
4) O.
4) 4)
s — 'O >>2 2
^ 1h ^ ^3 .S S
'n'c5 n ° '-'
PndiQWJhJOMPL,
^ >• M
O , -"O 3 H
ctf t>D ^
2 £p a 3
3 s > CM
-Q.|pi
>>^ 2 M
■3 m>*HTd
^°8
Sl-
§gS:wI
^^2 gffi
4> O C
tJ
QSS
fe-M-
8 g
sO'
^0
o^a
^‘•g S'
■pl,.2 M
■H*
-p's
T3 <d
IT) <VJZ
co^3 w
0'S
o ^
-w M
Vh _x.
_^c oj
 13 ju
wU
. £
A) ^ <U M
i-,—I'd o
-o ^ a «
Ow<^m
■*-»
m
go
o 8 d
O.^ o
"<Q
'2 7
2 ??a c
—P ?ccn—
>•3 , s
“JllSl
—w n,SC?<(; g-
o s
0 7 S oja
HH 00 ^ £
n" M
S PS «3
TJ <1 "d c3
fi g
t> C'o.'d . »
i^-R-c d o.
—7 W la ® S
u-^OpSM
1
Q 3
>?
HH C+-<
W o
W -1^
N o „ 2
“J 73.3'
W3d---a
^ iSw
w -•
w 3
R
a
■2 ’<-
-£ ^
w 2
<u o
-If
2-
8>
t587
cu
||,
-B
C b‘-5
2
•rS ~
ifefe
§
Its
O4
S ^ ^
0 V. ^
^ s A
^ ^
-s 0 ^
Q
ll§
PI
•b a «
•s|l
^^3
t>* n cord 2
•^- ID 10 G H
000 CX d
HH M M
^ 0’S § N >,
-c
rt?.'0" tS
c g
Q-pg||
g 2 St®
s<c3ao
GOVERNMENT
29
Acts of
Government
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the
executive, an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in
England and Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, the commander-in-chief
of all the armed forces of the Crown and the temporal head of the established
Church of England. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary process
during which the absolute power of the monarchy has been progressively
reduced, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which she cannot
constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The United
Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the
Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation
during the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers
without any necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen.
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; as a general rule
she opens the new session with a speech from the throne (although this may
be read by the Lord Chancellor if the Queen is unable to be present); and she
must give Royal Assent before a Bill which has passed all its stages in both
Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enactment. The Queen is ‘the fountain
of justice’ and as such can remit all or part of the penalties imposed on people
convicted of crime. As ‘the fountain of honour’, the Queen confers peerages,
baronetcies, knighthoods and other honours,1 and makes appointment to all
important State offices, including those of judges, officers in the armed forces,
governors, and diplomats, and to all leading positions in the established Church
of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are required before a minister
can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In the realm of international affairs,
by virtue of her pre-eminence as head of the State, the Queen has the power
to conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory, to declare war and to make
peace.
These and similar acts of government involve the use of the royal preroga¬
tive which has been defined as ‘the residue of discretionary authority legally
left in the hands of the Crown’.2 Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of
this authority is shown in three constitutional ways in which the royal will can
be expressed: by Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice of the Privy
Council’; by Order, Commission or Warrant signed personally by the Queen
and generally bearing the signature of one or more responsible ministers; or
by Proclamation, Writs, Letters Patent, or other documents under the Great
Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in obedience to a Royal Warrant counter¬
signed by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not
detract from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the
smooth working of government; for although the Queen has no personal
authority and must show complete impartiality in every field, she must be
informed and consulted on every aspect of the national life. The Queen holds
meetings of the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; a
few (the Order of Merit, the Royal Victorian Order, the Most Noble Order of the
Garter, and the Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle) are in the
Sovereign’s personal gift.
2 Other powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by Royal Charter;
the construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of infants; the admini¬
stration of charities; coinage; the grant of franchises, for example, to markets, ferries and
fisheries; the right to treasure trove; and to print, or to licence others to print, the
Bible, the Book of Common Prayer and State papers.
30 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
holders of office at home and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions,
reads dispatches and signs innumerable State papers.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them
if the Sovereign is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of 18 years on
accession to the throne. The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act 1953—
laid down that the first potential Regent should be The Prince Philip, Duke
of Edinburgh, and thereafter those in succession to the throne who are of age.
In the event of the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision
is made for the appointment of Counsellors of State (generally speaking, the
wife or husband of the Sovereign, and the four adult persons next in succession
to the Crown1) to whom the Sovereign may delegate by Letters Patent certain
royal functions. But Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the express instructions of the Sovereign), nor create
peers.
Ceremonial and Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the
Royal Visits British Isles and, in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered
outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages are
the same today as they were many centuries ago. Royal marriages, the birth of
royal children and royal funerals are marked by ancient ceremonial, although
to a lesser degree than in former days. The birthday of the Sovereign is officially
celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on the Horse Guards Parade
and is also celebrated as Commonwealth Day. State banquets take place when
a foreign monarch or head of State visits the United Kingdom; investitures
are held at Buckingham Palace; and royal processions grace such social
occasions as the Ascot Race Meeting, known as Royal Ascot, and add signifi¬
cance to the opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives in state from
Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating
from the fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal
ordinances, established custom and the public will. The Queen and other
members of the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom every
year, and their presence at the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial
and charitable works of national importance ensures nation-wide interest and
support. The Sovereign herself pays State visits, often accompanied by other
members of the royal family, to foreign governments and undertakes lengthy
tours in other countries of the Commonwealth. Other members of the royal
family pay official and private visits overseas.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say, the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the
House of Lords and the elected House of Commons.
The three elements of Parliament are outwardly separate; they are con¬
stituted on different principles; they do different work in different places; and
they meet together only on such occasions as the coronation, or the opening
or closing of a session of Parliament when the Commons are summoned by
the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making organ of State, however,
Parliament is a corporate body and cannot legislate without the concurrence
1 The Regency Act 1953 provided that Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
The Meeting of
Parliament
GOVERNMENT 31
of all its parts (except in the case of Bills passed under the Parliament Acts
iq 11 and 1949).
The Parliament at Westminster is representative of all the countries of the
United Kingdom. It can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, or any
of the constituent countries separately, or for any combination of them. It can
also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, but in these islands,
and in Northern Ireland, it is not the only legislature, for the Northern Ireland
Parliament has power to legislate for Northern Ireland on most domestic
subjects, and the ancient legislatures of the two Channel Island Bailiwicks
(the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and of the Isle of Man (the
Tynwald Court) legislate on domestic matters.1 Nevertheless, the Parliament
at Westminster retains supreme authority, and within practical limits there is
nothing that it cannot legally do.
By the passing of the Parliament Act 1911 the life of a United Kingdom
Parliament was fixed at five years (although it may be dissolved and a general
election held before the expiry of the legal term); and since one Parliament
cannot bind its successor (for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not
be sovereign or supreme), each assembly has a period of time of up to five
years during which it may legislate exactly as it chooses. During its life, it can
make or unmake any law; destroy by statute the most firmly established con¬
vention or turn a convention into binding law; or legalise past illegalities and
make void and punishable what was lawful when done and thus reverse the
decisions of the courts.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parliament is absolute. In practice
Parliament does not exercise its supremacy in this way. Its members bear in
mind the common law which has grown up in Britain throughout the centuries
and they act as far as possible in accordance with precedent and tradition.
Moreover, although the validity of an Act of Parliament that has been duly
passed, legally promulgated and published by the proper authority cannot be
disputed in the law courts, no Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which
it knew would receive no public support. The system of party government in
Britain ensures that Parliament legislates with its responsibility to the electorate
in mind.
A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with
a proclamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council.
Such a proclamation on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and,
on the other, orders the issue of writs for election and announces the date on
which the new Parliament is to meet. This cannot be less than 20 days after
the proclamation, but it may be more.
The resignation of a government usually entails the dissolution of Parlia¬
ment. Formerly the death of a Sovereign also involved dissolution, but this
has ceased to be the case since the Representation of the People Act 1867.
The time between the meeting of a Parliament and its prorogation or dis¬
solution is called a session. Parliament is usually prorogued by a commission
under the Great Seal, which appoints the day and place of its meeting in a new
session. The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred by a
subsequent proclamation. The effect of a prorogation is at once to terminate
all business (with certain minor exceptions) until Parliament is summoned again.
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man consist of the Queen, the
Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the
member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each
legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
32
The House of
Lords
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
During a session either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such
date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business. A
reassembly of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or on the
initiative of the Government under powers specially conferred by each House
on its Speaker.
The average number of sitting days for the House of Commons is 165,
divided by custom into the following periods: one from November until
Christmas lasting about 40 sitting days, one from January to Easter of about
50 sitting days, one from Easter until Whitsun of about 30 sitting days, and
one from Whitsun until the end of July lasting about 40-50 sitting days.
Nowadays, the session is sometimes concluded with a short period of up to
10 sitting days in October, after the long summer adjournment. The House
of Lords sits, on average, for about no days in each session.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual.
The Lords Temporal may be sub-divided into (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages under the Peerage Act 1963, (2) all life
peers and peeresses created by the Crown under the Life Peerages Act 1958,
and (3) Lords of Appeal in Ordinary who are appointed under the terms of the
Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 to assist the House in the performance of its
judicial duties and who remain members of the House after their retirement
from office. The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other bishops of the
Church of England, according to their seniority as diocesan bishops.
Peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages carry with them a right to
a seat in the House of Lords, provided the holder is 21 years of age or over,
but anyone succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession,
disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit
in the House of Lords but they gain the right to vote at parliamentary elections
and to offer themselves for election to the House of Commons.
Not all holders of temporal peerages with a right to sit in the House of
Lords attend the sittings of that House. Those who do not wish to attend may
apply for leave of absence, either for the duration of a particular Parliament
or for a single session.
Peers who frequently attend the House of Lords1 include elder statesmen
and others who have spent their lives in public service. They receive no salary
for their parliamentary work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses from
their homes to the Palace of Westminster (provided they attend at least one-
third of the number of sittings), and (with the exception of the Lord Chancellor,
the Lord Chairman of Committees, the Law Lords and any member in receipt
of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office) they may claim payment for
expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the House (except for
judicial sittings) within a maximum of ^6-50 a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who sits
on the woolsack and is ex officio Speaker of the House. The Crown, by com¬
mission under the Great Seal, appoints several members of the House to act
as deputy speakers in the absence of the Lord Chancellor. The first of the
deputy speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed each
session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House otherwise
1 Average daily attendance is about 250.
GOVERNMENT
33
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
directs. The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who is
charged with keeping the records of proceedings and judgments and who
pronounces the words of the Royal Assent to Bills; the Gentleman Usher of
the Black Rod, who enforces the orders of the House; and the Serjeant-at-
Arms,1 who attends the Lord Chancellor.
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by almost
universal adult suffrage and consists of men and women from all sections of the
community. There are at present 630 seats in the House of Commons (511
for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern Ireland).
Members of the House of Commons are paid an annual salary of £2,000
together with a Parliamentary allowance of £1,250 and an allowance of up to
£500 a year for secretarial assistance; they hold their seats during the life of a
Parliament. Members are elected either at a general election after a Parliament
has been dissolved and a new one summoned by the Sovereign, or at a by-
election, held when a vacancy occurs in the House as a result of the death of a
member, or of his acceptance of office under the Crown,2 or as a result of his
elevation to the House of Lords.
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is elected
by the members to preside over the House immediately after a new Parliament
is formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of
Ways and Means, and the Deputy Chairman, both of whom act as Deputy
Speaker; these officers are elected by the House on the nomination of the
Government and, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote other than in their
official capacity.
Permanent officers of the House (that is, those who are not members of
Parliament) include the Clerk of the House of Commons, who conducts the
business of the House in the official departments under his control and is
charged with such matters as keeping the records, endorsing Bills and signing
orders, and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Speaker in the House.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies,
each of which returns one member to the House of Commons. Permanent
Boundary Commissions for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
undertake general reviews of constituencies throughout that part of the United
Kingdom for which they are responsible at intervals of not less than ten and
not more than 15 years and report on the changes they recommend. A Com¬
mission is also empowered to submit interim reports on particular consti¬
tuencies if, for instance, it is necessary to bring constituency boundaries into
line with altered local government boundaries.
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained principally in the
Representation of the People Act 1949 as amended by the Act of 1969. Under
the provisions of these Acts, election to the House of Commons is decided by
secret ballot in which British subjects (except members of the House of Lords)
and citizens of the Irish Republic are entitled to vote (voting is not com¬
pulsory), provided that they are 18 years old or over, and are not subject to
any legal incapacity to vote. Those eligible to vote in any constituency are
1 This appointment and that of Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod are now held by the
same person.
2 If a member wishes to resign from the House, he may apply either for what is techni¬
cally an office of profit under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds and Steward
of the Manor of Northstead), but to which, in fact, no remuneration attaches, or for a
directorship by government nomination in a commercial company which is an ordinary
trading concern (see p. 34).
34
Parliamentary
Privilege
The Party
System
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
those who are recorded on the register1 of electors for the constituency as
resident in that constituency on a date fixed by statute. Each elector may cast
one vote, normally in person at a polling station, although members of the
armed forces, Crown servants of the United Kingdom and staff of the British
Council employed overseas, and wives or husbands of such persons, if resident
overseas with their married partners, may vote by proxy. Voting by post, or
in certain cases by proxy, may also be allowed if the voter cannot attend in
person because of physical incapacity or the nature of his work or on grounds
of religious observance.
Anyone, male or female, who is a British subject aged 21 or over, and is not
otherwise disqualified may stand as a candidate in any constituency at a
parliamentary election. Those who are disqualified include members of the
House of Lords, clergy of the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church, undischarged bank¬
rupts, and those expressly disqualified by the House of Commons Disqualifica¬
tion Act 1957, for instance, holders of judicial offices, civil servants, members
of the regular armed forces and the police forces, and government-nominated
directors of commercial companies which are ordinary trading concerns.
The conduct of elections, including the manner in which candidates can be
nominated for election, is likewise governed by provisions of the 1949 and 1969
Acts, the second of which also prescribes the maximum sum of money that
a candidate may spend on his election campaign. This is £750, plus ^0-05
for each eight electors in a borough constituency and £0-05 for each six
electors in a county constituency. The prescribed scale is not required to
cover a candidate’s personal expenses, for instance, the cost of his living at an
hotel during the election campaign, but any such expenses beyond £100 must
be paid by his election agent and particulars sent to the returning officer.
Each House of Parliament enjoys certain rights and immunities designed to
protect the House from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties.
These rights apply collectively to each House and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown
for the Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the
beginning of each Parliament. These include freedom of speech in debate;
and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective privilege of the
House. Further privileges include the right of the House to control its own
proceedings (so that it is able, for instance, to exclude strangers if it so wishes);
the right to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for membership and to
declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and the right to penalise those who
commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords include: freedom of speech in debate;
freedom of access to the Sovereign for each peer individually; and the right to
commit for contempt. These privileges are not formally claimed by the Speaker
as in the House of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth
century, and has now become an essential element in the working of the
constitution.
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political parties,
each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a general
1 A register containing the names of all electors, prepared for each constituency and
published yearly by the registration officers, who in England and Wales are the clerks of
local councils and in Scotland are the land valuation assessors.
GOVERNMENT
35
election or a by-election, the parties may put up candidates for election; any
other citizen who wishes may also stand. The electorate then indicates, by its
choice of candidate at the poll on election day, which of the opposing policies
it would like to see put into effect.
In the general election held in June 1970, 72 per cent1 of the electorate
voted, compared with 75 -8 per cent in October 1966. The number and percent¬
age of votes cast for the principal parties is shown in Table 5.
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the
general elections of 1970 and 1966 is shown in Table 6.
TABLE 5
Votes Cast at
General
Elections
1970 and 1966
Party
1970
% of votes
cast
1966
% of votes
cast
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Others®
13 106,965
12,141,676
2,109,268
900,473
46-4
43-0
7-4
3-2
11,418,433
13,057,941
2,327,533
452,689
41-9
47-9
8-6
1-6
0 Others include the Speaker, Republican Labour (Northern Ireland), Communists,
Scottish and Welsh Nationalists, Independents, and members of individual parties,
few of which were represented by more than one candidate.
TABLE 6
Members Elected
at General
Elections in
1970 and 1966
“ When a candidate at the polls the Speaker remains aloof from party issues, standing
as ‘the Speaker seeking re-election’. In the past it was customary to allow the Speaker
an unopposed election in his constituency but this is by no means settled practice and
since the end of the second world war the Speaker has, almost always, been opposed.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the
majority of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority
of supporters in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition,
the leader of the majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign,
usually on the advice of senior ministers; and its most outstanding members
in the House of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial appoint¬
ments on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes
the official Opposition with its own leader2 and its own council of discussion
or ‘shadow Cabinet’; while the members of any other parties or any Indepen¬
dents who have been elected may support the Government or the Opposition
1 The lower percentage vote in 1970, in spite of the higher number of total votes cast,
is accounted for by the increased size of the electorate, mainly due to the reduction of
the voting age to 18.
2 The Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons receives an annual salary of
£4,500 in addition to his parliamentary allowances; in the House of Lords the Leader
of the Opposition receives £2,000 a year.
1970
Conservative and Associates . . 330
Labour .. .. .. .. 287
Liberal . . . . . . .. 6
Republican Labour .. .. 1
Scottish Nationalist . . .. 1
Unity (Northern Ireland) .. 1
Protestant Unionst
(Northern Ireland) .. .. 1
Independents . . .. .. 2
The Speaker® .. .. .. 1
630
1966
Labour .. .. .. .. 363
Conservative and Associates .. 253
Liberal .. . . .. .. 12
Republican Labour .. .. 1
The Speaker . . .. .. 1
630
36 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
according to their party’s or their own view of the policy being debated at
any given time.
The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable
extent upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on
by agreement: that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must govern
and therefore accepts its decisions; and the majority agrees that the minority
should criticise and therefore sets time aside for that criticism to be heard.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House, by the Govern¬
ment Chief Whip in consultation with the Opposition Chief Whip. The Chief
Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to in the House
of Commons when the question of the possibility of finding time for debating
some particular issue is discussed. The direction of the business of the House
is primarily the responsibility of the Leader of the House, and it is his duty
to provide all reasonable facilities for the House to debate matters about which
it is concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include maintaining the voting
strength of their parties by ensuring the attendance of members at important
debates, and conveying upwards to the party leadership the opinions of their
party members. The Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons is
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury; of the other Government Whips,
five hold titular posts as Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, three are
officers of the Royal Household and four are paid Assistant Whips. The Chief
Opposition Whip also receives a salary, as does his counterpart in the House
of Lords, the amounts being £3,750 and £1,500 respectively. The Govern¬
ment Whips in the House of Lords hold offices in the Royal Household and
sometimes act as spokesmen for the Government in debates.
The Functions The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws regulating the life of
of Parliament the community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make
available finance for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds
necessary for the services of the State, and (3) to put relevant facts and issues
before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the ratifi¬
cation of certain international treaties and agreements (in spite of the fact
that the making of treaties is a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the
Government and, in theory, is not subject to parliamentary approval).
Parliamentary Parliamentary procedure is based to a considerable extent on custom and
Procedure precedent, supplemented by standing orders governing details of practice in
each House. The system of debate is much the same in the two Houses: for
instance, every matter is determined upon questions put from the chair or
woolsack and resolved in the affirmative or negative, as the case may be;
members speak from wherever they have been sitting and not from a rostrum;
and members do not read their speeches. The main difference is that in the
House of Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no inherent authority to
check or curtail debate, such matters being decided by the general sense of
the House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give
effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. He must
carefully guard against abuse of procedure or any infringement of minority
rights, and it is his duty to allow or disallow any closure motion (that is, a
motion to end discussion so that the matter may be put to the vote). He has
GOVERNMENT
37
Legislation
certain powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save the
time of the House in various other respects. In case of grave disorder he has
power to adjourn the House or suspend the sitting on his own initiative.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the
Speaker, and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number
of votes is cast, the Speaker, who has no original vote, must give the casting
vote; he does this (if possible) in such a way as to avoid change and leave
the question to be decided on another occasion. The procedure on voting in the
House of Lords is similar to that in the House of Commons, except that
the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote—the House of
Lords being governed by the principle that unless there is a majority in favour
the question is decided in the negative. When the House is sitting judicially
(see pp. 80 and 84) the question is put in such a way that, if the votes are equal,
there is no interference with the order under appeal.
All proceedings of either House are public, except on extremely rare occa¬
sions; the minutes (in the House of Commons called Votes and Proceedings
and in the House of Lords, Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The
Official Report of Parliamentary Debates, Hansard) are published daily.
Legislation can be initiated from either side of either House, but no Bill
involving taxation or the spending of public money can proceed very far
unless the Government agrees to introduce a ‘financial resolution’ to cover it.
This has the effect of giving the Government exclusive rights over a wide
field of legislation, and as a result most public Bills are presented by the
Government. In the House of Commons, however, certain days are set aside
for debating private members’ Bills;1 that is, public Bills introduced by mem¬
bers of the House not holding office in the Government, who have been suc¬
cessful in the ballot, held early in each session, of members wishing to introduce
Bills. Peers can introduce private members’ Bills in the House of Lords at any
time during a session without notice. Also, persons and bodies outside Parlia¬
ment can promote private Bills relating solely to matters of individual,
corporate or local interest.
Bills may originate in either House, unless they deal with finance or represen¬
tation when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule, however,
Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons before the
Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature are frequently
introduced and debated in the Lords before being sent to the Commons.
The process of passing a public Bill is basically the same in the House of
Lords as in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal first reading
on introduction; it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies
between one day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it
is given a second reading after the result of a debate on its general merits or
principles. In the Commons a non-controversial Bill may be referred to a
Second Reading Committee to recommend whether or not it should be taken
as read a second time. After a second reading in the Commons a Bill is referred
for detailed examination either to a standing committee or, if the House so
decides, to the whole House sitting in committee; in the Lords it is referred to
a committee of the whole House. The committee stage is followed by the
report stage, during which previous amendments may be altered and additional
amendments may be suggested and incorporated. In the Commons, if a Bill
1 A private member may also present a Bill after question time on notice given, or seek
leave to introduce a Bill under the ‘Ten Minute Rule’, that is, the standing order which
allows a brief speech proposing and another opposing the introduction of the Bill before
the House decides whether or not to grant leave.
38
Parliamentary
Committees
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
has been considered by a Second Reading Committee or the Scottish Grand
Committee (see p. 39) the report stage may be taken in that committee. The
last stage is the third reading which provides an opportunity for a Bill to be
reviewed in its final form. In the Commons this stage may be taken without
debate unless there is a motion on the Order Paper that the Bill should not be
proceeded with—a procedure of which substantial use is made. After the third
reading, the Bill is sent from the Commons to the Lords or from the Lords to
the Commons (depending on its place of origin), when it enters on the same
course again. Any amendments which the second House makes to the Bill
must be agreed to by the first House, or a compromise reached, before the
Bill becomes law.
In practice, the Lords pass without amendment all financial Bills,1 such as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing taxa¬
tion, and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the Supply
Services from the Consolidated Fund. As a general rule, these Bills are intro¬
duced upon resolutions in the House of Commons; they may be initiated only
by a Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are
sent for Royal Assent, which is given by the Sovereign in Letters Patent and
is declared to both Houses by their Speakers or, occasionally by Royal Com¬
mission. The Sovereign’s power to refuse assent has not been exercised since
the early eighteenth century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; they
are then returned to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent.
However, should any Lords Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would
never reach the Statute Book, for no debating time would be allotted to it—
at any rate until a new government came into power, when it might be re¬
introduced. The Lords, on the other hand, cannot prevent a Bill insisted upon
by the Commons from finally becoming law. In the normal course of events,
they either accept a Bill from the Commons and return it unchanged; or they
revise and improve it by amendments and return it for the consideration of
members of the other House, who frequently agree to the amendments made.
The Lords cannot veto financial measures; nor, in practice, can they delay
any other Commons Bill for more than six months. These limitations on the
powers of the Lords are based on the belief that the principal function of the
modern House (which is a non-elected assembly) in respect of legislation is
to act as a chamber of revision and that its object is to complement the House
of Commons and not to rival it.
In substance, a private Bill goes through the same procedure as a public
Bill but most of the work is done in committee, where proceedings follow a
semi-judicial pattern: the promoters must prove the need for the powers or
privileges that they seek and objections on the part of opposing interests are
heard. Both parties may be represented by counsel.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee, known as a Committee of
the Whole House, to consider Bills in detail, clause by clause, after their
second reading. A Committee of the Whole House is presided over by the
Chairman of Ways and Means or his deputy instead of by the Speaker.
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of which
1 It is provided in the Parliament Act 1911 that all money Bills sent to the House of
Lords one month before the end of the session shall receive the Royal Assent notwith¬
standing, if they are not passed by the Lords without amendment within the month.
BOTANICAL
GARDENS
Botanical gardens
are provided by
local authorities in
most urban areas.
Belfast,
Northern Ireland.
Croydon, Surrey.
Below:
Sheffield,
Yorkshire.
i {
TOPOGRAPHY
Above :
The Pembroke¬
shire coast.
Right:
The Scottish
Highlands.
SOME
BRITISH
BIRDS
Right:
The Greenshank.
Far right:
The Osprey.
The Puffin.
Right:
The Snowy Owl.
Far right:
The Peregrine.
Delegated
Legislation
GOVERNMENT 39
exist to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised and complex
work. They are:
1. Standing Committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons to
deal with public Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the
second reading and the report stages. With the exception of the Scottish
standing and Grand Committees1 (which consider Scottish estimates and
other matters relating exclusively to Scotland as well as Scottish Bills), and
the Welsh Grand Committee2 (for which parallel arrangements exist),
standing committees consist of from 16 to 50 members nominated for each
Bill by the Committee of Selection (a body normally consisting of 11 mem¬
bers drawn from the main parties in the House at the beginning of each
session—the parties being represented in proportion to their numbers in
the House). The procedure of a standing committee is generally similar to
that of a committee of the Whole House.
2. Select Committees, which are appointed to enquire into and report to the
House on special matters. Select Committees are appointed by either House
when the occasion for such an appointment occurs, or at the beginning
of a session (some of them by standing order) to consider all aspects of a
particular subject that may arise during the session. The latter type of
committee is known as a ‘sessional’ committee and includes in the House
of Commons the Committee of Public Accounts, the Expenditure Com¬
mittee, the Committee of Privileges, and the Committees on Nationalised
Industries, Statutory Instruments, Public Petitions and House of Commons
(Services) and in the House of Lords committees on standing orders,
personal Bills, procedure, offices, privileges, leave of absence and the Appeal
and Appellate Committees. In the House of Commons there are also a
number of specialist select committees such as the Committee on Science
and Technology; other committees include the Standing Orders Committee
which has duties relating to private Bills; and joint select committees of both
Houses of Parliament which may be appointed at the instance of either
House.
In addition to the House of Commons committees there are the parliamen¬
tary party organisations: the Conservative and Unionist Members Committee,
popularly known as the 1922 Committee, which consists of the back-bench
membership of the party; and the Parliamentary Labour Party, which is a cor¬
porate body comprising all members of the party in both Houses.
The system of delegated legislation, which is used to relieve pressure on
parliamentary time, empowers ministers and other authorities to regulate
administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. In order to minimise the
risk that powers thus conferred on the executive might supersede or weaken
parliamentary government, they are normally delegated to the Queen in Council
or to authorities directly responsible to Parliament, that is, to Ministers of the
Crown, to government departments for which ministers are responsible, or to
1 There are two Scottish standing committees, one consisting of 30 members representing
Scottish constituencies nominated by the Committee of Selection and not more than
20 other nominated members, and the other of not less than 16 nor more than 50
members nominated by the Committee of Selection, of whom not less than 16 represent
Scottish constituencies. The Scottish Grand Committee comprises all the members for
the Scottish constituencies and not less than ten nor more than 15 others.
2 The Welsh Grand Committee consists of 36 members for constituencies in Wales and
Monmouthshire, with up to 5 other nominated members.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
organisations whose regulations are subject to confirmation or approval by
ministers who thereby become responsible to Parliament for them. More¬
over, the Act which delegates power to issue rules and orders1 generally defines
the precise limits of this power and, in the more important cases, gives
Parliament the right to confirm or annul the orders themselves. Certain Acts
also require direct consultation with organisations which will be affected there¬
by before rules and orders are made. .
The House of Commons is aided in its supervision of delegated legislation
by the Select Committee on Statutory Instruments. The Special Orders Com¬
mittee of the House of Lords examines and reports on all Statutory Instru¬
ments requiring affirmative resolution.
Parliamentary Control of the Government in power is exercised in the final analysis by the
Control ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign either
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a matter of
confidence’; but Parliament has not used its power in this way for many
years. A number of opportunities for a searching examination of government
policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own back-benchers are,
however, provided in parliamentary procedure. Such opportunities include:
1. Question Time, which is an hour of parliamentary time on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday during which ministers, in rotation,
answer questions put to them on matters for which they are responsible.
So much parliamentary time is devoted to scheduled public business that
questions are regarded as one of the best means of eliciting hitherto un¬
published information about the Government’s intentions, as well as an
effective way of airing, and possibly securing some redress of, grievances
brought to the notice of members by their constituents. (Another means
available to members is by way of the Parliamentary Commissioner—see
p. 41.)
2. The right of members to use motions for the adjournment of the House to
initiate discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern.
There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of public business; and
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
Whitsun and the Summer) there is a whole day spent discussing rnatters
for which the Government is responsible raised by private members. More¬
over, if a member wishes to discuss a ‘specific and important matter that
should have urgent consideration’ he may, at the end of Question Time,
ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, he asks the House for leave for it to be put forward.
Leave can be given unanimously, or if 40 or more members support the
motion, or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and the House
(or a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is debated
for three hours, usually on the following day.
o The practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates has ceased to be
a consideration of the financial requirements of the Government and has
become an occasion for the examination, initiated by the Opposition, of
some aspect of the Government’s administrative policy, the cost of which
has been included in the Estimates.
1 Statutory instruments (‘SI’) are made in
Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
accordance with the provisions of the
GOVERNMENT
41
Parliamentary
Commissioner
The Northern
Ireland
Parliament
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of Com¬
mons, in the management of the revenues of the State and payments for the
public service are described in Chapter 15, Finance.
The Parliamentary Commissioner is an officer of the House of Commons,
independent of the executive. His function is to investigate complaints of
maladministration brought to his notice by members of Parliament on behalf
of members of the public. His powers of investigation extend to actions taken
by central government departments in the exercise of their administrative
functions, but not to policy decisions (which are the concern of the Govern¬
ment). Certain administrative actions are also outside his jurisdiction; these
include matters affecting relations with other countries and the activities of
British officials outside the United Kingdom.
In the performance of his duties, the Parliamentary Commissioner has
access to all departmental papers, and reports his findings to the member of
Parliament who presented the case. The Commissioner reports annually to
Parliament and may submit such other reports as he thinks fit. A Select
Committee has been appointed to consider his reports.
The Parliament of Northern Ireland consists of the Sovereign, a Senate and
a House of Commons. The Sovereign is represented in Northern Ireland by
a Governor, who summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament in Her
Majesty’s name; the Senate is composed of an ex officio senator (the Lord
Mayor of Belfast) and 24 senators who hold office for an eight-year term, 12
being elected by the House of Commons every four years under a system of
proportional representation; while the House of Commons consists of 52 mem¬
bers, elected by a system of parliamentary franchise similar to that which
operates in Great Britain. The House continues in existence for a period of
five years unless it is dissolved earlier.
The Northern Ireland Parliament has power to make laws for the peace,
order and good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all matters
except those especially reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom,
which include the Crown or succession to the Crown; foreign relations;
defence; the postal services; the Supreme Court; customs and excise; income
and profits taxes; coinage; standards of weights and measures; trade marks;
submarine cables; wireless telegraphy; aerial navigation; and lighthouses,
buoys and beacons. Under the constitutional practices which have developed
since the passing of the Government of Ireland Act 1920 the United Kingdom
Parliament does not legislate on matters within the powers of the Northern
Ireland Parliament unless the Government of Northern Ireland requests that
this should be done. But, because certain matters have been reserved to the
United Kingdom Parliament, provision was made in the Government of
Ireland Act 1920 for the continued representation of the Northern Ireland
constituencies in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; in accord¬
ance with this provision, 12 members are returned to Westminster.
There is a Parliamentary Commissioner for the Northern Ireland House
of Commons whose status and powers are similar to those of the Parliamentary
Commissioner at Westminster, but who may, additionally, investigate person¬
nel matters in the Civil Service.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent.
Many of its powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner Committee
of the Privy Council, and much of its work was handed over to newly created
government departments, some of which were originally committees of the
Privy Council. The present-day Privy Council is the body on whose advice
and through which the Sovereign exercises his or her statutory, and a number
of prerogative, powers. It also has its own statutory duties, independent of the
power of the Sovereign in Council.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn of the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy Council
(which is retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation
of the Prime Minister as an honour to persons who have reached eminence
in some branch of public affairs in any country of the Commonwealth. There
are usually about 300 Privy Counsellors.
Procedure and The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and is presided
Functions over by the Sovereign or, when the Sovereign is abroad or ill, by Counsellors
of State. Three Privy Counsellors form a quorum, but, as a rule, not fewer
than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy Council is called together
only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her
intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for advising the Sovereign to approve
Orders in Council, of which there are two kinds, differing fundamentally in
constitutional principle: those made by virtue of the royal prerogative, for
example, Orders approving the grant of Royal Charters of Incorporation; and
those made under statutory powers, which are the highest form of delegated
legislation. It is an accepted principle that members of the Privy Council
attending meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not thereby
become personally responsible for the policy upon which the orders are based,
this rests with the minister whose department is responsible for the subject
matter of the Order in question, whether or not he was present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclama¬
tions, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament) of the same validity as Acts of Parlia¬
ment. Its statutory responsibilities include powers, of supervision over the
registering bodies for the medical and allied professions.
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Judicial
Committee
There are a number of Privy Council committees whose meetings differ from
those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally
be present. These committees, which have advisory functions, may be preroga¬
tive committees, such as those which deal with legislative matters sub¬
mitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man and with
applications for the grant of charters of incorporation; or they may be provided
for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the
Scottish universities.
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out
in the Privy Council Office under the control of the Lord President of the
Council.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council derives its appellate jurisdiction
from the right of subjects of the Crown to appeal for redress to the Sovereign
in Council if they believe that the courts of law have failed to do them justice.
It is now the final court of appeal from the courts of the United Kingdom
Composition
Prime Minister
Departmental
Ministers
GOVERNMENT 43
dependencies, from the courts of those independent members of the Common¬
wealth (including certain countries of which Her Majesty is no longer Queen)
which have not elected to discontinue the appeal, from prize courts1 in the
United Kingdom and dependencies, from the courts of the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man, and from certain professional disciplinary committees.
It also has jurisdiction in a limited class of English ecclesiastical appeals.
Appeals come to the Judicial Committee either where a right of appeal has
been specially created—for instance, by statute, Order in Council or Letters
Patent—or by special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice of the
Judicial Committee. They are heard by a board of the committee, whose
members are usually selected from the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors
and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, although other members of the Privy
Council who have held high judicial office (including chief justices and certain
other judges from Commonwealth countries overseas) are asked to sit from
time to time. In theory the Judicial Committee does not deliver judgment.
It advises the Sovereign who acts on its report and approves an Order in
Council to give effect thereto. Its decisions, though not binding on the English
courts, are treated with great respect by them.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being
with the administration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons. There
are, however, always some ministers in the House of Lords, partly because
there is a statutory limit to the number of ministers who may sit and vote in
the Commons while receiving salaries from the Crown, and also because every
Government must be assured of spokesmen to expound and justify its inten¬
tions and its actions to the House of Lords. The Lord Chancellor is always a
member of the House of Lords.
Ministerial salaries range from £14,000 a year for the Prime Minister and
£8,500 for senior ministers to £3,750 for junior ministers. The Prime Minister
and ministers in the House of Commons also have the parliamentary and
secretarial allowances paid to all members of the House. The Lord Chancellor
receives £14,500 a year, including £4,000 as Speaker of the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to time,
both in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The usual
ministerial offices may be classified under the following heads:
The Prime Minister, who is also First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service.
Departmental Ministers, who are in charge of Government departments. The
holders of these offices (most of whom are in the Cabinet, see p. 45) are
known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or they may have a special title,
as in the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer (who is responsible for the
Treasury and a number of sub-departments). In the present administration
there are ten Secretaries of State and three ministers in this category. There
are also seven ministers with the status of a minister in charge of a department
1 Prize courts deal with matters concerning property captured in time of war which, by
grace of the Crown, falls to the forces which assist in the capture.
44
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
The Prime
Minister
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
not represented in the Cabinet, who are responsible, under a Secretary of
State, for a particular part of the activities of the department concerned.1
Non-Departmental Ministers, who include the holders of various traditional
offices—the Lord President of the Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster,2 the Lord Privy Seal, the Paymaster General—and Ministers with¬
out Portfolio. Often these ministers have few or no departmental duties and
are thus available to perform any special duties which the Prime Minister
may wish to entrust to them.
The Lord Chancellor, who is in a special position as a Minister of the Crown
with departmental functions, is also head of the judiciary in England and
Wales. The four Law Officers of the Crown are: for England and Wales, the
Attorney General and the Solicitor General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate
and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State who are appointed to government departments in which the
work is particularly heavy and complex or where it involves frequent travelling
abroad. There are now two Ministers of State in the Home Office and Ministry
of Defence; and one each in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the
Treasury, the Department of Health and Social Security, the Department of
Employment, the Scottish Office, and the Welsh Office.
Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary or,
where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to relieve
their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in parliamentary
debates, answering parliamentary questions, and assisting in departmenta
duties. In certain cases, however, they may be given responsibility, directly
under the head of the department, for specific aspects of the department’s
work. The Parliamentary Secretary of the Treasury and the other Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips.
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during
the eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the holder
of this office derives from his ability to command a majority in Parliament and
from his power to submit his own choice of ministers to the Sovereign and to
obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. Nowadays, by convention,
the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general
business of the Government; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise a
general supervision over departments, settling departmental differences and
approving important departmental decisions where reference to.the Cabinet
is not required. The Prime Minister speaks for the Government in the House
of Commons on the most important topics and answers questions on its
general administration in that House.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include making recommenda-
1 The Minister for Overseas Development in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
the Minister for Trade, the Minister for Industry and the Minister for Aerospace in the
Department of Trade and Industry; the Minister for Housing and Co?faction, the
Minister for Transport Industries and the Minister for Local Government and Develop¬
ment in the Department of the Environment. , . ,
2 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed
by the reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and
is separately administered by the Chancellor.
GOVERNMENT
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
45
tions to the Sovereign for the appointment of Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans and the incumbents of some 200 Crown livings, as well as
for appointments to high judicial offices, such as Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
Lord Chief Justice and Lord Justices of Appeal. He also advises the Crown
on appointments of Privy Counsellors, Lord Lieutenants of counties1 and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower,
and some university appointments which are in the gift of the Crown. The
Prime Minister makes similar recommendations for appointments to various
public boards and institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation,
as well as to various royal and statutory commissions. He likewise makes
recommendations to the Sovereign for the award of many civil honours and
distinctions and of Civil List pensions, and selects the trustees of certain
national museums and institutions.
The Cabinet is composed of a number of ministers2 personally selected by the
Prime Minister. Its origins can be traced back to the informal conferences that
the Sovereign held with his leading ministers, independently of the Privy
Council, during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal
from an active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development
of organised political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the franchise
from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of the policy to
be submitted to Parliament; the supreme control of the national executive
in accordance with the policy agreed by Parliament; and the continuous co¬
ordination and delimitation of the authority of government departments. The
exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the Cabinet is a
group of party representatives, depending for its existence upon the support
of a majority in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential.
Its members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publica¬
tion of Cabinet as well as of other State papers (although after they have been
in existence for 30 years they may be made available for inspection in the
Public Record Office) and a resigning minister desiring to make a statement
involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions should first obtain the permission
of the Sovereign through the Prime Minister. From a practical point of view,
this secrecy is essential in the interests of full and frank discussion, which can
be maintained only if there is no risk of publicity for every statement made and
every point conceded.
In normal times the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week
during parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is
not sitting. Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any
time if a matter urgently requiring discussion should arise. To keep the
amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a great
deal of the work of the Cabinet is carried on through the committee system,
which involves the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet com¬
mittee or to an ad hoc committee composed of the ministers primarily con¬
cerned. The committee then considers the matter in detail and either disposes
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia!
2 At September 1971 this was 17.
46
Ministerial
Responsibility
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of it or reports upon it to the Cabinet with recommendations for action.
Ministers not in the Cabinet are called to attend its meetings when matters
affecting their departments are under discussion; they may also be members
of Cabinet committees. _ ,
The Secretary of the Cabinet and senior officials of the Cabinet Office attend
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate. A record is kept of
the conclusions and of the main points made in discussion.
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which
ministers share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual
responsibility of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the
middle of the nineteenth century, means that the Cabinet is bound to offer
unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold
identical views on a given subject. Consequently it means that the policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government
as a whole. In principle, once the Government’s policy on a particular matter
has been decided, each minister is expected to support it, unless he chooses
to resign, as he is free to do if he cannot agree with his colleagues on a matter
of general policy or on a single major issue.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department
means that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its
acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of admini¬
stration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be
criticised in Parliament, whether he is personally responsible or not. Since
the majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, they are
available to answer questions and to defend themselves against criticism m
person. Departmental ministers who are in the House of Lords must be
represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually a Minister of State or a Parliamentary Secretary.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they will usually wish to consult
their colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. Any
decision by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way
of bringing government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament dis¬
courages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to govern¬
ment policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation. They may,
and frequently do, work with and through local authorities, statutory boards
and government-sponsored organisations operating under varying degrees of
government control.
A few departments have existed for over 200 years. Many more have come
into existence during the past half-century to match the widening scope o
government activity. The election of a party of a different political complexion
does not necessarily affect the number or general functions of government
departments, although a radical change in policy is usually accompanied by
some organisational change. ,
The work of some departments, for instance, the Board of Customs and
GOVERNMENT
Internal
Organisation
Advisory Bodies
47
Excise, covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments, for
instance, the Department of Employment, cover Great Britain (England and
Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland); others, such as the Depart¬
ment of Health and Social Security, the Department of Education and Science
and the Department of the Environment are mainly concerned with affairs in
England, and there are separate departments for Scotland and Northern Ire¬
land. There is also a separate department with responsibility for affairs in
Wales.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in
which questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent
official, and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament.
For instance, Treasury ministers are responsible for a number of departments,
including Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, the Central Office of Information,
the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Department of the Government
Actuary, the Royal Mint, the National Debt Office, the Public Works Loan
Board, and the Department for National Savings. The staff of departments are
all members of the Civil Service, a body of Crown servants recruited into the
service as a career.
Departments differ in size and in the volume, type and complexity of their
work. Since each department makes its own arrangements for discharging
its duties there are variations in internal organisation. Most departments, how¬
ever, have certain features in common: for instance, the minister of a major
department is likely to have at the head of his officials a permanent secretary
(known as the Permanent Under-Secretary of State in those departments
where the minister is a Secretary of State), one or more deputy secretaries,
and a varying number of under-secretaries and assistant secretaries. Usually
major departments also have a principal finance officer and a principal establish¬
ments and organisation officer. A number of establishment divisions have their
own organisation and methods (‘O and M’) branch, the members of which act
in an advisory capacity. Many departments also have their own legal advisers
or solicitors, and their own information divisions.
Some departments maintain a regional organisation, and some that have
direct contact with the public throughout the country also have local offices.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or com¬
mittees (several hundred in all) which undertake research and collect informa¬
tion, mainly to enable ministers to ascertain informed opinion before coming
to a decision involving a legislative or executive act. In some cases there is a
statutory obligation on a minister to consult a standing committee, but usually
advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister concerned be¬
cause he feels the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according
to the nature of the work involved. Some are expert committees; others include
civil servants and representatives of varying interests and professions, for
instance, industrialists, trade unionists, university and industrial scientists,
educationists, lawyers and local government councillors and officers.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are ad hoc committees
which the Government frequently sets up to examine and make recommenda¬
tions on specific matters. For certain important enquiries Royal Commissions,
whose members are selected on the grounds of their wide experience and
diverse knowledge, may be appointed (by Royal Warrant). Royal Commissions
examine written and oral evidence from government departments and other
48
Distribution of
Functions
The Cabinet
Office
The Civil
Service
Department
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interested organisations and individuals, and on this evidence submit recom¬
mendations. The Government may accept the recommendations in whole or
in part, or it may decide to take no further action or to delay action. Enquiries
may also be undertaken by departmental committees, appointed by the head
of the appropriate department.
The following pages provide an outline of the principal functions of the main
government departments. They are arranged in alphabetical order, except for
the Cabinet Office, the Civil Service Department, and the Treasury (which,
in view of their central position, are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern
Ireland departments (which are grouped at the end of the section), further
information on the work of departments is given in later sections under the
relevant subjects headings.
The Cabinet Office is in essence a secretariat, headed by the Secretary of the
Cabinet, serving ministers collectively. It operates under the direction of the
Prime Minister as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the highest
level. Its functions include circulating the memoranda and other documents
required for Cabinet or Cabinet committee business, preparing the agenda for
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees, recording their discussions and
circulating the minutes, keeping in touch with the progress of action on deci¬
sions and safeguarding the security of documents. The Cabinet Office also
includes an historical section, which is responsible for the preparation of
Official Histories of the War. . . .
Attached to the Cabinet Office, and an integral part of it, is the Central
Statistical Office which is charged with the collection from departments of
statistics relating to the national economy, their analysis and their preparation
as an agreed body of statistics to assist the Government in formulating its
economic and financial policy. In addition, a Central Policy Review Staff has
been appointed to work, under the supervision of the Prime Minister, with and
through departments to assist Cabinet Ministers collectively by providing
them with an assessment of Government policies and programmes as a
whole.
The Civil Service Department is under the control of the Prime Minister as
Minister for the Civil Service, with responsibility for the day-to-day work
of the department delegated to a senior minister assisted by a Parliamentary
Secretary. The department’s Permanent Secretary is also the official head of the
Home Civil Service. . ... G
The department is responsible for personnel management in the Civil Ser¬
vice which includes policy and central arrangements for recruitment, training
(including the Civil Service College), promotion, general career management
welfare and retirement. It is also responsible for the size and deployment of
manpower, pay, pensions, and conditions of service in the Civil Service, and
with the co-ordination of pay and pension policies in the public sector as a
whole. The department’s further responsibilities include the development and
application of new systems and techniques in the field of management and
administration; the provision of a central management services consultancy
for the Civil Service as a whole to deal with organisation and methods and
operational research; central planning and co-ordination of data processing
in Government; project appraisal; and the promotion of technical developments
of significance to other Government departments.
GOVERNMENT
The Civil
Service
Commission
Parliamentary
Counsel
Office
The Treasury
The Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
49
The Civil Service Commission, which is responsible for the recruitment of
permanent civil servants, and for assigning candidates to the various depart¬
ments forms part of the Civil Service Department, but specific and formal
arrangements have been made to ensure its independence and impartiality in
the performance of its task.
The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is responsible for the drafting of all
Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions of Bills exclusively affecting
Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s Department. The Office
drafts all financial and other parliamentary motions and amendments moved by
the Government during the passage of Bills; it advises departments on ques¬
tions of parliamentary procedure; and attends sittings (and committees) in
both Houses. It also drafts subordinate legislation when specially instructed,
and advises the Government on legal, parliamentary and constitutional ques¬
tions falling within its special experience.
Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the
First Lord of the Treasury (now always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor
of the Exchequer and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners
never meet as a board and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, assisted by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, the Financial
Secretary and a Minister of State. There is also a Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury, who is the Chief Government Whip in the House of Commons.
The Treasury is the government department primarily responsible for the
development of Britain’s overall economic strategy. Its work is carried by three
main groups: the Public Sector Group which has the broad function of con¬
trolling the level of public expenditure and ensuring that resources are effi¬
ciently used within the public sector; the Finance Group which is responsible
for all questions affecting home and overseas finance and monetary policy;
and the National Economy Group which is responsible for the preparation of
short-term and medium-term economic forecasts and the co-ordinated eco¬
nomic strategy based on these forecasts; and for the surveillance of certain
areas of economic policy administered primarily by other departments—
namely, fiscal and industrial policies.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible in England
and Wales for administering government policy for the agriculture, horticul¬
ture and fishing industries. Its functions include the administration of various
support schemes which, together with a system of import levies, provide condi¬
tions under which the efficiency and productivity of these industries can be
improved. It also administers schemes such as those designed for the control
and eradication of animal and plant diseases and for the improvement and
drainage of agricultural land; and it exercises responsibilities relating to applied
research and development. In addition the Ministry is concerned with the
quality of food and food hygiene, including its compositional standards, and
labelling and advertising; and it has certain responsibilities for ensuring public
health standards in the production and handling of basic foods in cargoes,
stores and slaughterhouses.
A number of the functions relating to agriculture and fisheries in Wales and
Monmouthshire are the joint responsibility of the Minister and the Secretary
of State for Wales. In regard to the operational control of certain diseases of
animals the Ministry’s responsibilities extend to Scotland.
The Ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
countries and participates in certain of the activities of a number of inter¬
national organisations concerned with agriculture, fisheries and food, such as
the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, and the Organisa¬
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The Board of The primary work of the Board of Customs and Excise is to collect and
Customs and administer the customs and excise duties imposed from time to time in the
Excise annual Finance Acts or by other legislation, and to advise the Chancellor ot
the Exchequer on any matters connected with them. The Board is also respon¬
sible for preventing and detecting evasion of the revenue laws.
The Board undertakes, for other departments, a wide range of non-revenue
agency work, for instance, the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on
the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods, exchange currency
control, and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade statistics from
customs import and export documents.
The Ministry of The Ministry of Defence is the government department responsible for defence
Defence policy and for the control and administration of the three fighting Services—
Navy, Army and Air Force. The Secretary of State for Defence is in charge of
the department, assisted by a Minister of State for Defence who represents the
Secretary of State in the House of Commons and deputises for him on all
occasions in his absence. There is also a Minister of State for Defence Procure¬
ment responsible, under the Secretary of State, for the activities of the
Defence Procurement Organisation and for matters in the field of Services
operational requirements. Three Parliamentary Under-Secretaries are severally
responsible for each of the three Services.
The Meteorological
Office
The Meteorological Office is responsible for the provision of meteorological
services for the armed forces (other than the Royal Navy), civil aviation, the
merchant navy and fishing fleet, public and local authorities, commerce,
industry and the general public. It provides forecasts for transmission by radio
and television, for publication by the press and for use on the Post Office s
automatic telephone weather service. There are weather centres in London,
Glasgow, Manchester, Southampton and Newcastle upon Tyne to deal with
industrial, commercial and popular demands.
The Meteorological Office is also responsible for research in meteorology
and geophysics, and for the maintenance of the National Meteorological
Library.
The Department The Department of Education and Science promotes the education of the
of Education people of England and Wales and fosters the progress of civil science both
and Science in Britain and in collaboration with other nations. The work of the depart¬
ment is organised in branches severally concerned with schools (includ¬
ing special and nursery schools, direct grant and independent schools) in
England; further education (including vocational, recreational ^and adult
education and the youth services), teachers and kindred subjects in England
and Wales; and with the universities, civil science and support for the arts
throughout Great Britain. The department also has responsibilities relating to
national library policy, including liaison with the National Lending Library
for Science and Technology, and to the administration of the Victoria and
Albert Museum and the Science Museum. Specialist branches advise on health,
building and planning (including educational research and statistics), and law,
and there is an information service. The Secretary of State for Education and
GOVERNMENT
The Department
of Employment
The Department
of the
Environment
5i
Science is assisted by two Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. Depart¬
mental responsibility for the Government’s arts policy is the concern of the
Paymaster General in his capacity of ‘Minister for the Arts’.
The department’s responsibilities for the development of primary, secondary
and other education include dealing with the supply, training and superannua¬
tion of teachers, the building of new schools and other institutions, the school
health service, the special educational treatment of handicapped children, and
the provision of school milk and meals. In these matters the department works
in co-operation with local education authorities whose duty it is to secure
adequate facilities for all forms of education in their areas. Its relations with
the universities are conducted through the University Grants Committee.
Its activities concerning civil science are discharged through five research
councils: the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural Research Council,
the Natural Environment Research Council, the Social Science Research
Council, and the Science Research Council. On questions of scientific policy
the Council for Scientific Policy advises the Secretary of State.
The Department of Employment is generally responsible for the efficient use
of Britain’s manpower. Its functions include identifying industries and regions
where manpower is, or is likely to become, under-employed and areas where
there are persistent shortages, and co-operating with other government depart¬
ments on general employment policy, including the distribution of industry
and the future supply of, and demand for, scientific and technical manpower.
The department has a national employment exchange service, and a manpower
and productivity service which is charged with promoting higher productivity
and efficiency in industry.
The department is also active in the promotion of good industrial relations
and has long-standing powers relating to conciliation, arbitration and investi¬
gation in industrial disputes. Its other functions relate to the development of
industrial training, the employment aspects of race relations policy, wages and
terms and conditions of employment, the move towards equal pay for women,
redundancy payments, safety, health and welfare in industry, and the presenta¬
tion overseas of Government policy on labour matters. The department in
addition undertakes agency work for other government departments in con¬
nection with the payment of unemployment and other social security benefits,
and the repayment of income tax to unemployed workers, and certain work on
the issue of passports.
The Department of the Environment has been set up, under a Secretary of
State, to assume responsibility in England for the range of functions affecting
the physical environment in which people live and work, which were formerly
divided between the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Ministry
of Public Building and Works, and the Ministry of Transport. The Secretary
of State for the Environment is assisted by three ministers.
1. The Minister for Housing and Construction is responsible for housing
programmes and finance; building regulations; new towns; relations with
the building and civil engineering industries; government accommodation
and supplies at home and overseas; building for the armed forces, the Post
Office, research establishments, and the prison service; and for royal parks,
royal palaces, and ancient monuments.
2. The Minister for Transport Industries is responsible for ports, general
policy on the nationalised transport industries; railways, inland waterways,
52
Ordnance
Survey
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the Channel Tunnel; road haulage; buses; the international aspects of
inland transport; road and vehicle safety; driver and vehicle licensing; and
sport and recreation.
The Minister for Local Government and Development is responsible for
local government; regional, land use and transport planning; the country¬
side and conservation; roads; water; sewerage; and refuse disposal.
The Department of the Environment is also concerned with the co-ordina¬
tion of work on the prevention of environmental pollution, with special res¬
ponsibility for clean air and anti-noise functions, and research into roads,
building, hydraulics, water pollution, fire prevention and the uses of timber.
The Ordnance Survey, which is administered by the Department of the
Environment, but is responsible for the management of its own day-to-day
affairs, is in charge of the survey and mapping of Great Britain—the maps
resulting from the survey ranging in scale from 1:1,250 to 1:1,250,000. ihe
Survey also undertakes a considerable amount of agency work in compilation,
drawing and printing for other departments, particularly the Ministry of
Defence and the Land Registry.
The Foreign
and
Commonwealth
Office
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office, under the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, provides, mainly through Diplomatic
Missions, the means of communication between the British Government an
other governments and international governmental organisations for the dis¬
cussion and negotiation of all matters, including economic issues, falling within
the field of international relations. In particular the department is responsible
for alerting the British Government to the implications of developments over¬
seas- for protecting British interests overseas, including commercial interests;
for protecting British citizens abroad; and for explaining British policies to,
and wherever possible cultivating friendly relations with, governments and
peoples overseas. The department is also responsible for the discharge of
British responsibilities in the Associated States (mainly for defence and external
affairs) and dependent territories. In the dependent territories, each of which
has its own internal administration, the British Government is finally respons¬
ible for good government and for the relations between these territories and
other countries.
Overseas
Development
Administration
The Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary is also responsible for the Overseas
Development Administration (ODA), which manages the British Govern¬
ment’s overseas aid programme. The day-to-day administration of the ODA
is in charge of a Minister for Overseas Development.
The Forestry
Commission
The Forestry Commission has its own annual Vote in the Estimates. As the
national forestry enterprise, it is charged primarily with the production of
timber for industry, and as secondary objectives, with the provision of recrea¬
tional facilities, wildlife management and with paying due regard to the beauty
and amenity of the countryside. As the forest authority it is responsible for
administering the grant scheme to private woodland owners, forestry resear<J“’
the implementation of forestry legislation (mainly concerning plant health),
and for licensing the felling of growing trees. _ r a • 1
The ministers responsible for forest policy are the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the Secretary o
State for Wales.
GOVERNMENT
The Department
of Health and
Social Security
The Home
Office
The Central
Office of
Information
53
The Department of Health and Social Security, under the Secretary of State
for Social Services, is the government department responsible (in England)
for the administration of the National Health Service, the welfare services
provided by local authorities for the elderly and handicapped, welfare foods
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene. Throughout Great
Britain it is responsible for the payment of benefits and collection of contri¬
butions under the national insurance and industrial injuries schemes and the
payment of family allowances. The department is concerned in malting recipro¬
cal social security arrangements with other countries, and represents the
United Kingdom on the World Health Organisation.
Through its Supplementary Benefits Commission the department is respon¬
sible for determining awards of non-contributory benefits and Family Income
Supplements, for reception centres, for certain refunds of the selective employ¬
ment tax, and for assessing the means of people applying for legal aid. The
department also has responsibilities in connection with pensions and welfare
services (including in some cases the provision of medical and surgical treat¬
ment) for war pensioners in the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands and
the Isle of Man, and, through its various agencies, for United Kingdom war
pensioners living in other countries.
The head of the Home Office is the Secretary of State for the Home Depart¬
ment (the Home Secretary), who is entrusted with all the responsibilities of
national administration which have not been especially assigned by law or
convention to another minister. The Home Secretary is the channel of com¬
munication between the Sovereign and her subjects, and between the United
Kingdom Government and the Governments of Northern Ireland, the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are: the main¬
tenance of law and order; the police service; the prison service; the treatment
of offenders, including juvenile offenders; the probation and after-care service;
the organisation of magistrates’ courts; the introduction of legislation on
criminal justice; the criminal injuries compensation scheme; the fire service;
civil defence; the law relating to the conduct of parliamentary and local govern¬
ment elections; public safety; immigration control of aliens and Common¬
wealth citizens; naturalisation of aliens; community relations; and general
questions and individual cases relating to British nationality and citizenship
of the United Kingdom and Colonies.
Other matters for which the Home Office is responsible include: receiving
and submitting addresses and petitions to the Sovereign and preparing pre¬
sentations to Parliament; preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal
proceedings for the bestowal of honours; advising the Crown on the exercise
of the prerogative of mercy; making and receiving requests for the extradition
of criminals; sanctioning by-laws made by local authorities in so far as they
relate to law and order’ and ‘good governance’; granting licences for scientific
experiments on animals; ordering the exhumation and removal of bodies;
supervising the control of explosives, firearms and dangerous drugs; deciding
general policies on the law of liquor licensing and of shops; and general policy
on the law relating to music and dancing.
The Central Office of Information is a common service department which
produces information and publicity material, and supplies publicity services
required by other government departments. In the United Kingdom, it con¬
ducts government press, television and poster advertising, produces booklets,
The Board of
Inland Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Departments
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
leaflets, films, television material, exhibitions, photographs and other visual
material, and distributes departmental press notices. For the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office it supplies British information posts overseas with press,
radio and television material, booklets, magazines, reference services, films,
exhibitions, photographs, display and reading-room material; and manages
schemes for promoting the overseas sale of British books, periodicals and
newspapers. It is responsible for British pavilions at world exhibitions, such
as Expo 70 and for other exhibition services on behalf of the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office. It also organises tours (other than those sponsored by
the British Council—see p. 336) for visitors officially invited to Britain. There
are nine regional information offices in England, which provide services for
the home departments and assist the overseas services by the provision of
material and in arranging tours for overseas visitors, and similar services
are supplied on an agency basis by the information staffs of the Scottish and
Welsh Offices and of the Government of Northern Ireland. As a non-ministenal
department, the Central Office of Information is administratively responsible
to Treasury ministers, but the ministers whose departments it serves are
responsible for the policy expressed in its work.
The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax
and surtax, corporation tax, capital gains tax, stamp duty, estate duty and
certain other direct taxes, and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any
matters connected with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of real
property for such purposes as compensation for compulsory purchase, local
rates in England and Wales, and estate duty; and it collects tithe redemption
annuities.
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales (the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General) are responsible for the legal advice given to the
Government; in addition, they have a wide range of duties in relation to the
courts. The Attorney General, who is the senior Law Officer, is the Crown s
representative in the courts, and legal proceedings for the enforcement of
public rights and on behalf of the interests of charity are conducted m his
name; he is assisted by the Solicitor General, who is the junior Law Officer.
The Attorney General’s consent is required to the institution of criminal
proceedings for certain offences, and the Director of Public Prosecutions is
subject to his superintendence. The Queen’s Proctor, who has certain duties
connected with the operation of the divorce laws, also exercises his functions
under the direction of the Attorney General. The Solicitor General is subject
to the authority of the Attorney General, with the same rights and duties. 1 he
Law Officers, who are appointed from among the leading members of the
English Bar and are always members of the House of Commons, are assisted
by a small professional staff.
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an
eminent ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar and carrying Cabinet rank.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian
of the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different
offices and branches which are mainly concerned with legal practice and
procedure. He controls the personnel and machinery of the courts of law
through his patronage, through administrative powers conferred by the Judi¬
cature Act 1925 and other Acts, and through his membership of the Supreme
Court and Matrimonial Causes Rules Committees and his responsibility tor
GOVERNMENT
The Department
for National
Savings
The Paymaster
General’s Office
The Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
The Ministry of
Posts and
Telecom¬
munications
55
that of the county courts; he appoints the justices of the peace and recommends
to the Crown other appointments to the judiciary in England and Wales; and
he is the minister responsible for the Judge Advocate General’s Department,
which advises the Secretary of State for Defence and the Defence Council
on legal matters arising out of the administration of military law, and which
reviews the proceedings of army and air force courts martial (see p. 89).
In addition, the Lord Chancellor is a leading member of the Judicial Com¬
mittee of the Privy Council; he appoints the members of the Law Commission
for England and Wales, the chairmen of certain administrative tribunals in
England and Wales, and (with the Secretary of State for Scotland) the members
of the Council on Tribunals; and he is responsible for the administration of
the Land Registry (which maintains a State register of title to land), the Public
Trustee Office (which may act as the executor or administrator of the estate
of a deceased person or as a trustee under a will or settlement) and the Public
Record Office (which preserves, and provides access to the national archives).
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
the National Savings Bank, National Savings Certificates, Premium Savings
Bonds, Government Bonds and stocks on the National Savings Stock register
and for the new contractual savings scheme, SAYE. The head of the depart¬
ment is the Director of Savings, who has assumed the responsibility for national
savings previously held by the Postmaster General, and is answerable to the
Treasury.
The Paymaster General s Office acts generally as a banker for government
departments other than the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and
Excise, for which separate arrangements exist. Money granted by Parliament
is transferred (in such sums as may be required from day to day) from the
Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster General at the Bank of
England. Most departmental payments are made by means of payable orders
drawn on the Paymaster General’s Office; these are similar to cheques, and
their recipients obtain payments through the commercial banks, whose accounts
at the Bank of England are in turn reimbursed by the Paymaster General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many public
service pensions, including those of civil servants, teachers, and members of
the National Health Service, as well as the retired pay and pensions of officers
of the armed forces, their widows and dependants.
The Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, whose director is also the
Registrar General for England and Wales, is concerned with the regulation of
civil marriages, the registration of births, marriages and deaths in England and
Wales, and control of the registration services. Its work also includes the pre¬
paration and publication of reports on vital medical and demographic statistics,
taking the periodical census of the population, and, through the social survey
division, conducting research into the attitudes and circumstances of indivi¬
duals through direct contact with sample members of the general public or of
particular groups.
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is responsible to Parliament
for the Post Office. He also has responsibilities for broad questions of national
broadcasting policy and may issue directions to the British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration and to the Independent Television Authority on technical and other
matters.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry has regulatory control of radio transmission and reception; it
is also responsible for the issue of radio operating licences and the sale (through
the Post Office) of television broadcast receiving licences. .
The department represents the United Kingdom in the Universal Postal
and International Telecommunication Unions and all related inter-govern¬
mental bodies.
The Department
of the
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number of
government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his department
include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and drafting subordinate
legislation, representing other departments in court, and giving general advice
on the interpretation and application of the law. The department undertakes
a considerable amount of conveyancing connected with the transfer of real
property, administers residuary estates (estates undisposed of by will) of cer¬
tain deceased persons, and deals with the outstanding property and rights of
dissolved companies. The Statutory Publications Office is staffed and controlled
by the Treasury Solicitor, who reports annually on its work to the Statute
Law Committee (a body appointed by the Lord Chancellor from among the
judiciary and legal profession in England and Scotland).
Some government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury
Solicitor for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a proportion
of the work and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice and, often,
for litigation and conveyancing; others, whose administrative work is based
on or deals with a code of specialised law or involves a great deal of legal wor ,
have their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also the Queen’s Proctor.
The Stationery
Office
fhe Stationery Office, responsible to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is the
:entral purchasing organisation responsible for supplying the home and over-
,eas public service with paper, printing, binding, books, periodicals, office
lupplies, and office machinery (including computers and automatic data pro¬
cessing equipment). The department also provides services, such as duplicating,
iddressing, photocopying, micro-copying, distribution, automatic data pro¬
cessing and repair of office machinery. .
As publisher for Parliament and the Government, the Stationery Office
produces a wide range of printed matter in its eight printing works and through
private printers under contract. It operates five binding works which undertake
the repair of manuscripts from national archives. Official publications are so
by Stationery Office bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Manchester, Belfast,
Bristol, Cardiff and Birmingham, and through agents in Britain and overseas.
The Stationery Office is also the United Kingdom agent for Canadian and
Italian government publications, and for those of the principal Internationa
and European inter-governmental organisations. The Controller is Queen s
Printer of Acts of Parliament, and the copyright of all British Government
documents is vested in him.
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
Phe Department of Trade and Industry, under a Secretary of State (who also
bolds the historic office of the President of the Board of Trade), combines
those functions (other than defence procurement, research, and development
in the aviation field) previously exercised by the Board of Trade and the Minis¬
try of Technology. The department’s main objective is to assist British indus¬
try and commerce to improve their economic and technological strength and
competitiveness by establishing a general framework of requirements, incen-
The Welsh
Office
SCOTLAND
GOVERNMENT 57
tives and restraints within which firms can operate to their own individual
advantage. Its operations, for which the Secretary of State is finally responsible,
are carried out in three functional wings, each under a minister, assisted by a
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State. Its work is concerned with the
development of general industrial and commercial policy and Government
relations with industry, including privately owned manufacturing industries,
the service industries and those nationalised industries for which the
department is responsible (electricity, gas, coal, atomic energy, steel, airlines
and airports); the administration of legislation affecting industry and com¬
merce, including insurance and company law, consumer protection, standards,
weights and measures, patents and trade marks; overseas commercial relations
and exports, including negotiations for British membership of the European
Economic Community, export promotion services, export credit, and tariff
questions; regional industrial development, including regional advisory
services to industry, investment grants and tourism; policy on monopolies,
mergers, and restrictive practices; energy policy; civil aviation questions, in¬
cluding measures for the development of civil aviation, research relating to air
navigation, the design, development and production of civil aircraft and the
promotion of safety and efficiency in their use; and policy towards the aero¬
space industry and towards civil aerospace recearch, developments and pro¬
jects.
The Secretary of State for Wales has full responsibility in Wales for ministerial
functions relating to child care, health, housing, local government, primary and
secondary education, town and country planning, new towns, water and
sewerage, roads, forestry, tourism, national parks and historic buildings, and
shared responsibility for the administration of urban grants to areas of acute
social deprivation, and (with the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food)
for agriculture in Wales. He has, in addition, a general oversight of government
policy in Wales, and certain responsibilities relating to the National Library
and the National Museum. The Welsh Office maintains close and continuous
working relationships with the government departments mainly concerned
with economic and social planning through the Welsh Planning Board and
Welsh Council.
The Welsh Office is centred in Cardiff; there is also a small ministerial
office in London.
The Secretary of State is responsible in Scotland for a wide range of functions
which in England and Wales are divided among a number of departmental
ministers. He is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State and three
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law
Officers.
The Secretary of State’s statutory functions are discharged by four main
departments of equal status (the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
for Scotland, the Scottish Development Department, the Scottish Education
Department, and the Scottish Home and Health Department), each under a
Secretary responsible to the Secretary of State.
The responsibilities of the Secretary of State for the preparation and imple¬
mentation of the economic plans for Scotland are discharged through the
Permanent Under-Secretary of State and other Scottish Office staff with the
advice of the Scottish Economic Council and the assistance of the Scottish
Economic Planning Board and the officials of the departments principally
concerned.
58
The Department
of Agriculture
and Fisheries
for Scotland
The Scottish
Development
Department
The Scottish
Education
Department
The Scottish
Home and
Health
Department
Other
Administrative
Departments
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The day-to-day administration of the departments is conducted in Edin¬
burgh, but each department has representatives in London for liaison and
parliamentary duties. The London office is generally known as the Scottish
Office, the term also used to describe all Scottish administration for which the
Secretary of State is responsible.
The Scottish Ministers are advised and assisted (particularly on questions
with which more than one of the departments are concerned or which fall
outside the province of any of them) by the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State.
The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland has a general re¬
sponsibility for, and in most cases administers, government measures for the
promotion and development of farming in Scotland. It also has responsibilities
for the oversight and protection of the Scottish inshore, deep sea and fresh¬
water fisheries, and functions relating to certain harbours.
The Scottish Development Department is concerned with a number of services
affecting the physical development of Scotland, such as town and country
planning, Highland and rural development, new towns, housing, roads, water
supplies and sewerage, coast protection, flood prevention, building standards
and the prevention of river and air pollution (most of which are administered
locally by town and county councils); with passenger transport by road and
sea; and with the policy of the Electricity Boards in Scotland. The department
is also responsible for general policy in regard to local government organisation
and finance.
The Scottish Education Department is responsible for supervising the
administration of the Education (Scotland) Acts and for guiding the develop¬
ment of public education in Scotland in all its forms. The department s
functions include: the regulation of the training of teachers and of teachers’
salaries and the administration of the Teachers (Superannuation) (Scotland)
Regulations; the control and distribution of specific Exchequer grants in aid
of educational expenditure by voluntary bodies; the award of students’ allow¬
ances to those taking full-time courses at universities and colleges of education
and comparable courses at other institutions; and general supervision over
local authority social work services exercised through the Social Work Services
Group. The department is also concerned with the development of the arts
in Scotland, having responsibility in this connection for the administration
of the National Galleries of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum (including
the Scottish United Services Museum), the National Museum of Antiquities
of Scotland, and the National Library of Scotland.
The Scottish Home and Health Department is responsible for: (a) the central
administration of functions relating to law and order; and (b) the administra¬
tion of the National Health Service in Scotland. Under (a) the Department is
concerned with the police service, criminal justice, legal aid and the services
needed by the courts, and is directly responsible for the administration of penal
institutions. It is also the central authority in Scotland for the fire service,
for civil defence, and for legislation concerning shops, theatres, cinemas and
licensed premises.
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish
departments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the
Secretary of State. Such departments include the Scottish Information Office,
GOVERNMENT
The Law
Officers and
Legal
Departments
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The Prime
Minister’s
Department
The Ministry of
Commerce
59
which undertakes information services on behalf of the Scottish departments
and, to some extent, for Great Britain departments in Scotland, and acts as
the agent in Scotland of the Central Office of Information; the Department
of the Registrar-General for Scotland (the General Register Office); the
Scottish Record Office; and the Department of the Registers of Scotland.
There are also Scottish branches of the Great Britain and United Kingdom
departments under the direction of controllers, who are responsible for ensuring
that the execution in Scotland of the policy and procedure of their departments
is in accordance with Scottish conditions and needs.
The Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the
Solicitor General for Scotland) are the chief legal advisers to the Government
on Scottish questions and the principal representatives of the Crown for the
purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is also closely concerned
with questions of legal policy and administration and is himself responsible
for the institution and direction of all prosecutions on indictment in Scotland,
and the control of summary prosecutions in the sheriff court.
In some of this work the Lord Advocate is assisted by the Lord Advocate’s
Department, the members of which also act as legal advisers on Scottish
questions to certain government departments who have no Scottish legal
adviser of their own. The work relevant to prosecutions is centred in the
Crown Office in Edinburgh.
The Parliamentary Draftsmen for Scotland, incorporated in the Lord
Advocate’s Department, are responsible to the minister concerned and to the
Law Officers for the drafting of government Bills affecting the Law of Scotland.
Executive and administrative powers in matters under the jurisdiction of the
Northern Ireland Parliament are vested in the Crown, and exercised by the
Governor, acting on the advice of the Northern Ireland Cabinet, through a
number of departments. Each of the eight ministries (Agriculture, Commerce,
Community Relations, Development, Education, Finance, Health and Social
Services, and Home Affairs) is under the control of a minister responsible to
the Northern Ireland Parliament. Other Northern Ireland departments in¬
clude the Supplementary Benefits Commission, and the Exchequer and Audit
Department and there is an Office of the Agent of the Government of Northern
Ireland, which carries out liaison duties in Great Britain to promote trade,
commerce, and the tourist industry and to act as the main agent in Great
Britain of the Northern Ireland Government’s publicity services.
Certain of the Northern Ireland departments, including the Ministries of
Home Affairs, Education and Agriculture, have functions indicated by their
titles. The other departments have duties of a varied nature, which are sum¬
marised below.
The Prime Minister’s Department includes the Cabinet Secretariat and the
Information Service. The Cabinet Secretariat corresponds with the Govern¬
ment of the United Kingdom on major matters of policy and acts as a channel
of communication between the Governor and the Cabinet and between the
Cabinet and departments.
The Ministry of Commerce is concerned with industrial information and
statistical services; the progress of industrial production and trade in Northern
Ireland; the development of existing enterprises and the attraction of new
ones; and the administration of schemes of financial assistance to industry.
Ministry of
Community
Relations
The Ministry of
Development
The Ministry of
Finance
The Ministry of
Health and
Social Services
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The department also has responsibilities in relation to electricity and gas under¬
takings; harbours; the tourist trade; the regulation and inspection of mines
and quarries; mineral development; scientific development and the provision
of scientific and technical services to industrial and commercial undertakings,
local authorities and other Government departments; weights and measures;
the registration of companies and friendly societies; and the administration
of the Assurance Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance Acts.
There is a close association between the Ministry and the Department of
Trade and Industry in Great Britain.
The Ministry of Community Relations is the department responsible for
formulating and sponsoring policies for the improvement of community rela¬
tions in Northern Ireland, and for assisting in the administration of the public
services so as to improve those relations. It administers the Social Need
(Grants) Act (NI) 1970 which allows the Ministry to pay grants to local authori¬
ties and voluntary and other bodies towards expenditure incurred by them by
reason of the existence of special social need in urban areas.
The Ministry of Development is responsible for planning, land development
values, new town development, expansion of existing towns, amenity lands,
local government, housing, rent restriction, slum clearance and redevelop¬
ment, water supplies and sewerage. The department is also responsible for
public transport, motor taxation, road freight licensing and the planning, con¬
struction and maintenance of roads, including motorways.
The basic functions of the Ministry of Finance are the settlement of financial
questions with the United Kingdom Treasury, the financial control of
Northern Ireland departments, and the management of the Civil Service. In
connection with these functions the Ministry is responsible for the control
of borrowing, the issue of Ulster Savings securities, government loans to
local or public authorities, the collection of stamp duties, death duties and
certain excise duties, the collection of land purchase annuities and the staffing,
recruitment and training of the Civil Service and the regulation of its conditions.
Other responsibilities of the Ministry include the provision of buildings for
the Northern Ireland Government and certain departments of the United
Kingdom Government, the preservation of ancient monuments, the Public
Record Office, property valuation, ordnance survey, the Land Registry and the
Registry of Deeds, censuses, the registration of births, deaths and marriages,
and certain duties in relation to charities and charitable funds.
The Office of the Parliamentary Draftsmen, which prepares Bills for intro¬
duction into Parliament, is attached to the Ministry.
The Ministry of Health and Social Services is responsible for a wide range of
functions in Northern Ireland, including all aspects of the health, welfare
and hospital services; employment and industrial training; industrial con¬
ciliation and arbitration machinery; and the administration of the social
security schemes, such as national insurance, supplementary benefits and
family allowances. It also administers the Selective Employment Payments
Act (NI) 1966 in respect of industry in the private sector and certain public
bodies.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of a
political or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose
GOVERNMENT
6l
The
Development
of the
Modern
Service
Post-Fulton
Reforms
remuneration is found wholly and directly out of money voted by Parliament.
The term is generally used only to cover ‘non-industrial’ members of the staffs of
the various government departments in the United Kingdom or working over¬
seas. They total almost 500,000,1 a third of them women. In addition there are
over 200,000 government industrial employees in such establishments as Royal
Ordnance factories and Royal Dockyards.
Civil servants work in support of ministers in their public and parliamentary
duties. Their functions range from the formulation of policy proposals and the
management of the machinery of government to carrying out the day-to-day
duties that public administration demands. Stability of administration is en¬
sured by the political neutrality of the Service. Although a civil servant works
under the authority and direction of the minister of the department to which
he is appointed, legally he is a servant of the Crown. A change of minister,
whether due to ministerial changes within a government or the advent of a
government of a different political complexion, does not involve a change of
permanent staff.
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years.
Before then, departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying
standards were unknown, there was no central supervision, and political
jobbery was rife. Nineteenth century reforms included the substitution of open
competition for the practice of obtaining Civil Service appointments by favour
or purchase, and the establishment of an independent body, the Civil Service
Commission, to control recruitment. The great expansion in State activity in
the first half of the twentieth century, and the consequent increase in the
numbers of civil servants and the scope of their duties, led to further re-
organisation, including the creation of service-wide scientific and professional
classes; recruitment was adapted to a developing educational system, and
co-ordination between the various departments improved. Civil servants,
though they remained employees of their departments, became members of an
integrated service with common conditions of employment and traditions and
standards of conduct belonging, not to individual departments, but to the
Civil Service as a whole. Recently the Civil Service has again been the subject
of searching examination,2 as a result of which it has embarked upon an
important programme of reconstruction and reform.
The programme launched by the Civil Service is designed to make it more
effective in carrying out its changing and expanding tasks, and will take several
years to complete both because of its complexity and because of the resources
in money and manpower that its full implementation requires. Nevertheless,
since the Government acceptance of the main Fulton proposals, action has
been taken on a number of points. For instance, the Civil Service Department
(see p. 49) has been in operation since November 1968; the Civil Service
College (see p. 64) has been open since June 1970 and a greatly extended
training programme has been introduced throughout the Service; and a merger
into a new administration group of the former administrative, executive and
clerical classes, up to assistant secretary level was effected in January 1971.
In addition a plan to absorb all posts from permanent secretary down to and
Including part-time staffs two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent to one
whole-time officer.
r By committee appointed by the Government in 1966 under the chairmanship of
Lord Fulton, then Vice-Chancellor of the University of Sussex, to examine the structure,
recruitment and management, including management training, of the Civil Service
which published its report on the Civil Service in June 1968.
62
Civil Service
Structure
Administration
Group
Departmental
Classes
Science and
Specialist Groups
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
including under-secretary and equivalent grades into a single, separate unit,
is nearing completion.
The merger described above is the first major stage in reshaping the structure
of the Civil Service to fit it more appropriately to a pattern of work allocation
no longer based on the concept of making specific types of work the preserve
of individual classes and to ensure that the way to the higher levels of the
Service is open to the most able, no matter what their method of entry. For
many years in the past civil servants have been divided, for recruitment,
management and pay purposes, into separate categories of classes, each class
with members performing similar functions, sharing similar qualifications, and
having their own pay and grading scales. At the end of 1970, before the merger,
there were 47 ‘general service’ classes, that is to say, classes whose members
were distributed across the Civil Service as a whole, and more than 1,000
classes whose members performed specialist tasks in one department only.
The Administration Group consists of about 210,000 civil servants who were
previously members of the administrative, executive and supporting clerical
classes.1 For the time being, it does not involve the separate departmental
classes within the broad executive and clerical framework. The group, whose
functions range from the co-ordination and improvement of government
machinery and the control of departments of the public service at the higher
levels, to the performance of normal clerical duties connected with the running
of departmental business at the lower levels, takes some of its entrants,
including those who will subsequently fill the highest posts in the Service,
direct from the university. Others join the Service direct from school or after
employment in other public organisations or in private firms.
Altogether about 38,700 civil servants are members of the departmental
executive classes. Among them are the Waterguard Service and the Outdoor
Service of the Board of Customs and Excise, the Home Office Immigration
Service, the Tax Inspectorate and the tax officers of the Board of Inland Rev¬
enue, and the departmental executive staff of the Department of Employment.
The special departmental clerical classes—for instance the Inland Revenue tax
officers and the departmental clerical staff of the Department of Employment-
account for some 43,000 staff.
The science and specialist groups,2 which account for nearly 30 per cent of all
non-industrial staff, include: the scientific classes (scientific officer, experi¬
mental officer and scientific assistant); the ‘works group’ of professional classes
(architects, engineers and surveyors), the architectural and engineering
draughtsmen and certain technical, engineering and other supporting classes;
and other civil servants with professional or technical qualifications, who, like
the first two categories, are generally divided into three groups reflecting t eir
educational level or qualifications on entering the Civil Service. These include
economists, statisticians, medical officers and research officers for whom t e
entry requirement is a university degree or equivalent; a large number of sta ,
including air traffic control officers and draughtsmen, from whom less exacting
minimum qualifications are required; and the staff of the ‘ancillary techmca
1 The grades involved are: assistant secretary, principal, assiatant principal prmcipd
executive officer, senior-chief executive officer, chief executive officer, higher executive
officer, executive officer, clerical officer and clerical assistant. . . ,
? Consideration is being given to the possibility of a merger of the sctenttfie classes, and
a further merger of the works group and allied classes.
Typists
Other Support
Staff
The
Diplomatic
Service
The
Northern
Ireland
Civil Service
Public Services
of Overseas
Dependent
Territories
Recruitment
GOVERNMENT 63
classes, such as office machine operators, laboratory attendants and driving and
traffic examiners.
The Civil Service employs about 26,600 shorthand typists, audio typists, and
copy typists, who work mainly in small groups. Attached to this class are about
3,600 personal secretaries who work directly to senior civil servants.
There are about 26,000 other support staff, including paperkeepers, office
cleaners and messengers. As far as practicable, posts of messengers are
reserved for ex-servicemen, although other men and women over the age of
30 may be recruited.
The Diplomatic Service is a separate self-contained service of the Crown,
which provides the staff (comprising some 6,400 civil servants) for service in
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom diplomatic
missions and consular posts in foreign and in independent Commonwealth
countries. Its functions include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas
governments and conducting business in international organisations; promot¬
ing British exports and the advancement of British trade; presenting British
ideas, policies and objectives to the people of overseas countries; and protecting
British interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with
that of the Home Civil Service; it also has Secretarial, Communications and
Security Guard branches. Various specialists and advisers from home depart¬
ments or the armed forces may serve at overseas posts on secondment or
attachment to the Diplomatic Service.
The Government of Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service which deals
with matters transferred to its jurisdiction under the Government of Ireland
Act 1920. Subject to regional differences, the Northern Ireland Civil Service
is modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain, recruitment being effected
through its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff between the
two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only, and is a matter for depart¬
mental agreement in individual cases.
Britain’s dependent territories fill vacancies in their public services by the
appointment of suitably qualified local candidates wherever possible; but when
vacancies cannot be filled by this means, the Overseas Development Ad¬
ministration (see p. 52) and the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and
Administrations are asked to recruit other candidates, principally from the
United Kingdom.
The main principle of recruitment to the permanent Civil Service is that of
entry by open competition, in which all eligible candidates (both within and
outside the Service) are considered on equal terms. There are also limited
competitions designed to afford special opportunities of permanent appoint¬
ment or promotion for particular categories of staff already employed in the
Service.
There are three main levels of entry into the administration group of the
Home Civil Service, related to the academic achievements of: honours graduates;
18-year-old school leavers; and 16-year-old school leavers. Selection is by
interview and/or qualifying examination. Entry to the professional and
technical classes usually requires appropriate qualifications in the subject
concerned, and selection is by record and interview. The Civil Service
64
Training
Promotion
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commission is responsible for conducting the examinations and interviews,
and for issuing to departments certificates to the effect that candidates are
qualified for permanent posts. The appointment of the candidate after
certification is carried out by the department in which he is to be employed.
Recruitment to clerical and certain other junior posts may be undertaken
by the departments themselves, with the Commission acting in an advisory
capacity and issuing the certificates necessary for permanent appointment.
Temporary civil servants are also normally recruited by the department
concerned; no special qualifying examinations are required.
In all except the smallest government departments, there are full-time training
officers and instructors whose task it is to help identify the training needs of the
staff and to organise courses, both general and technical, to provide for their
varying requirements. The number of management courses run within the
Civil Service, including those provided at the Civil Service College, as well as
the use made of external management courses at business schools, the
Administrative Staff College, Henley, and elsewhere, have increased sub¬
stantially during recent years and will continue to do so with growing emphasis
in the country generally on the provision of training in all aspects of manage¬
ment.
Methods of training within the Service combine lectures, discussion groups,
instructional visits and case-studies with the use of many audio-visual aids
such as closed-circuit television and Video-tape recordings, instructional films
and programmed learning: there is also a considerable amount of on-the-job
training. Civil servants are regularly moved between the different branches of
their department and sometimes between departments so that they can gain as
wide an experience as possible of Civil Service work.
In order that they may continue their studies, civil servants under the age
of 18 are released, usually on one day a week ( day release schemes) to attend
local technical colleges. Adult staff are assisted financially, and by giving them
‘time off’, to undertake private studies leading to recognised educational or
professional qualifications in approved studies. There are also opportunities
for civil servants in mid-career to obtain fellowships or otherwise to go on
sabbatical leave to undertake research in areas of interest to themselves or their
departments. _ # .
Training is co-ordinated by the Management Personnel Training Division
of the Civil Service Department which is responsible, in conjunction with the
Civil Service College, for the analysis and determination of training needs to be
met centrally in the Civil Service, and which exercises advisory functions in
regard to departmental training. All central training is provided by the Civil
Service College which conducts courses designed for a wide range of students
with different backgrounds, academic qualifications, skills and jobs. Falling
broadly into six categories, four of the courses cater severally for young
executive officers, graduate administration trainees, administrative and
executive grades at about principal level and equivalent grades, and civil
servants at the assistant secretary level, while two cater for departmental
instructors and other specialist staff. Subjects covered include structure and
machinery of government, organisation and staff management, economics,
statistics, industrial growth, social administration, operational research,
computers and information systems.
A period of probation (varying according to grade, with extensions in certain
instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent Civil Service.
GOVERNMENT
Conditions of
Service
Political and
Private Activities
65
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted examinations and
partly by the departments themselves. Promotions or appointments to most
of the highest positions in the Service, for instance, permanent secretaries,
principal establishment officers and principal finance officers, are approved by
the Prime Minister, who is advised in these matters by the head of the Home
Civil Service.
The consideration governing all promotion is the advancement of the
efficiency of the public service—the criterion being the fitness of an officer for a
more senior, responsible post. Normally promotion is from grade to grade, but
a procedure of accelerated promotion has been worked out for administration
trainees and officers who have shown exceptional promise but are outside the
age and salary limit for this grade.
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service
as a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council, which is composed
jointly of official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate
sections of the service is provided through the various staff associations which
civil servants are encouraged to join (for instance, the Civil and Public
Services Association, the Society of Civil Servants and the Institution of
Professional Civil Servants), and through departmental Whitley Councils.
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is based on a fair
comparison with that paid for similar work outside the service and usually he
receives annual increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to
which he belongs. In addition, although a civil servant holds office at the
pleasure of the Crown and may therefore be dismissed at any time, in practice
he enjoys a considerable measure of security of tenure. Thus every permanent
civil servant, who is capable and efficient, may reasonably expect a full career in
the public service and a pension on retirement.1
Civil servants are required to work a specified number of hours each week.
Certain grades are eligible for overtime pay for any hours worked in excess of
the standard hours, but this does not apply to the higher grades whose salaries
are determined on the assumption that they will work such long hours as may
be necessary without additional pay. The standard working week for office
staffs is 41 hours in London and 42 hours in the provinces. Annual leave varies
according to grade and length of service up to a maximum of six weeks, that is,
30 working days a year.
Sick leave on full pay, less any national insurance benefit received, may be
granted to permanent civil servants for up to six months in any 12 months,
and on reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s sick leave in any four years;
any officer whose health is permanently impaired may be retired on medical
grounds.
The position and functions of a civil servant remain the same whichever
political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government of the day
irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which he is free, as a
private individual, to participate in political activities varies according to grade.
For this purpose civil servants are divided into three groups: those who are
completely free to engage in all kinds of national and local political activities
(although if they intend standing for Parliament, they must resign their
1 An established civil servant with sufficient service to his credit may retire with
immediate superannuation benefits at any time after the age of 60, but there is no fixed
age of retirement, and it is possible for a civil servant to continue to work after the age
of 60, provided that he is in good health and continues to give satisfactory service.
66
Security
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
appointment before nomination day on the understanding that if not elected
they will be reinstated in their previous capacity within a week of the declaration
of the election result); those who are free, subject to the acceptance of the need
for discretion and with the permission of the department, to take part in most
activities except parliamentary candidature; and those who are debarred from
national political activities though they may seek permission to take part in
local government political activities. In the non-industrial Civil Service, the
completely free groups are members of the minor classes such as cleaners and
messengers. The intermediate group includes mainly members of the clerical
and typing grades and the granting of permission by the department depends,
broadly, on the nature of the work done. The group which is not allowed to take
part in national political activities includes members of the professional, the
scientific and technical, and the executive and administrative grades of the
administration group. Departments are encouraged to permit members of all
groups to engage in local political activities to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Service for political impartiality and the avoidance
of any conflict with official duties. Where permission is granted, it is subject to
a code of discretion and to the obligation to notify the department of election
or co-option to a local council.
All civil servants enjoy the right to register their private political opinions
on appropriate occasions, for instance, at general or local authority elections.
They may also engage in such private activities as they wish, provided that
these do not in any way conflict with their official duties, nor with the pro¬
visions of the Official Secrets Acts 1911 arid i920> an(i the Prevention of
Corruption Act 1906. However, since a civil servant must not use his official
position to further his private interests, he is subject to certain restrictions in
commerce and business: for instance, he may not hold private interests in
public contracts and he may not use official information in writing, broad¬
casting or lecturing without the approval of his department.
The political views of civil servants are not as a general rule a matter of official
concern, but there are some civil service duties in which secrecy is so vitally
important to State security that the Government does not feel itself justified
in employing anyone to carry them out whose reliability is in doubt. F01 this
reason no one who is known to be a member of, or actively associated or in
sympathy with, the Communist Party or with Fascist organisations, or is liable
to be a security risk in any other respect, is employed in connection with secret
work.
Each government department is responsible for its own internal security,
and the Security Service, which operates independently under a director-
general who is responsible for its efficiency to the Home Secretary, deals with
national security. In addition, there is a Security Commission which, if
requested by the Prime Minister in consultation with the leader of the
Opposition, may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public
service and, in certain circumstances, advise whether any change in security
arrangements is necessary or desirable.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Government on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of the
United Kingdom for many centuries. In its present shape much of it dates back
to the late nineteenth century, when the conception of a comprehensive system
GOVERNMENT
Relationship
between
Central and
Local
Government
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
67
of locally elected councils to manage various services provided for the benefit
of the community was first incorporated in statute law. Since that time there
has been a large increase in the population, and a massive transformation in the
range, complexity and scale of local authority functions. Because of this, local
government in Greater London was reorganised in the 1960s. Government
proposals for a major restructuring of local government throughout the
remainder of Great Britain were announced in 1971 and are intended to come
into effect by 1975.1 The Northern Ireland Government is committed to a
reorganisation programme which it intends to implement by April 1973.2
Housing has already become the responsibility of the new Northern Ireland
Housing Executive.
Local government is conducted by elected local authorities, acting in accor¬
dance with powers and duties conferred on them by Parliament. The actual
administration and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits are the
responsibility of the local authority, but, in respect of certain services, Acts of
Parliament dealing with local government give ministers of the Crown defined
powers, some of which are designed to secure a measure of national uniformity
in the standard of service provided or to safeguard public health, while
others are for the protection of the rights of individual citizens. For some
services the minister concerned has wide powers of supervision; for others
there are strictly limited powers. Government policy is to ensure that central
government controls over local authorities are kept to a minimum.
In addition to their statutory powers, ministers concerned with local
government give assistance to local authorities by the general issue of advisory
circulars and by giving advice in individual cases.
The Department of the Environment is the main link between local
authorities and the central Government in England; in Scotland the Scottish
Development Department is responsible for general policy in regard to local
government; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland, the
Ministry of Development.
The main pattern of local government organisation in England and Wales
(outside the Greater London area) and Northern Ireland is at present a
division of the country into county boroughs and administrative counties.
The county boroughs (mostly with populations of over 75,000) are separate
from the counties and independent of them. The administrative counties are
subdivided into county districts—non-county boroughs, urban districts and
rural districts, the last-named being further divided into parishes3 (except in
1 In Great Britain the existing 1,800 authorities will be replaced by 51 county and some
375 district authorities in England and Wales, and 8 regional and 49 district authorities
in Scotland (outside the Orkney and Shetland Islands, which will have separate, virtually
all-purpose, authorities). The new county and regional authorities will normally provide
those services most suitably administered on a large scale, including major planning,
roads, education and the social services, while the independently elected district
authorities will provide the more local services such as housing, refuse collection, and the
provision of amenities. The main exceptions will be in six conurbations in England
(provisionally styled ‘metropolitan’ counties) where the districts will be responsible for
education and the social services.
2 In Northern Ireland it is proposed that the local government functions which are of a
regional character should be transferred to the Northern Ireland Government. Planning,
roads, and water and sewerage services would be administered by the Ministry of
Development, while education, personal health and personal social services would be the
responsibility of area boards acting as agents of the ministries concerned. It has been
decided that the remaining local government functions will be provided by 26 new
district authorities.
3 There are usually some 20 to 30 parishes in a rural district.
68
Constitution
and Election of
Councils
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland). Scotland is divided into counties, counties of cities, large
and small burghs, and districts. Each local authority area is administered by its
own elected council.
In England and Wales (outside the Greater London area) there are 58
county councils, 83 county borough councils, 259 non-county borough
councils, 522 urban district councils, 470 rural district councils, and over 10,000
parish councils or meetings; in Scotland, 33 county councils (two pairs being
combined for certain purposes), 201 town councils (including 4 for counties of
cities—Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen) and 196 district councils
(2 counties not being divided into districts); and in Northern Ireland, 1 county
borough council, 6 county councils, 9 non-county borough councils, 24 urban
district councils, 26 rural district councils, and 2 Development Commissions
exercising municipal functions.
The Greater London area is administered by the councils of 32 London
boroughs and the City of London, and by the Greater London Council (GLC).
Local councils comprise a number of unpaid elected councillors (and, in some
cases, though not in Scotland, aldermen elected by the councillors), presided
over by a chairman who has varied ceremonial and civic duties to perform in
addition to his work on the council. In most boroughs of England and Wales
and Northern Ireland the chairman is the Mayor; in the City of London and
certain important boroughs, the Lord Mayor; in the Scottish counties, the
Convener; and in the burghs, the Provost or Lord Provost.
The normal term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local
government is three years; aldermen normally hold office for six years. In
some local authority areas the whole council retires every third year and
another is elected immediately; in other areas elections are held annually,
when one-third of the councillors retire. Procedure at local government
elections in Great Britain is governed by rules laid down in the Representation
of the People Acts 1949 and 1969 or made for a specific type of authority;
in Northern Ireland it is governed by the Electoral Law Acts (Northern
Ireland) 1962-69.
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to vote
at a local government election in Great Britain provided that he or she is 18
years of age or over, is a British subject or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is
not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local government
elector for the area for which the election is held. A person qualifies for regis¬
tration as a local government elector if, on the qualifying date for the register
(compiled annually), he or she is resident in the council area. In Northern
Ireland, a person must be 18 years of age or over and must have been born in
Northern Ireland or, alternatively, have resided continuously in the United
Kingdom for seven years immediately prior to the qualifying date.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative
of one of the national political parties, as a member of an association repre¬
senting some local interest, or as an independent. He must be of British
nationality and aged 21 or over. In addition, he must be registered as a local
government elector in the area of the local authority to which he seeks election,
or have resided or occupied premises in that area during the whole of the
12 months preceding the day on which he is nominated as a candidate, or, in
that 12 months, have had his principal or only place of work there. A candidate
is also subject to a number of statutory disqualifications designed to ensure
that unsuitable persons do not offer themselves for election.
Most local authority areas are divided into electoral areas for local council
Functions and
Services
GOVERNMENT 69
elections. Administrative counties are divided into single-member electoral
divisions in accordance with orders made by the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, for the Environment, or for Scotland. Boroughs and urban
districts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and burghs in Scotland, are
either divided into ‘wards’, or, if they are small, left as single units. For rural
district council or parish council elections, each parish or ward of a parish (or,
in some cases, a combination of parishes) forms an electoral area which returns
one or more members. For the purposes of elections to the Greater London
Council, each London borough forms an electoral area returning two, three or
four councillors.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the returning officer
concerned, and under the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the
purpose. The procedure for local government voting is similar to that for
parliamentary elections, although facilities for postal voting are more restricted.
Each elector has one vote for each seat contested in his electoral area: he need
not record all his votes, but must not give more than one vote for each
candidate.
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such
services as Acts of Parliament require. It may provide additional services
under the permissive powers of a general Act or under powers granted to it by
local or Private Bill legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon their type, as follows:
in England (outside the Greater London area) and Wales county borough
councils are all-purpose authorities, while both county councils and county
district councils have particular functions allotted to them, which they
exercise independently to a considerable extent. County councils are generally
responsible for the police, fire, educational and welfare services, while the
district councils provide housing and administer most of the environmental
services. There is, however, a certain degree of delegation from county
councils to county district councils, especially of duties connected with town
and country planning and the education, health and welfare services. Parish
councils or parish meetings have a few functions of local interest which they
may exercise of right. In Scotland the councils of the counties of cities are all¬
purpose authorities; elsewhere, the county councils, the town councils and the
district councils share responsibilities. In Northern Ireland the position is
broadly similar to that in England and Wales, except that local authorities are
not called upon to provide or administer the police or (except in Belfast) the
fire services.
In Greater London the basic units of local government are the London
boroughs; the GLC is responsible only for those services which, by their
nature, require unified administration and control over the whole area. In the
City of London (an area of approximately one square mile in the centre of the
metropolis) the City Corporation exercises the general powers administered,
and duties performed, by the London borough councils.
Local authority services may be classified under three heads: environ¬
mental, protective and personal. The environmental services are designed to
secure local good order, amenity and public health. The main service is town
and country planning while others include the services for bridge and highway
construction and maintenance, for street lighting, public safety on the roads,
and the provision of recreation grounds, parks and similar amenities. Other
environmental services are those concerned with drainage, sewerage, street
cleansing, refuse collection and disposal, litter prevention, rodent control, the
70
Internal
Organisation
of Local
Authorities
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
supervision of water supplies, measures for ensuring food hygiene and for
preventing air pollution, and the provision of public lavatories.
The protective services are the police, fire and civil defence services. In the
administration of the police and fire services neighbouring authorities frequently
combine.
The personal services range from education, housing and the health and
welfare services to the provision of public entertainment. Education and culture
are promoted by the establishment and maintenance of various types of schools;
by the provision of adult education centres, and art and technical colleges,
by the award of grants and scholarships to students of all kinds; and by the
provision of libraries, art galleries and museums. Housing needs are met, as
far as possible, by building new houses (mainly to let), acquiring old houses
and converting them to provide additional accommodation, clearing slums,
and laying down the standards to be maintained in both newly built and older
houses. . .
Services concerned primarily with health and welfare cover the provision
of ante-natal, post-natal and child health clinics, and some residential and
day nurseries; the provision and supervision of midwifery services, health
visitors and home nursing facilities; measures for the prevention of illness and
the aftercare of physically or mentally sick persons; the provision of domestic
help where necessary; the ambulance service; the provision of facilities for
vaccination and immunisation against certain infectious diseases, and the
services for the permanently disabled or handicapped, for the aged and infirm
and for children deprived of a normal home life.1
Some local authorities engage in trading services, such as passenger
transport, water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services, they also have
power to initiate schemes to attract industrial development.^
The above is only a brief outline of local authority services. Fuller infor¬
mation is given under the relevant subject headings in later chapters.
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own
internal arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they
discharge their responsibilities. Most councils use the committee system,
whereby questions of policy and principle are decided in full council, and
committees are appointed to administer the various services. Parish councils
and the smaller district councils are often able to do their work efficiently in
full session although they appoint committees from time to time as necessary.
In recent years many councils have rationalised their organisation by reducing
substantially the number of their committees. Some have established policy
advisory or co-ordinating committees with powers to originate policy, subject
to the approval of the full council.
The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council s
standing orders. A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees,
except its powers in connection with raising loans, levying rates, or making
financial demands on other authorities liable to contribute, which are legally
reserved to the council as a whole. County and county borough councils
exercise their powers of delegation to a considerable extent.
Joint committees or joint boards consist of representatives of more than
one authority and may be established, outside the Greater London area, for
services that can be more effectively administered over a wider area than that
1 Proposals have been published for the transfer of some of these services to new area
health authorities within the National Health Service (see footnote, p. 135)-
Officers and
Employees
Local
Government
Finance
GOVERNMENT 71
controlled by a single council, for instance, town and country planning, water
supplies and the police service.
The public and the press are admitted to all meetings of the council (and of
some committees) but may be excluded while a particular item is considered
if the council resolves that publicity for that matter would be prejudicial to the
public interest.
The execution of council policy rests with salaried officers and employees,
whose number may vary from about half a dozen in a small rural district to
tens of thousands in the larger authorities. Generally speaking, councils are
free to make such appointments as they think necessary for carrying out their
work, although certain posts, for instance, the clerk, the treasurer and the
medical officer of health, are compulsory in almost all councils, and a borough
or city architect must be appointed in each London borough and in the City of
London. Otherwise choice of personnel is left to a great extent to the in¬
dividual council: in theory, the appointment of certain chief officers is subject
to some central control but, in practice, the nominee of the council is nearly
always accepted.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers, whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial
kind; subordinate officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical
capacity; and manual workers who are employed to do the physical work for
which the council is responsible. Senior staff appointments are usually made
at the instance of the committee or committees particularly concerned; most
junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also respons¬
ible for engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements are always
made in conformity with the council’s set establishment and committees are
informed of any appointments which they have not made themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within
the jurisdiction of the employing council (except for the rare case where the
proposed salary of an officer requires the approval of a government depart¬
ment, as in the case of the clerk of a county council in England and Wales).
They are based on recommendations made by the Whitley Councils, of
which the largest are the National Joint Council for Local Authorities’
Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services and the National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Services (Manual Workers). Conditions
of service and salary scales for senior local government officers are determined
by separate joint committees for England and Wales, and for Scotland. The
local government service in Northern Ireland has its separate joint negotiating
machinery at various levels.
Local authority expenditure in Britain now amounts to nearly £7,000 million
annually, of which about a quarter is capital, the remainder current, expendi¬
ture. Capital expenditure is normally financed by borrowing (see p. 73),
although the government makes grants towards the capital costs of certain
services, principally roads and public lighting, and annual subsidies are payable
for local authority housing. Housing is the major element in capital expenditure
representing two-fifths of the total.
Current expenditure by local authorities accounts for about a quarter of
total current-account spending by public authorities. Apart from interest on
loans which absorbs about 20 per cent of the total, the education service
represents by far the largest portion of this spending followed by the police
service, roads and sewerage. Local authority current expenditure is financed
72
Rates
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
from three principal sources1: government grants (some 45 per cent); local,
rates, paid by occupiers of land and buildings (35 per cent); and rents from
municipal houses, dividends and interest (20 per cent).
Government grants are normally related directly to total local authority
spending and payable both in aid of revenues generally (when they are known
as rate support grants) and for specific services. In 1971-72 rate support
grants in England and Wales amounted to £2,004 million, while the estimated
grant for specific services was £178 million. The grants for Scotland were
£251 million and £22 million respectively.
The rate support grants are distributed among authorities (in England and
Wales, the county, county borough, county district and London borough
councils; in Scotland, the county and town councils) in three parts: the ‘needs’
element composed of a basic payment which takes into account total heads of
population and, in particular, the number of children of school age, together
with supplementary payments which may take into account the numbers of
children under five years old and of people over 65, the cost of various stages of
education, density of population and road mileage; the ‘resources’ element
which is paid to authorities whose rateable resources are below the average for
all authorities in relation to population; and the ‘domestic’ element which
compensates rating authorities for loss of rate income from reductions in rate
poundage which they are required to give to householders—in England and
Wales £0-09^ in 1971-72, and in Scotland £o*u. Services qualifying for
specific grants include the police service. Grants are also made towards the
cost of rate rebates for people with low incomes.
In Northern Ireland there is a system of grants towards the cost of specific
services (for instance, education, roads, housing, health and welfare, water
supplies and sewerage), supplemented by a General Exchequer Contribution
which compensates for derating and takes account of the needs and resources
of individual authorities. A grant is also paid to rating authorities to compen¬
sate them for prescribed reductions in rate poundages, which they are required
to give to householders.
Rates are a local tax paid by the occupiers of non-agricultural land and
buildings as a contribution towards the cost of local services. Each occupier s
payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by multiplying the
rateable value of his property (broadly equivalent to its annual rental value)
by the rate poundage—a percentage fixed by the authority according to its
projected financial needs. Rateable values are assessed periodically in England
and Wales by the Board of Inland Revenue, who are independent of local
authorities. Their latest valuation took place in 1963* but new valuation lists
will come into force in 1973. Disputes about assessments are heard by local
valuation courts, each consisting of three members of an independent local
valuation panel and then, on appeal, by the Lands Tribunal.
In Scotland valuation is on a basis similar to that in England and Wales;
but it is carried out by assessors appointed by the councils of counties and
counties of cities. Appeals are heard by the valuation appeal committee of each
valuation area and thereafter by the Lands Valuation Appeal Court of the
Court of Session. In Northern Ireland the valuation authority is the Com¬
missioner of Valuation, whose department is part of the Ministry of Finance.
In England and Wales the responsibility for levying and collecting the rates
lies with the councils of county boroughs and county districts, with the
1 Changes in the methods of financing local government are under consideration.
GOVERNMENT
73
Loans
Control of Finance
London borough councils and with the Common Council of the City of
London. Rates in Scotland are levied by the town councils in burghs (including
counties of cities) and by the county councils elsewhere. County borough and
county of city authorities, which are responsible for all services in their areas,
determine the rates solely on the basis of their own financial needs; elsewhere,
where services are divided, the rating authorities take account in their rate
determination of the needs of the other, non-rating, authorities, to which part
of the proceeds are passed to cover services provided by them. In Northern
Ireland the only non-rating authorities are the rural district councils, which
derive their rate income from the county councils.
Agriculture throughout Britain is exempted from rate payments, and in
Scotland and Northern Ireland industry and freight transport are rated at a
half and a quarter, respectively, of their net annual value. Householders in
Great Britain benefit from rate reductions financed by government grant (see
p. 72) and they have the right to pay rates in ten instalments a year. House¬
holders with small incomes are entitled to rebates. Charities pay half the full
rate on property they occupy for charitable purposes but may be given further
reliefs by the rating authorities, which are empowered to reduce or remit the
rates for a wide range of non-profit-making bodies. Half rates may be levied
on the owners of all empty properties.
Loans may be raised by local authorities for financing such items of capital
expenditure as are sanctioned by the Secretaries of State for the Environment,
for Scotland and for Wales, or, occasionally, by the minister responsible for the
service for which the capital is required, for example, the Minister of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food. In England and Wales the control, by detailed
loan sanctioning, of individual capital projects is being relaxed for many
services. The Greater London Council applies annually for parliamentary
sanction to raise the money it needs for capital expenditure. In Northern
Ireland the government department responsible for the service also issues the
appropriate loan approvals. Borrowing powers for specific purposes may also
be taken under Acts of Parliament of local application.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by issuing mortgages, by issuing
stock upon the Stock Exchange and by bonds which may or may not be quoted
on the Stock Exchange. Although these bonds may be for any period, local
authorities normally issue them for one year. Local authorities also have right
of access to the Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer, or, in
Northern Ireland, to the Government Loans Fund, for long-term borrowing
to finance a proportion of their reckonable capital payments, and may borrow
temporarily for a limited proportion of their current outstanding loan debt.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned
by a finance committee, whose function it is to keep the financial policy of
the council under constant review. In England and Wales the accounts of
county councils, urban and rural district councils, and a variety of other local
authorities are wholly subject to audit by district auditors appointed by the
Secretary of State for the Environment. Certain accounts of county borough
and borough councils are statutorily subject to district audit, and these
authorities can opt to have the remainder of their accounts audited either by
district audit or by a firm of professional accountants. In Scotland the accounts of
each authority are audited by a professional auditor appointed by the Secretary
of State for Scotland and paid by the council concerned, and in Northern Ireland
by special local government auditors appointed by the Minister of Development.
FIRE
AUTHORITIES
IN GREAT
BRITAIN
Central Control
Establishment
Schemes
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE FIRE SERVICE
The fire services in Great Britain are organised on a local basis, subject to
a measure of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England
and Wales) and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire services in
Northern Ireland are controlled by two authorities, the Belfast Corporation
and the Northern Ireland Fire Authority, which are responsible to the
Minister of Home Affairs. Every part of the United Kingdom is covered by a
public fire brigade.
It is the statutory duty of every fire authority to make provision for fire¬
fighting purposes, and in particular to maintain a brigade of sufficient strength
to meet efficiently all normal requirements. In England and Wales there are
132 local authority fire brigades administered by the county and county
borough councils (with some amalgamations) which are the fire authorities for
their areas. The Greater London Council is the fire authority for London.
In Scotland the local authorities are grouped in 11 areas each with a single
brigade; with the exception of Glasgow, where the town council of the city
is the responsible authority, each area is administered by a joint committee
representative of the councils of the counties and large burghs in the area.
There are also fire-fighting organisations outside the local authority service,
for instance, those maintained by the Army and Air Force Departments of the
Ministry of Defence; by the Department of Trade and Industry at certain of
their establishments; and by some large industrial and commercial concerns.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department and the Secretary of State
for Scotland have central responsibility for the fire service in England and
Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central control is directed mainly towards
ensuring that the operational efficiency of brigades is maintained. To this end
the Secretaries of State have powers, under the Fire Services Acts, to make
regulations on such matters as appointments and promotions, standards of
training and equipment, pensions, and disciplinary matters. Their approval is
also required for reductions in the operational establishments of fire brigades.
In matters affecting the fire brigades as a whole (excluding discipline and
conditions of service), each minister is advised by the appropriate Central Fire
Brigades Advisory Council, consisting of officers of the respective Home
Departments, representatives of the local authority associations, and of the
associations representing members of fire brigades, and other persons with
special qualifications, appointed by the Secretary of State. The National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades and the National Joint
Council for Chief Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades are the nego¬
tiating bodies on ranks, pay and conditions of service of members of the
brigades in Great Britain.
Inspectorates of fire services advise the Secretaries of State on operational
and technical matters.
Each fire authority is required to draw up a scheme showing the establishment
of officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and
location of fire stations and the number and type of appliances considered
necessary for the provision of fire cover for its area. Establishment schemes vary
according to the fire risks in the area concerned, the strength of individual
brigades ranging from seven whole-time and 73 part-time men (in Merioneth¬
shire) to nearly 5,000 whole-time men (in London). In the whole of England
GOVERNMENT
75
and Wales there are about 23,930 whole-time and 17,300 part-time firemen,
operating more than 3,770 fire-fighting appliances (including pumps, turntable
ladders, water tenders, and emergency and salvage tenders) housed in some
1,600 fire stations. In Scotland there are approximately 2,800 whole-time and
2,900 part-time firemen, 600 fire-fighting appliances, and 340 fire stations.
It is the duty of every fire authority to buy such appliances and equipment as
may be necessary to meet efficiently all normal fire-fighting requirements in
their area. Certain items of equipment are standardised so that there is complete
interchangeability when a fire is attended by men and appliances from more
than one brigade. The principal types of fire-fighting appliances are bought by
fire authorities to requirement specifications approved by the Home Secretary
and the Secretary of State for Scotland, on the advice of the respective Central
Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. These specifications ensure that minimum
standards are maintained and at the same time allow sufficient freedom of
design to meet special circumstances and encourage further developments.
Each fire authority must appoint a chief fire officer (firemaster in Scotland)
for its fire brigade. The appointment must be approved by the Home Secretary
or by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Central control is exercised by the chief fire officer from brigade head¬
quarters. Divisional officers who are in charge of the geographical divisions
into which most areas are divided, are responsible for mobilising their forces
to deal with outbreaks of fire in their divisions. Constant communication is
maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters and if at any time an
outbreak of fire should grow beyond the capabilities of a division, help is sent
from one or more neighbouring divisions, or even from the area of another
fire authority. Under arrangements for mutual help made by all fire authorities,
the nearest available force is sent to the scene of a fire, regardless of area
boundaries.
In England and Wales, the approximate number of fire calls in 1970
(including false alarms and special service calls—see below) was 467,200. In
Scotland the number was approximately 45,000.
Fire authorities have discretion to employ their brigades and equipment for
purposes other than fire-fighting, and they are in fact used in a variety of
emergencies, such as rail, road and aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings,
flooding of premises, leakage of noxious gas or liquids and the rescue of people
or animals from dangerous situations, for which no charges are made. Brigades
are also used, by prior arrangement, for such purposes as emptying of swimming
pools and filling of water tanks.
Estimated property losses from fire in the United Kingdom in 1970 amounted
to about j£iio-9 million—a reduction of 7-88 per cent on the corresponding
figure for 1969. These figures relate to direct losses only.
The large cities and urban areas in Great Britain are served in the main by
whole-time firemen but some 60 per cent of county fire brigade establishments
is composed of part-time retained firemen who, in return for a retaining fee
and call-out and attendance fee, undertake to attend fires if called upon, and
volunteer firemen, who receive no remuneration. Many fire authorities employ
women (about 884 in England and Wales and 135 in Scotland in 1970) on
communications and mobilising duties, and some brigades have schemes for
?6
Finance
Fire Prevention
Research
FIRE SERVICES
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the employment of junior firemen between the ages of 16 and 18 years, with a
view to their being enrolled as regular firemen at the age of 18.
Recruits and junior ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive
practical training in basic firemanship at collective training schools run by the
larger fire authorities. In Scotland similar training is carried out at a central
training school which is the responsibility of the Scottish Home and Health
Department. Management and command training is provided for the higher
and middle ranks at the Fire Service Staff College, Wotton House, near
Dorking, Surrey, where high-level operational studies are also conducted,
fire prevention, practical firemanship, advancement and instructor training,
mainly for the middle ranks is provided at the Fire Service Technical College,
Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. Both these establishments are main¬
tained by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Facilities for properly accredited officers from overseas fire services to study
the organisation, current training methods, appliances and equipment of the
British fire brigades are arranged by the Home Office Fire Department.
The cost of maintaining the fire service is borne by local authorities, and is
grant-aided by the central Government through the rate support grant
(see p. 72).
Fire authorities are required, under the 1947 Act, to make efficient arrange¬
ments for giving advice, when requested, about fire prevention, limiting the
spread of fires, and means of escape in case of fire. In addition, they have been
made the enforcing authority for fire precautions under a steadily growing
number of Acts of Parliament and they are concerned with provisions relating
to fire and fire prevention in a large number of other Acts.
Within brigades, the work of fire prevention is carried out by a staff of fire
prevention officers. Other sources of advice on fire prevention include the
various insurance companies which advise their policyholders, and the Fire
Protection Association, a non-profit-making body established by the Fire
Offices’ Committee1 as an advisory centre on a nation-wide basis for industry
and the general public on protection of life and property against fire.
Research into the causes, development and prevention of fire is undertaken
by the Joint Fire Research Organisation under the general direction of a
steering committee, whose members are drawn from the Department of the
Environment, the Home Office, the Fire Offices’ Committee, the independent
insurance companies and industry. The annual cost of the Organisation is over
£420,000, of which £125,000 is paid by the Fire Offices’ Committee, the
balance being met by the Government. The Organisation operates from the
fire research station at Boreham Wood, Hertfordshire.
An Operational Fire Research Group has been established in the Home
Office to undertake research into the factors affecting fire cover, fire service
performance and fire losses.
In Northern Ireland the Belfast Corporation controls the Belfast Fire Brigade
and is responsible for the area inside the city boundary, and the Northern
Ireland Fire Authority covers the rest of the country outside Belfast.
The Belfast Fire Brigade maintains 5 whole-time stations and has an
establishment of 293 officers and men manning 15 appliances, while the
1 The Fire Offices’ Committee is representative of some, but not all, of the fire insurance
companies in Britain.
GOVERNMENT
77
Northern Ireland Fire Authority has one whole-time station in Londonderry
and 44 other stations throughout the remainder of the area, and an establish¬
ment of 109 whole-time officers and men and 700 part-time firemen, manning
108 appliances.
The amount of fire service grant payable to the Northern Ireland Fire
Authority is 50 per cent of the loan charges in respect of capital expenditure
which do not exceed £119,000 and 25 per cent of the amount (if any) by which
the loan charges exceed £119,000 together with 50 per cent of the first
£346,000 of other net expenditure and 25 per cent of the excess over that
amount. Expenditure in excess of the fire service grant is apportioned among
the local authorities liable to contribute to the funds of the Authority. Under
the Fire Services Act, the Belfast Fire Brigade does not qualify for the payment
of fire service grant.
3 LAW AND ORDER
THE LAW
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, it does not have a single body
of law applicable universally within its limits. Scotland has its own distinctive
legal system and law courts, and although the existence of a single Parliament
for Great Britain since 1707, common opinions on broader issues, and a
common final court of appeal in civil cases have resulted in substantial
identity on many points, differences in legal procedure and practice remain. In
Northern Ireland on the other hand, the structure of the courts and legal
procedure and practice have closely resembled those of England and Wales for
centuries but, as Northern Ireland has its own Parliament with defined powers
(as well as being represented in the Parliament at Westminster), its enacted
law derives in certain spheres from a different source and may differ in
substance from that which operates in England and Wales. However, a large
volume of modern legislation, particularly in the social field, applies through¬
out the United Kingdom.
A feature common to all the systems of law in the United Kingdom (which
differentiates them from some continental systems) is that there is no complete
code.1 The sources of law in all the systems include legislation and unwritten
or ‘common’ law.
Legislation includes some 3,000 Acts of Parliament and delegated or
subordinate legislation made by ministers and others under powers conferred
by Parliament, Acts of Parliament being absolutely binding on all courts of
the United Kingdom, and taking precedence over any other source of law. The
common law of England originated in the customs of the realm and was built
up by decisions of the courts. A supplementary system of law, known as
‘equity’, came into being during the Middle Ages to provide and enforce more
effective protection for existing legal rights. It was administered by a separate
court and later became a separate body of legal rules. In 1875 the courts of
equity were fused with the courts of common law, so that all courts now apply
both systems but, where they conflict, equity prevails.
In Scotland the basis of common law, which largely depends on the canon
law of Rome, helped by continental commentators, is embodied in the
writings of certain seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth century
lawyers of great repute who, between them, described systematically almost
the whole field of private and criminal law as it existed in their times. Broadly
speaking, the principles enunciated by these lawyers, together with the many
judicial decisions which have followed and developed from those principles,
form the body of Scots non-statutory law. Scotland has never had a separate
system of equity—equitable principles having always permeated the ordinary
rules of law.
A feature common to the legal systems of the United Kingdom is the
distinction made between the criminal law and the civil law. Criminal law
is concerned with wrongs against the community as a whole; civil law is
1 The Law Commission (see p. 95) is working on the codification of certain branches of
law.
CRIMINAL LAW
IN ENGLAND
AND WALES
Criminal Courts
Magistrates'
Courts
Quarter Sessions
LAW AND ORDER 79
concerned with the rights, duties and obligations of individual members of
the community between themselves.
The three levels of criminal courts in England and Wales are: magistrates’
courts, which try and dispose of the great majority of criminal cases; courts of
quarter sessions, which deal with the less serious of those that remain; and
courts of assize, including the Central Criminal Court (for Greater London)
and the Crown Courts in Liverpool and Manchester, to which the most serious
cases are sent. Both quarter sessions and assizes provide trial by jury. During
1972, as part of a basic re-shaping of the court system1 aimed at accelerating
the judicial process and saving money and manpower, this structure is to be
changed by the establishment of a single Crown Court to take all criminal
work above the level of magistrates’ courts.
Magistrates’ courts are for the most part presided over by lay justices of the
peace, of whom there are some 18,500, and who are part-time and unpaid. The
jurisdiction of the courts is local, their areas being the counties and most of the
large boroughs. Counties are divided into petty sessional divisions so that the
courts are held in different places, while a borough that has a separate com¬
mission of the peace forms a single division, with its own justices. The function
of the court, which consists of between two and seven justices, is to hear and
determine charges against people accused of summary offences—that is, those
offences that may legally be disposed of by the justices sitting together without
a jury. In addition, justices may also try certain offences which would normally
be tried on indictment, that is to say, the more serious offences, if the accused
consents to forgo his right to trial by jury—and, in fact, about 98 per cent of all
criminal cases are disposed of in magistrates’ courts. Magistrates also sit as
‘examining justices’ to conduct preliminary enquiries to determine whether
there is sufficient evidence to justify the committal of the accused for trial in a
higher court.
In inner London and a few large provincial cities there are, in addition to
justices, stipendiary magistrates (37 in London and 11 elsewhere), who are full¬
time salaried lawyers, and usually sit alone. In the City of London, the courts
consist of the aldermen of the City, who are justices ex officio by virtue of
charters, and of justices. Benches of lay magistrates work with the help and
advice of the Clerk of the Court—a barrister or solicitor or other person with
court experience.
To hear cases involving children under 14 brought before the court as
being in need of care, protection and control, and to deal with applications for
the adoption of children, magistrates’ courts sit as juvenile courts. For young
people between the ages of 14 and 17 the juvenile courts are concerned both
in care proceedings and in criminal proceedings (where these are appropriate.
Juvenile courts sit either in a different room or building from other courts, or
at a different time, and only limited publicity is allowed.
Each of the 58 administrative counties of England and Wales has its own court
of quarter sessions, consisting of a bench of lay magistrates under a legally
qualified chairman or deputy chairman who mostly serves part-time. In addi¬
tion, there are five courts of quarter sessions in Greater London, each presided
over by a full-time chairman or deputy chairman; 93 boroughs have their own
courts in which the judge, known as the Recorder, sits by himself; and there
is a court of quarter sessions for the City of London, composed of the Lord
1 Under provisions of the Courts Act 1971.
8o
Assizes
New Structure
Criminal
Appeals
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mayor, the Recorder and the aldermen, which is, in practice, mainly an appeal
court. The work of quarter sessions in Liverpool and Manchester is taken in
the Crown courts.
Courts of assize are branches of the High Court presided over by High Court
judges and held at assize towns1—generally the county town of each county
and certain of the other larger towns and cities. There are seven circuits of
assize towns, round which the judges progress in set order three times a year.
Each town is visited once on each circuit; the larger towns are visited twice.
After all criminal business has been disposed of, the judge or judges may hear
civil actions in a differently conducted and differently constituted court.
The assize court for Greater London is the Central Criminal Court, which
sits at the Old Bailey. The jurisdiction of the court is entirely criminal and it
is in continuous session. The court may sit in two or more divisions; some¬
times as many as 15 courts sit at the same time, each presided over by a
salaried judicial officer.
The Crown Courts of Liverpool and Manchester act as courts of criminal
assize (and of quarter sessions) in and for two divisions of south Lancashire.
The courts, which are in continuous session, are presided over by Recorders.
Civil matters are dealt with in the ordinary assize courts for these areas.
The new Crown Court will take over the criminal work of quarter sessions,
assizes and the Lancashire Crown Courts, all of which will cease to exist.
It will have jurisdiction throughout England and Wales and will be able to
sit anywhere in the country. The judges will be High Court judges, Circuit
judges (who at the outset will be all existing full-time judges below the High
Court level), and Recorders, who will be part-time judges. The decision as to
which cases or classes of case shall be allocated to a judge of the High Court or
to a Circuit judge or to a Recorder will be taken by the Lord Chief Justice in
consultation with the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals may be brought on a point of law, by either the prosecutor or the
defendant, direct from the magistrates’ court to the High Court by way of
case stated, that is, by requesting the justice who sat in the court in question
to ‘state a case’ for the opinion of the High Court. The more usual appeal is
that of a convicted person against the conviction or his sentence, which is
heard by quarter sessions.2
Appeals against convictions or sentences by quarter sessions, assizes or
Crown Courts go to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). Appeals against
conviction may be brought to the court by right on any point of law, and with
leave of the trial judge or the court on any question of fact or mixed fact and
law. Appeals against sentence come with the leave of the court, provided that
the sentence was in the discretion of the trial judge and not fixed by law. The
Lord Chief Justice or a Lord Justice of Appeal presides in the Criminal Divi¬
sion and Queen’s Bench judges sit with Lords Justices of Appeal.3 A further
appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) to the House of Lords
can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
1 As an interim measure, pending the coming into operation of the Courts Act, assizes
have been discontinued in 12 towns by an Assize Order made under the 1970 Administra¬
tion of Justice Act. „ . ^
2 Under the Courts Act the appellate jurisdiction of quarter sessions is to be transterred
to the Crown Court. tt:„u
3 Under the Courts Act, the Lord Chief Justice will have power to ask any High Court
judge to sit in the Criminal Division.
LAW AND ORDER
8l
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
Trial
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the House of Lords that
the point is one that ought to be considered by the House. In addition, a prose¬
cutor or defendant may appeal to the House of Lords from a decision of the
High Court in a criminal case.
In the majority of cases there is no restriction on the right of a private citizen
to institute criminal proceedings, but most prosecutions in England and Wales
are, in fact, initiated and conducted by the police. In some cases the consent
of the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions or, less fre¬
quently, a government department is required. The Director of Public Prosecu¬
tions is also concerned with prosecutions in all the more serious cases of
indictable offences; in courts where a substantial number of cases with which
he is concerned are tried, standing counsel are appointed by the Attorney
General to appear on his behalf. At the Central Criminal Court in London,
for instance, there is a panel of counsel known as Treasury Counsel, who are
retained to prosecute in the Director’s cases.
In criminal cases arrest may be effected either on a warrant issued by a judicial
authority on sworn information laid before it or, in certain cases, without
warrant. In the latter circumstances, a police officer may release the defendant
on bail, that is, he may discharge him temporarily, subject to his entering into
a recognisance, with or without sureties, for a reasonable sum of money, to
appear in court or at a police station at an appointed time. If the defendant
cannot be brought before the magistrates’ court within a day, and his alleged
offence is not serious, the police must release him on bail. Magistrates also
have discretion to grant bail, which they exercise according to well-defined
principles. If bail is refused by the magistrates, the defendant is entitled to
apply to a judge of the High Court, and he must be informed of this right.
Once anyone has been charged with an offence, the police may not put any
further questions to him, save, in exceptional circumstances, to prevent or
minimise harm or loss to any person or to the public, or to clear up an ambi¬
guity in a previous answer or statement. This is laid down by the Judges’
Rules which, although they do not have the force of law, nevertheless carry
very great weight.
A person detained in custody who thinks that the grounds for his detention
are not lawful,1 may sue out a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him, this person then being required to appear before the court on the
day named to justify the detention. An application for such a writ is normally
made to a divisional court of the High Court either by the person detained or
by someone acting on his behalf. If no court is sitting the application may be
made to a single judge who may, and in some cases must, direct that it should
come before a divisional court. An application on behalf of anyone under 18 is
always first made to a judge sitting in chambers or in private. A writ may be
refused only by a divisional court.
Since criminal law in Britain presumes the innocence of the accused until
his guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to employ a legal
adviser for his defence and if he cannot afford to pay he may be granted legal
aid wholly or partly at the public expense; if remanded in custody he may be
1 Lawful grounds are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for contempt of court or of
either House of Parliament; detention of persons found to be mentally disordered;
detention of children by their parents or guardians; and detention expressly authorised
by Act of Parliament. The writ of habeas corpus runs in both criminal and civil cases.
82
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
visited in prison by his legal adviser to ensure that his defence is properly
prepared. During the preparation of the case, it is customary for the prosecution
to inform the defence of any relevant documents which it is not proposed to
put in evidence and to disclose them if asked to do so.
Criminal trials are (with rare exceptions) held in open court and the rules
of evidence (which are concerned with the proof of facts) are rigorously
applied. For instance, although the uncorroborated evidence of one witness is,
as a matter of English law, sufficient, conviction in criminal cases solely on the
evidence of an accomplice (or accomplices) is, in practice, never allowed unless
the judge has warned the jury of the danger of convicting without corroboration.
During the trial the defendant has the right to hear and subsequently to
cross-examine (normally through his counsel) all the witnesses for the prosecu¬
tion ; to call his own witnesses who, if they will not attend the trial of their own
free will, may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court either
in person or through his counsel—the defence having the right to the last
speech at the trial. Moreover, the defendant cannot himself be questioned
unless he consents to be sworn as a witness in his own defence. The right
to cross-examine him, even when he is so sworn, is limited by law, with the
object of excluding enquiry into his character or into past offences not relevant
to the particular charge on which he is being tried. Furthermore, although
confessions made in the course of previous judicial proceedings are admissible
as evidence if they have been made upon oath, no confessions made in any
other circumstances are admitted unless it can be proved that they were made
voluntarily, that is, without fear of prejudice or hope of advantage held out
by the person to whom the confessions were made.
In criminal trials by jury the judge determines questions of law, sums up
the evidence for the benefit of the jury, and acquits the accused or passes
sentence according to the verdict of the jury; but the jury alone decides the
issue of guilt or innocence. Verdicts in criminal proceedings need not neces¬
sarily be unanimous; in certain circumstances the jury may bring in a majority
verdict provided that, in a normal jury of 12 people, there are not more than
two dissentients.
If the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of
appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. If a
defence of insanity is accepted by the jury the verdict is ‘not guilty by reason
of insanity’ and the defendant will be detained in a suitable hospital. From a
verdict of ‘guilty’ or of ‘not guilty by reason of insanity’ there is a right of
appeal on the part of the defendant to the appropriate court.
CIVIL LAW IN
ENGLAND AND
WALES
Civil Courts
Magistrates’
Courts
County Courts
The main civil courts in England and Wales are the county courts, which
deal with a wide variety of civil cases, and the High Court, where those that
cannot be decided in the county courts are heard. Magistrates’ courts have
limited civil jurisdiction. Most appeals in civil cases go to the Court of Appeal
(Civil Division) and from there may go to the House of Lords.
The civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial proceed¬
ings for separation and maintenance orders, adoption, and affiliation and
guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction in respect of such
matters as nuisances under the Public Health Acts and the recovery of rates.
Committees of magistrates exercise quasi-administrative functions in relation
to the licensing of public houses and of betting shops and clubs.
County courts (of which there are 337) are so located that no part of a county
is more than a reasonable distance from one of them. They are presided over
Local Courts
The High Court
of Justice
LAW AND ORDER 83
by a paid judge, who almost always sits alone, although he may sit with a jury
consisting of eight persons if either party wishes it and the court makes an order
to that effect.1 There are 106 county court judges now in office, each having a
circuit, which is either one court, or a group of courts, depending on the amount
of work to be done.
The jurisdiction of the county courts covers: actions founded upon contract
and tort (except libel, slander, and some other types of case) where the
amount claimed is not more than ^750; equity matters, such as trusts and
mortgages, where the amount does not exceed £5,000; and actions for the
recovery of land where the net annual value for rating does not exceed £400.
Cases outside these limits may be tried in the county court by consent of the
parties, or may be transferred to the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the
Rent Act, landlord and tenant, and adoption. In addition bankruptcies are
dealt with in certain county courts outside London; undefended divorce
cases2 are heard and determined by county courts designated as divorce
county courts; and complaints of racial discrimination brought by the Race
Relations Board are heard by selected county court judges sitting with
assessors.
Certain local courts, which up to 1971 still exercised jurisdiction in civil cases,
are to be abolished.3 The Palatine Chancery Courts of Lancaster and Durham
are to be merged wdth the High Court, while the Mayor’s and City of London
court will continue as a county court, but without its hitherto unlimited juris¬
diction.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction, which is both original
and appellate and covers all civil and some criminal causes, is vested in all its
divisions. In general, however, particular types of work are assigned to a
particular division—distribution of work being governed by statute, the rules
of court and the practice of the court. For instance, the Family Division deals
with all jurisdiction of a family kind, including matrimonial cases, and cases
relating to wardship, adoption, guardianship, and non-contentious probate
matters; while Admiralty and prize jurisdiction rests with a specially constitu¬
ted Admiralty Court of the Queen’s Bench Division. Although the judges can
sit in any division, each is in practice assigned to a particular one.
The High Court is staffed by 68 puisne judges (judges without any other
special office). The Lord Chancellor is president of the Court of Appeal and
of the Chancery Division—the administration of the Chancery Division being
the responsibility of the senior judge known as the Vice-Chancellor. The
Queen’s Bench Division is presided over by the Lord Chief Justice of England,
who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in the legal hierarchy, and the Family
Division is headed by the President. Under the Courts Act, the High Court
will be able to sit anywhere in England and Wales.
For the hearing of cases at first instance, High Court judges sit singly.
Appellate jurisdiction in civil matters from inferior courts is exercised by
1 The Courts Act provides that the summoning of juries, both civil and criminal, is to be
the responsibility of the Lord Chancellor.
2 Defended cases are transferred to the High Court.
3 Under the Courts Act the courts to be abolished are the Liverpool Court of Passage,
the Tolzey and Pie Poudre Courts of the City and County of Bristol, the Norwich
Guildhall Court, and the Salford Hundred Court. There remain in existence over 165
other local courts whose jurisdiction is seldom, if ever, exercised.
84
Appellate Courts
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
divisional courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of
the appropriate division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial proceedings heard by magistrates’ courts he to a
divisional court of the Family Division of the High Court. Affiliation appeals
are heard by quarter sessions,1 as are appeals from decisions of the licensing
and betting licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High Court
and the county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) an
may (with leave of the court or of the House of Lords) go on to the House of
Lords, which is the ultimate court of appeal in civil cases in the United
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) are the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the President and the Master of the Rolls;
the ordinary members are 14 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the ten Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals
(which normally takes place in a committee room and not in the legislative
chamber), but peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit.
The president of the House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
civil
Proceedings
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person;
no preliminary enquiry as to the authenticity of the grievance is required. 1 he
most common form of proceedings is an action commenced by a writ ot
summons served on the defendant by the plaintiff, which notifies the defendant
that the plaintiff has a claim against him and states the nature of the claim.
If the defendant intends to contest the claim, he ‘enters an appearance by
informing the court to this effect and documents setting out the precise
question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court.
A decree for divorce can be obtained only after a hearing in court, whether
or not the case is defended. . , .
Other civil proceedings can generally be abandoned or compromised at any
time without leave of the court (because they are of concern only to those
""f^the'greaTmajority of cases, the parties to a dispute are able to settle
their differences through their solicitors before the stage of actual trial is
reached. Actions that are brought to court are usually tried by a judge without
a jury, except in cases involving claims for defamation, false imprisonment,
malicious prosecution, seduction, or breach of promise of marriage when
either party may insist on trial by jury, or in a case of fraud when the defen¬
dant may claim this right. In trials where a jury is present, the jury is respon¬
sible for deciding questions of fact (as in criminal trials) and also the amoun
of damages to be awarded to the injured party and, under the Courts Act,
majority verdicts will be accepted. , . c +, _ ,
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Refusal to obey a judgment directing the defendant to do something or o
refrain from doing something may result in imprisonment for contempt ot
court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant
of the court. . ... . ^
As a rule, the court orders that the costs of an action (the barrister s fees,
solicitor’s charges and essential disbursements) should be paid by the losing
1 See footnote 2, p. 80.
LAW AND ORDER
CRIMINAL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Courts of
Criminal
Jurisdiction
Burgh (or Police)
Courts
Justice of the Peace
Courts
The Sheriff Court
The High Court
of Justiciary
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
85
party, although in practice the winning party always pays part of them. In
certain circumstances (for instance, extravagance or negligence in the conduct
of the case), the court may, at its discretion, refuse to order that one party’s
costs should be borne by the other.
Criminal cases in Scotland1 are heard either under solemn procedure, when
proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a jury, or under
summary procedure, when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the
High Court of Justiciary and the more serious ones in the sheriff court are
tried under solemn procedure. Proceedings are taken under summary pro¬
cedure in the less serious cases in the sheriff court, and in the justice of the
peace and burgh (or police) courts.
These courts are established in burghs. The judges are town councillors who
are serving (or have served) in the office of magistrate of the burgh. In
Glasgow stipendiary magistrates act as judges of three of the courts.
These courts are organised on a county (and county of city) basis, the judges
being the justices of the peace for the county (or county of city).
Scotland is divided into sheriffdoms, each consisting of a county or combina¬
tion of counties, and these sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court
districts. A sheriffdom has a sheriff-principal and a number of sheriffs who
act as the judges of the court. The sheriff courts exercise an extensive civil
jurisdiction, as well as a criminal jurisdiction.
The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court of first instance.
Any one of the following judges is entitled to try cases in the High Court: the
Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of Session),
the Lord Justice Clerk, or any one of the 16 Lords Commissioner of Justiciary
who are also judges of the Court of Session. The seat of the court is in Edin¬
burgh, but the judges go on circuit to preside at trials in other towns.
A person convicted in the High Court or in a sheriff court on indictment may
appeal to the High Court of Justiciary (a) against his conviction on any ground
which involves a question of law alone, or, with leave of the High Court or
upon the certificate of the judge who presided at the trial that it is a fit case
for appeal, on any ground, and (b) against his sentence, with the leave of the
High Court, unless the sentence is one fixed by law. Appeals are heard by
three or more judges, and there is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
A person convicted summarily may appeal to the High Court, but only on
questions of law and procedure, and not on issues of fact.
In Scotland the police make preliminary investigation of all cases of crime
discovered by or made known to them, but it is for the Public Prosecutor
concerned (the Lord Advocate in the High Court, the Procurators Fiscal in
the sheriff court, and the justice of the peace fiscal and burgh prosecutor in
the justice of the peace and burgh courts respectively) to decide whether or
not to prosecute and, in the case of the Procurator Fiscal, to decide whether
1 A departmental committee is studying trial and pre-trial procedure in Scotland with a
view to ascertaining whether any changes of law or practice are required.
86
Arrest
Trial
CIVIL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to proceed summarily or to charge the accused by petition with a view to
proceedings on indictment.
The police in Scotland have very broadly the same powers of arrest as have
the police in England and Wales. The Judges’ Rules do not apply in Scotland,
but when anyone is arrested he must be cautioned and have the charge read
over to him. Thereafter, only his voluntary statements are used in evidence
at his trial, and the court will reject any statements made by him unless it is
satisfied that they have been fairly obtained.
As in England and Wales, when anyone is apprehended in Scotland, he
must be brought before the court competent to deal with his case with the
least possible delay. Where a prosecution on indictment is contemplated,
the accused is brought before a judge for judicial examination and the judge
may then commit him for trial or for further examination. Eight days may
elapse between commitment for further examination and commitment for
trial.
People in custody, other than those charged with murder or treason, may
be liberated on bail by the sheriff or, if the offence is within the jurisdiction
of a summary court other than the sheriff court, by that court or by the police.
Even in the case of murder or treason, bail may be granted at the discretion
of the Lord Advocate or the High Court of Justiciary. There is a right of
appeal to the High Court by the accused person against the refusal of bail,
by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by either party against the
amount fixed. .
The writ of habeas corpus does not apply in Scotland, but the High Court
of Justiciary has power to release anyone unlawfully detained and trials must,
in any event, be brought to a conclusion within no days of committal.
In trials on indictment, the first ‘pleading’ diet takes place in the sheriff court,
when the accused person is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty. If he
pleads not guilty, the case is continued to the second ‘trial’ diet in the appro¬
priate court. If he pleads guilty, and it is a case which is to be dealt with in the
sheriff court, the sheriff may dispose of it at once. If it is a High Court case
it is continued to the second diet in the High Court for disposal.
The second diet is held at least nine days after the pleading diet, either
before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury. Evidence is led (without
opening speeches) and there are closing speeches for the prosecution and for
the defence, followed by the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return
a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’, both of which result in acquittal,
or they may find the accused ‘guilty’, in which case the court proceeds to
deliver sentence. The verdict may be by a majority of eight to seven. Fairness
to the accused is ensured by the fact that, with a few minor exceptions, no
person may be convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or
corroboration of one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly impli¬
cate the accused in the crime.
At summary trials the accused is asked to plead to the charge at the first
calling of the case and, if he pleads guilty, the court may dispose of the case.
Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court may proceed to trial at once or it
may appoint a trial diet for a later date.
The main courts of civil jurisdiction in Scotland are the sheriff courts which,
in their civil capacity, correspond roughly to the county courts in England
Civil Courts
Sheriff Courts
The Court of
Session
The Scottish Land
Court
Civil
Proceedings
COURTS IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
LAW AND ORDER 87
and Wales, and the Court of Session, which is the supreme civil court in
Scotland.
The civil jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to nearly all actions and is
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff,
against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or
directly to the Court of Session. Minor civil matters (actions not exceeding
£5 in value) may be tried by justices of the peace.
The Court of Session has universal jurisdiction, sits only in Edinburgh, and
has sole jurisdiction, inter alia, in divorce actions. The court is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
which is mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions
of equal status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being presided
over by the Lord President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk.
From the Inner House an appeal may lie to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court is a special court that deals with certain agricultural
matters. The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank
and dignity of a judge of the Court of Session.
In Scotland civil proceedings are initiated by the service on the defender of
a writ or summons, which sets out the nature of the decree which the pursuer
seeks, a statement of facts upon which the pursuer founds his claim, and a
statement of the legal propositions upon which the pursuer maintains that he
is entitled to the remedy which he seeks. In Court of Session actions the next
step is the calling of the summons, which is the publication of the action in
the court lists. If the defender intends to contest the action, he must ‘enter
appearance’ within two days of calling and thereafter lodge defences to it. In
ordinary sheriff court actions ‘entering appearance’ is followed by the ‘tabling
of the cause’, which involves a formal appearance in court by solicitors, or, in
some cases, by the parties to the dispute. In summary and small debt actions
the defender is simply given notice of the date on which the action will be
heard. It is much more common in Scotland than in England and Wales to
have legal debates in court as to the competency or relevancy of the written
pleadings prior to the proof.
In Scotland a pursuer can abandon his case, including any matrimonial
case, at any time, but where abandonment is sought after the commencement
of the proof or trial, only with leave of the court. Trial by jury in civil action
in Scotland is more common than in England and Wales, being the usual form
of procedure in actions for damages for personal injuries.
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in
England and Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller com¬
munity. The superior courts comprise the Supreme Court of Judicature (con¬
sisting of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal) and the Court
of Criminal Appeal. The High Court is the superior court of first instance,
is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench Division (including
probate, matrimonial and Admiralty proceedings) and the circuit courts and
is constituted of the Lord Chief Justice, as president, and four judges. The
Court of Appeal, which is the appellate tribunal, is constituted of the Lord
Chief Justice and two Lords Justices of Appeal.
The inferior courts are the county courts and courts of summary jurisdiction
(petty sessions). The county courts exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction
88
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and are presided over by county court judges, of whom there are five (two
of them having a title of Recorder—of Belfast and of Londonderry). At least
four sittings of the court are held annually in each division. Petty session courts
are composed of one resident magistrate (who corresponds to a stipendiary
magistrate in England and Wales) who sits alone except in some specific cases,
for instance, in a special crimes court, where two may adjudicate. Juvenile
courts are composed of one resident magistrate and two lay members, one of
whom must be a woman.
SPECIAL COURTS
Coroners’
Courts
Administrative
Tribunals
Coroners’ courts are common law courts convened when a person appears to
have died a violent or unnatural death or a sudden death of which the cause
is unknown, and in certain other circumstances. In such cases, it is the duty
of the local coroner (who may be a barrister, a solicitor, or a medical practi¬
tioner of not less than five years’ standing, appointed by county, county
borough, or certain borough councils) to hold an enquiry into how, when and
where the deceased died; he may hold an inquest in court for this purpose,
and he must do so if he has reason to believe that the deceased has died a
violent or unnatural death or has died in prison or in circumstances for which
an Act of Parliament provides that an inquest must be held. If he has reason
to suspect that the death was due to murder, suicide, manslaughter or infanti¬
cide, or was caused by an accident arising out of the use of a vehicle on the
public highway, he must summon a jury.
Cases may be brought to the notice of the coroner by medical practitioners,
by the police, by various public authorities or by members of the public, i he
amount of work varies considerably according to the type of locality.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fisca
enquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and
may report the result of his enquiries to the Crown Agent in order that Crown
Counsel may consider what proceedings, if any, are required.
In Northern Ireland coroners are appointed by the Minister of Home
Affairs and must, on appointment, be either barristers-at-law of not less than
five years’ standing practising in Northern Ireland or practising solicitors of
the Supreme Court of Judicature in Northern Ireland of not less than five
years’ standing.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial or
quasi-judicial functions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a
rule, they are set up by Act of Parliament or under powers conferred by
statute, which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure.
The continuing expansion of governmental activity and involvement in t e
social and economic affairs of the nation has greatly multiplied the occasions
on which the individual may find himself at issue with the administration,
with a group of people or with another individual; consequently there has
been a substantial growth in the number of tribunals (there are over 2,000 in
existence) and in the range of their activities during the past 20 years. I heir
constitution follows a fairly general pattern: all, for instance consist of an
uneven number of persons so that a majority decision can be reached; members
are usually appointed by the minister concerned with the subject but other
authorities (for instance, the Crown, the Lord Chancellor or the Master of
the Rolls) have the power of appointment in appropriate cases the Lord
Chancellor, or the Lord President of the Court of Session in Scotland, makes
appointments in most cases where a lawyer chairman or member is require ,
and, with some exceptions, members of tribunals hold office for a period
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Board
Courts Martial
LAW AND ORDER 89
specified in the warrant or instrument by which they are appointed. Administra¬
tive tribunals may be broadly classified as follows:
1. those which have permanent members appointed for their special know¬
ledge, and a chairman who must be a lawyer of experience: for instance,
the Transport Tribunal, which hears appeals relating to goods vehicles
operators’ licences throughout Great Britain, and the Lands Tribunal, which
has jurisdiction in a variety of matters relating to the value of property;
2. those which deal exclusively with matters of interest to one government
department or public authority: for instance, the Pensions Appeal Tribunals,
which hear appeals against the rejection by the Secretary of State for Social
Services of war service pension claims, and the Special Commissioners of
Income Tax who hear appeals on income tax matters from the rulings of
the Inland Revenue officials; and
3. those appointed by a minister to arbitrate between individuals: for instance,
the Rent Tribunals, which have jurisdiction in the determination of rents
of certain properties.
There are also tribunals which enforce professional discipline, such as the
General Medical Council and the Disciplinary Committee of The Law
Society, but these are entirely different in constitution from the statutory
tribunals and have no jurisdiction over the general public.
Although there is no general provision respecting appeals from statutory
tribunals, the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971 provides for an appeal, at
least on a point of law, from all the more important tribunals to the High
Court, or, in Scotland, to the Court of Session. An appeal may also lie to a
specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a minister of the Crown or to an
independent referee. An advisory body known as the Council on Tribunals
(appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of State for
Scotland) exercises general supervision1 over tribunals and reports on par¬
ticular matters, those peculiar to Scotland being dealt with by the Scottish
Committee of the Council.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board consists of a chairman of wide
legal experience and eight other legally qualified members appointed by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland after consultation
with the Lord Chancellor. Its function is to entertain applications for ex gratia
payments of compensation, in certain circumstances, to victims of crimes of
violence in Great Britain or on a British vessel or aircraft. Compensation,
which is assessed on the basis of common law damages and usually takes the
form of a lump sum payment, amounts to more than £2 million a year. Some
8,000 applications a year are currently received.
Courts martial have jurisdiction, under the Army Act and the Air Force Act
of 1955 (as amended) and the Naval Discipline Act of 1957 (also as amended),
over serving members of the armed forces and, in certain circumstances, their
dependants and other civilians who accompany them outside the United
Kingdom. Courts martial may not deal with charges involving treason,
murder, manslaughter or rape, if the offence is committed in the United
Kingdom. Civil offences committed in the United Kingdom by members of
the armed forces are also normally dealt with in the ordinary courts.
A court martial (which consists of a president and a number of serving
Excluding supervision of the professional disciplinary tribunals.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
officers) may be convened by any authorised officer. A judge advocate is
appointed to sit with the court in more serious cases brought under the
Army and Air Force Acts (and at every trial brought under the Naval
Discipline Act) to advise upon law and procedure and, in the former case, to
sum up the evidence. The judge advocate in the case of the Army and the
Air Force is a civilian and a barrister appointed by the Office of the Judge
Advocate General. In the case of the Navy he is a legally qualified serving
officer appointed by the convening authority.
Appeals lie to the Courts Martial Appeals Court, and from that court to
the House of Lords if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or to the House of Lords
that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
ADMINISTRATION In the United Kingdom no single minister is responsible for the operation of
/''VTI' nPTTT? - « -w-x *1 • 1 * i  £   ^ «-« A /"vf ‘t’ Vi 111 fl 1 Cl H1 SVStdXX 111
OF THE
JUDICIAL
SYSTEM
the law. Responsibility for the administration of the judicial system in
England and Wales, when it does not rest with the courts themselves, lies
partly with the Lord Chancellor and partly with the Home Secretary; m
Scotland it lies with the Secretary of State. In England the Lord Chancellor
is concerned with the composition of all courts, both criminal and civil with
parts of criminal procedure and with everything relating to civil law, and the
Home Secretary with criminal law, preventing offences, apprehending
offenders, part of the process of trying them, and virtually the whole of then:
treatment. The Prime Minister is also concerned in that he is responsible tor
recommending to the Crown the highest judicial appointments.
The administrative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature (the Cour
of Appeal and the High Court) and the appointment of the officers of the court
is partly in the hands of the Lord Chancellor and partly in the hands of the
appropriate judges. The Lord Chancellor is a member of the Rule Committee
(which makes the rules of the Supreme Court) and of the Matrimonial Causes
Rule Committee; he appoints the County Court Rule Committee, and has
power to alter or disallow the rules made by it.1 , T j 11
When the new court structure comes into operation, the Lord Chancellor
will also be responsible for the administration of the High Court, the Crown
Court and the county courts through a unified court administrative service
organised on a circuit basis under a senior officer, known as a circuit ad¬
ministrator’. Two High Court judges, to be known as ‘presiding judges , are
to be assigned to each circuit to assist the circuit administrator by planning the
itineraries of the judges in their circuit, inviting individual circuit judges to
give assistance to the High Court Bench and supervising the judicial aspects of
business in the courts. , . .
Magistrates’ courts are mainly administered by the magistrates themselves,
chiefly through committees known as magistrates’ courts committees (the com¬
mittee of magistrates in inner London) but the local authorities with financial
assistance from the Government, are responsible for meeting their costs, and
the Home Secretary, besides exercising a general oversight, has certain specific
responsibilities, including the approval of boundary changes to petty sessional
division areas, approval of the appointment of justices clerks, and decid ng
disputes on financial matters. n- r ^ tj- u
In Scotland the Secretary of State appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the staffing and
general organisation of the sheriff courts. He is also responsible, jointly with
Twhen the Crown Court is established it will be part of the Supreme Court and the
Lord Chancellor will also head the Crown Court Rule Committee.
LAW AND ORDER
91
THE PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
the Lord Advocate, for appointing the members of the Law Commission for
Scotland (which has functions similar to those of the English Law Com¬
mission).
In Northern Ireland the administration of the superior courts has been
reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. The judges are appointed by
the Crown and are removable only on an address of both Houses of that
Parliament. The Minister of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland is responsible
for the staffing and general organisation of the county and petty sessions
courts; the judges of the county court and resident magistrates of the
magistrates’ courts are appointed by the Governor of Northern Ireland.
The operation of the law requires the participation of judges, with whom,
aided in certain cases by juries, the decision of disputed cases rests, and of the
officers of the court, who have general or specialised functions of an adminis¬
trative (and sometimes of a judicial) nature in the courts to which they are
attached. Barristers (advocates in Scotland) and solicitors who are entrusted
with representing the interests of the parties to a dispute are also involved
because, although the law allows an individual to conduct his own case if he
wishes, most people prefer to be legally represented.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts (since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power) and the Sovereign, acting on the
advice of ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary. In
England and Wales appointments to the highest positions—the Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the
President of the Family Division and the Lords Justices who are the judges of
the Court of Appeal—are made on the recommendation of the Prime Minister,
while the Lord Chancellor recommends the appointment of the puisne judges,
the county court judges (except in Lancashire where they are recommended
by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster), the chairmen of quarter sessions,1
the recorders of boroughs, and the metropolitan and other stipendiary
magistrates. Justices of the peace are appointed on behalf of the Crown by the
Lord Chancellor,2 who is advised, as to a county by the Lord Lieutenant3 with
the assistance of a local advisory committee, and as to the boroughs by separate
advisory committees.
In Scotland the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appoint¬
ment of the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord
Justice Clerk. Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies
with the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State is responsible
for the appointment and removal of justices of the peace.
Judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor who, as
well as being head of the judiciary, is a leading member of the Government
in power. With the exception of justices of the peace, judges are normally
appointed from practising barristers, advocates or solicitors and neither their
training nor their career is in any way dictated by the State. Justices of the
peace need no legal qualifications, being appointed for their qualities of in¬
tegrity and understanding and as broadly representative of the community
1 The Lord Chancellor will be responsible for recommending appointments to the
Circuit bench, when this is established.
2 Except in Lancashire, where the Chancellor of the Duchy acts on behalf of the Crown
in this matter.
3 The office of the Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth
century. Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county
militia.
92
Juries
The Legal
Profession
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which they serve. On appointment, however, they give an undertaking to com¬
plete a period of basic training, so that they may obtain a sufficient knowledge
of the law, including the rules of evidence, and may understand the nature
and purpose of sentencing. In certain circumstances (for instancy m cases of
misconduct or proven incapacity) judges of the inferior courts in England and
Wales may be removed from their position by the Lord Chancellor, and in
Scotland, subject to specified conditions, by the Secretary of State on a
report prepared at his instance by the Lord President of the Court of Session
and the Lord Justice Clerk. In order to safeguard and perpetuate the inde¬
pendence of the judiciary from the executive however, superior judges m
England and Wales (other than the Lord Chancellor who, as a Cabinet
Minister, changes with the Government) are subject to a power of remova
only by the Sovereign on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament
in Scotland there is no statutory provision for removal of judges of the Court
of Session or High Court of Justiciary from office and it is probable that
special legislation would be required to effect such a dismissal.
A iury in England and Wales summoned to a criminal or civil court consists of
12J persons (except in county courts, where it consists of eight persons). In
Scotland the jury consists of 15 persons in criminal cases and 12 m civil cases
and in Northern Ireland of 12 in criminal and seven in civil cases. Most house¬
holders in Britain (men and women alike) are liable for jury service if they are
British subjects between the ages of 21 and 60, but people following certain
occupations can claim exemption and certain persons with criminal records
^ A'iu'Jyfsrampletely independent of both the judiciary and the executive.
In criminal cases the accused can have up to seven jurors (in Scotland, five)
changed without giving reasons and both defence and prosecution can object
for cause shown (for instance, lack of impartiality), but once members of the
jury have been sworn, they are protected by law from interference of any kin .
J At certain inquests at coroners’ courts in England and Wales and Northern
Ireland and at fatal accident enquiries in Scotland, a jury is required to e
present to return a verdict on how, when and where a deceased person died.
Juries in this instance consist of from seven to eleven jurors, and the coroner-
may accept a majority verdict provided that the minority consists of not
more than two. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner o
decide whether objects of gold or silver found in the ground are treasure
trove’.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers1 (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Each performs distinct duties-sohcitors undertake
legal business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems sub¬
mitted through solicitors and conduct proceedings in the higher cour s
though certain functions are common to both.
To become a barrister in England a student must have reached an accepted
educational standard, have passed a legal examination prescribed by the
Council of Legal Education and have become °nerr°f
Inns of Court—Lincoln’s Inn, the Inner Temple, the Middle Temple and
Gray’s Inn—where he must keep eight terms. He may then be called to the
Bar, but is normally not allowed to practise until he has kept a further tour
terms and completed six months’ pupillage with a practising barrister of at
1 Known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and collectively and individually as ‘counsel’.
LEGAL AID AND
ADVICE
Legal Aid in
Civil Cases
LAW AND ORDER 93
least five years’ standing. A barrister with a substantial junior practice may
apply to the Lord Chancellor for a patent appointing him Queen’s Counsel—
a proceeding known as ‘taking silk’. Most of the higher judicial offices are
filled from the ranks of Queen’s Counsel. The professional conduct of a
barrister is subject to the scrutiny of the General Council of the Bar; discipline
is vested in the Senate of the four Inns.
A prospective solicitor in England and Wales must be considered suitable
by the appropriate committee of The Law Society (the professional organisa¬
tion of solicitors) and he must enter into ‘articles of clerkship’ with a practising
solicitor of not less than five years’ standing before he can begin his profes¬
sional career. The term of articles lasts for two, three or five years, depending
upon the educational qualifications of the student. An articled clerk must
pass the necessary examinations prescribed by The Law Society and, unless
he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is generally
required to attend a course of studies at a recognised law school. Once a
solicitor is qualified, he may become a member of The Law Society.
In Scotland prospective advocates and solicitors undergo much the same
training. While the respective professional organisations—the Faculty of
Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland—have their own professional
examinations, candidates usually obtain exemption from them by including
the necessary subjects in a law degree of a Scottish university. The prospective
advocate must, thereafter, undergo a period of training (either of 21 months
or of 12 months depending on whether or not he has been granted exemption
from nine months’ training) in a solicitor’s office, followed by about nine
months’ pupilage with a practising advocate. The prospective solicitor must
serve an apprenticeship of two years in a solicitor’s office before he can begin
his professional career.
In Northern Ireland barristers are members of the Inn of Court of Northern
Ireland; there is also a General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The
professional organisation for solicitors is the Incorporated Law Society of
Northern Ireland.
In Britain legal aid is available for nearly all types of civil and criminal
proceedings in nearly all courts of law. It is also available for all proceedings
before the Lands Tribunal and oral legal advice and in certain circumstances
where the assistance of a lawyer is needed but which do not (or do not yet)
involve litigation.
Free legal aid in civil cases is available to persons with very small incomes and
capital, and contributory legal aid to those with larger but still limited means.
The majority of people are financially eligible for legal aid.
The legal aid scheme in England and Wales is run by The Law Society
under the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor, assisted by an advisory
committee. It is operated by 13 area committees and a network of local com¬
mittees composed of barristers and solicitors (who may be paid a fee), with a
salaried staff. The cost is met from the Legal Aid Fund, drawn from three
sources: contributions from assisted persons; costs recovered from opposite
parties in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer.
Applicants for free legal aid must show that they have reasonable grounds
for asserting or disputing a claim. A successful applicant is allowed to select
from a panel a solicitor who, if necessary, instructs a barrister, and the case
is then conducted in the ordinary way. Certain types of action, including
libel and slander, are excluded from the scheme.
94
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Scotland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of
Scotland through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court
Committee and 16 local committees. To obtain legal aid for litigation an
applicant is required to show ‘probable cause’ and produce in support of his
application a statement corroborated according to the requirements of Scottish
law. Assistance is available in connection with appeals to the House of Lords
from the Court of Session, in civil proceedings before the Court of Session,
the Lands Valuation Appeal Court, the Scottish Land Court, the Lands
Tribunal for Scotland and the sheriff courts, and in matters not involving
litigation. Where litigation is not involved, the applicant must show he has
reasonable grounds for taking the proposed legal action.
In Northern Ireland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Incorpora¬
ted Law Society of Northern Ireland under the general guidance of the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The scheme provides for legal aid in proceedings
in the Supreme Court, the county courts and in certain civil proceedings in
magistrates’ courts.
Legal Aid in
Criminal Courts
In the criminal courts in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made
by the court or courts concerned if it appears that a defendant s means are
such that he requires financial help in meeting the costs of the proceedings
in which he is involved (such an order must be made when a person is com¬
mitted for trial on a charge of murder or where the prosecutor appeals or
applies for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) or
the Courts-Martial Appeal Court to the House of Lords). No limit of mcome
or capital above which a person is ineligible for legal aid is specified, but the
court has power to order applicants to pay a reasonable contribution towards
the cost of the case according to their means. Generally, legal aid in cnmma
proceedings consists of representation by a solicitor and counsel assigne y
the court, but in most proceedings in magistrates’ courts the recipient is enti e
only to the services of a solicitor, and in assize and quarter sessions proceedings
the court may, in cases of urgency (when there is no time to instruct a solicitor),
order that legal aid shall consist of representation by counsel only.
In appeal cases at quarter sessions legal aid may be granted by a magistra es
court or a court of quarter sessions. The granting of legal aid for appeals to the
Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) rests with that court, which may also
grant legal aid for the purposes of a further appeal to the House of Lords.
The cost of legal aid in magistrates’ courts is paid out of the Legal Aid
Fund. In the higher courts payments are made in the first instance out of
local authority funds and the cost is reimbursed by the central Government.
Legal aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland is available to all persons in
custody on their first appearance in the High Court of Justiciary and he
sheriff courts. Otherwise, it is granted for proceedings m these courts at t e
discretion of the courts themselves except in appeals, when the final decision
whether or not it should be granted is in the hands of the Supreme Court
Committee of the Law Society of Scotland. * u r ~
In Northern Ireland free legal aid is available in trials on indictment before
courts of assize and in county courts and in criminal proceedings before
magistrates’ courts. It is also available for appeals from magistrates courts
to the county court and in appeals from county courts and courts of assize
to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).
Legal Advice
Oral advice on legal matters is available throughout the United Kingdom, free
of charge to persons in receipt of social security benefit and at a very reasonab e
LAW AND ORDER
95
Law Reform
Penalties
cost (^o-i 2-^ for an interview of up to 90 minutes) to those of limited means.
Advice is given by practising solicitors paid out of legal aid funds. The scheme
is administered by the law societies, which also run voluntary schemes (for a
fee of 3^1 for an initial interview of up to 30 minutes) for those who do not
qualify for statutory assistance.
The duty of keeping the law under review in order to ensure that it meets the
needs of modern society lies, in England and Wales with the Law Reform
Committee, the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Law Commission,
and in Scotland with the Law Commission for Scotland. The Law Reform
Committee and the Criminal Law Revision Committee are standing commit¬
tees of judges and lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord Chancellor and
the Home Secretary, to examine such aspects of the civil and criminal law
as may be referred to them by the appropriate minister. The Law Commission
is a permanent body consisting of five lawyers of high standing, charged with
the duty of scrutinising the law with a view to its systematic development and
reform, including the possibility of codification, the elimination of anomalies,
the repeal of obsolete and unnecessary enactments, and the reduction of the
number of separate enactments. The Commission submits programmes of
reform to the Lord Chancellor and may recommend further examination of
specified topics by itself or by some other body, such as a Royal Commission
or the Law Reform Committee or Criminal Law Revision Committee. The
Lord Chancellor may also ask the Commission to prepare draft Bills or to
advise government departments. In the course of its work the Commission has
power to consider the legal systems of other countries.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The chief aims of the penal systems of the United Kingdom are to deter the
potential law-breaker and to reform the convicted offender. The element of
deterrence is intended to lie in the fear of detection, public trial and possibility
of punishment rather than in the severity of the punishment itself. In England
and Wales the Home Secretary is assisted by an Advisory Council on the Penal
System, which makes recommendations on specific aspects of the prevention
of crime and the treatment of offenders.
Methods current in British penal practice include imprisonment (and, for
certain categories of offender, other forms of custodial treatment); probation;
fines; and absolute or (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) conditional
discharge for up to three years. In addition, an offender may be ‘bound over’—
that is to say, required to pledge money, with or without sureties, ‘to keep the
peace and be of good behaviour’. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland,
if sentenced to imprisonment for two years or less, an offender may be given
a suspended sentence, which means that the sentence will not actually be
served unless he commits a further offence punishable with imprisonment
within a period of between one and three years. If, however, he does commit
such an offence the suspended sentence will normally take effect and a further
sentence may be imposed.
The automatic penalty for murder in England, Wales and Scotland, where
the death penalty has been abolished, is imprisonment for life—a sentence
which may also be imposed for manslaughter and certain other offences,
including rape, robbery with violence, and arson. In Northern Ireland the
death penalty has been retained for two categories of ‘capital’ murder:
96
Administrative
Authorities
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
murder of a constable or other person in the service of the Crown in the
course of duty involving enforcement of the law, maintenance of law and
order, or the administration or advancement of justice; and murder done in
the course of furtherance of any seditious conspiracy or of the activities of an
unlawful organisation. For other kinds of murder it has been abolished.
Except in cases of murder, for which the penalty is prescribed by law, the
court which tries the offender has discretion to select the penalty that it
considers most suitable in the light of the nature and gravity of the offence
and the information available about the character and needs of the offender.
In certain cases this discretion is modified by statutory provisions designed
for the most part to ensure that prison sentences are kept to a minimum.
In England and Wales, no offender under the age of 17 may be sentenced to
imprisonment; for those aged 17 and under 21 prison sentences must be for
less than six months or for more than three years except in the case of a per¬
sistent offender, who may be sent to prison for 18 months or more. In Scotland
no offender under 21 may be sent to prison; where neither borstal training nor
detention in a detention centre is thought appropriate, he may be sent to a
young offenders’ institution. In England and Wales the courts must suspend
sentences of up to six months’ imprisonment unless the offender has served a
previous prison sentence or the crime involved violence. On the other hand,
special sentences of somewhat longer duration (extended sentences) may be
imposed on persistent offenders.
In England and Wales the Home Secretary is the minister generally respon¬
sible for legislation relating to the treatment of offenders, for collecting
statistical and other information about the operation of the penal system,
for keeping penal methods under review, and for bringing information about
these methods to the attention of the courts. He has specific responsibilities
in connection with accommodation for children in care, for promoting the
efficiency of the probation service, and for providing, maintaining and
managing prisons, borstal institutions, detention centres, remand centres and
attendance centres. Prison policy is carried out by the Prison Department of
the Home Office through the agency of the prison service which operates
under a director-general and includes a headquarters organisation, regional
directors, the governors and staff of the penal establishments and members
of particular professions, such as medical officers, chaplains and social workers.
Reports to the Home Secretary on the administration of local prisons are
made by visiting committees of justices of the peace appointed by the various
courts of quarter session in the area, in numbers fixed by the Home Secretary.
For all other prisons and for borstals, detention centres and remand centres
this function is performed by boards of visitors appointed by the Home
Secretary, not less than two members of which must be justices of the peace.
The other functions of these bodies include acting as the superior disciplinary
authority for reports of a more serious nature against prisoners and pro¬
viding an independent channel of complaint for any prisoner having a
grievance.
The boards of visitors also advise on the release on licence of the inmates
of borstals. The work of both committees and boards helps to preserve local
interest, and is voluntary.
The penal systems in Scotland and Northern Ireland are based on principles
similar to those applied in England and Wales. In Scotland the system is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, and in Northern Ireland
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
LAW AND ORDER
97
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
The aims of the prison service are briefly to provide for the detention of those
committed to custody under the law in conditions generally acceptable to
society and to develop methods of treatment and training which will ‘en¬
courage and assist them to lead a good and useful life’.1 To this end prisoners
are classified into groups, according to their record, character, potentialities
and the risk they present to security, and assigned, so far as circumstances
permit, to the establishment best suited to their needs. Untried prisoners are
separated from convicted prisoners and, as far as practicable, those under 21
are separated from those over that age.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known
as ‘local prisons; all are closed establishments. Other prisons, which may be
open or closed, receive prisoners on transfer from local prisons. To relieve
overcrowding in local prisons and generally to improve prisoners’ conditions,
new prisons are being built and existing establishments redeveloped and
modernised. During the last ten years, 5,000 new places have been provided in
England and Wales, and the current building programme envisages work
starting on about 2,000 places a year from the financial year 1970-71 onwards.
In Scotland the analogous figures are 1,300 new places provided and an annual
increase of 400 places in the future.
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to im¬
prisonment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence
provided that this does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in Scotland,
30 days). In addition, except in Northern Ireland, prisoners serving fixed
sentences become eligible for consideration for release on parole after serving
one-third of their sentence, subject to a minimum of one year. Each eligible
prisoner is first considered by a local review committee which reports to the
Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland on his suitability for
parole. The Minister concerned then refers a selection of the recommenda¬
tions to the Parole Board for England and Wales or the Parole Board for Scot¬
land, each of which consists of a chairman and a number of other members (32
in England and Wales and 13 in Scotland), appointed by the Home Secretary
and the Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Where the Parole Board
recommends favourably, the decision whether or not to release the prisoner
depends finally on the Minister, but where the Board does not recommend
release the Minister has no power to grant parole. The licence remains in force
until the date on which the prisoner would have been released if he had not
been licensed or, for prisoners serving extended sentences (in England and
Wales only) and offenders sentenced while under 21 years of age, until the end
of the sentence.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence. In
Great Britain the usual practice in such cases is to seek the views of the local
review committee after the offender has served seven years. Each case is
considered by the Home Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland and
forwarded to the Parole Board concerned. The Lord Chief Justice in Eng¬
land or the Lord Justice General in Scotland (as the case may be) and, if he is
available, the judge who presided at the trial must, by law, be consulted
before any life sentence prisoner is released. In Northern Ireland, where the
Minister for Home Affairs is responsible for the release on licence of prisoners
serving life sentences, the judiciary is similarly consulted before any such
release takes place.
1 Rule 1 of the Prison Rules made by the Home Secretary for prisons in England and
Wales.
98
Employment
Education
Medical Services
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England and Wales prison work is controlled by the Directorate of In¬
dustries and Supply of the Prison Department of the Home Office, which
comprises executive, professional and technical staff. Technical advice
and services to workshops are provided by visits from headquarters staff.
Industrial managers at establishments assist governors with the day-to-day
running of the workshops. Farms and gardens attached to penal establish¬
ments are controlled by the Chief Farms and Gardens Officer at the Director¬
ate’s headquarters. In Scotland there is a Supervisor of Industries and
Training, who advises the Director of the Prison Service on industrial
employment (including agriculture) and training. A deputy supervisor, two
technical officers and four industrial managers work under the supervisor.
In Northern Ireland general supervision of prison work is exercised by the
Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation, where necessary, with other
government departments.
The primary source of work for prison inmates lies in the requirements of
the prison service itself, that is to say, building and maintenance, domestic
services and equipment. Goods and services are also supplied to other
government departments and, on an increasing scale, to other purchasers,
both inside and outside the public service. A few prisoners are employed
outside prison in agriculture and on work such as archaeological excavation
and the preservation of canals.
In England, Wales and Scotland, small payments (averaging £0-35 a week)
are made to inmates for the work they do; in some prisons payments above
the minimum (up to ^1-65 a week) are made on the basis of output and skill;
in Northern Ireland a progressive system of earnings, related to work done,
is being gradually introduced.
Any prisoner serving a sentence of four years or more may be considered
for employment in an ordinary civilian job outside prison for about six
months before his discharge. Prisoners selected for the scheme may live
either in prison or in a prison hostel; they are paid normal wages, from which
they support their families and meet their own expenses.
Education for those in custody in Great Britain is provided by local education
authorities. In England and Wales, where arrangements are being developed
under a chief education officer, there is close liaison with the Department of
Education and Science, and in Scotland with the Scottish Education Depart¬
ment. Most prisons have a tutor-organiser, assisted by a number of part-time
teachers and, usually, one or more full-time teachers. Prisoners may attend
evening classes and take correspondence courses when these are available and
other educational facilities, such as physical training, concerts, plays, films,
lectures and group discussions, are arranged where facilities allow; prisoners
may also use the prison libraries, which depend largely upon the local public
libraries for their stocks. For selected prisoners vocational training courses,
leading to an acknowledged qualification, such as that of the City and Guilds
of London Institute, are provided, and experiments with Open University
studies and full-time education are being undertaken. Education in prisons in
Northern Ireland is the responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Facilities similar to those in Great Britain are provided under the direction
of the Prison Service Education Officer.
Medical attention is provided by full-time and part-time medical officers
whose duties include the care of the physical and mental health of prison
inmates, and the oversight of those services which affect health in prisons.
In a few prisons there are large, fully-equipped hospitals where major
LAW AND ORDER
99
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare and
After-Care
surgery can be undertaken and treatment by visiting specialists given both to
inmates and to prisoners from other establishments. There is also one
psychiatric prison (in England and Wales) with accommodation for some 350
people.
Several prisons have their own psychiatric clinics, to which prisoners
from other establishments may be referred and, in England and Wales, there
is a prison psychological service, whose officers assist governors and medical
officers in their work of examining and classifying prisoners. The hospital
facilities of the National Health Service (see Chapter 5) are available for the
treatment of prisoners in appropriate cases and arrangements may be made,
where necessary, for prisoners to receive treatment after release.
All prisoners, from the beginning of their sentence, have a legal right to
write and receive letters and to be visited by their relations at regular intervals.
They also have such privileges as additional letters and visits, the use of
books, periodicals and newspapers, and the right to make purchases from the
canteen with money they have earned in prison. Depending on the facilities
available at individual establishments, they may be granted the further
privileges of dining and recreation in association and watching television in the
evening.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, visiting
committee or board of visitors, who have power to order, among other
penalties, forfeiture of remission and forfeiture of privileges.
Welfare in prisons is the general concern of the prison staff as a whole, and in
particular of the chaplains and assistant governors, but special responsibilities
attach to prison welfare officers, who, in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, are probation officers seconded by the probation and after-care
service. (In Scotland, prison welfare officers are specially appointed for this
purpose.) The functions of these officers include helping the prisoner in his
relationships with individuals and organisations outside the prison, and
making plans for the prisoner’s after-care, working closely in this connection
with colleagues in the probation and after-care service and with other agencies
in the community whose help the prisoner or his family may need either during
sentence or after release.
For the spiritual welfare of the inmates, a chaplain of the Church of
England (in Scotland of the Church of Scotland, and in Northern Ireland of
the Church of Ireland and of the Presbyterian Church), a Roman Catholic
priest and a minister of the Methodist Church are appointed to every prison.
Ministers of other denominations are either appointed or specially called in as
required. Chaplains not only hold regular services, but also visit every
prisoner soon after reception, shortly before release and regularly during
sentence, and pay daily visits to all prisoners who are sick or confined to
their cells and to any others who apply to see them.
Prisoners may also receive visits from specially appointed prison visitors,
whose work is voluntary and in England and Wales is co-ordinated and
guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
In England and Wales pre-release courses are conducted at all prisons.
During these courses experts hold open forum with prisoners nearing their
release on the domestic, social and employment problems with which they
are likely to be faced. Certain categories of prisoners may be granted home
leave towards the end of their sentences to enable them to preserve links with
their families and friends, or to make new contacts with people, including
potential employers, who may be able to assist them on release. Some categories
IOO
Probation
YOUNG
OFFENDERS
Borstal
Training
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are considered for two periods of home leave, one allowing five clear days and
the other a week-end at home, and others for one period of five days at home.
Offenders released on licence are subject to statutory supervision after
release by probation officers of the probation and after-care service, to which
offenders not subject to compulsory supervision may also apply for help.
Those who fail to observe the conditions of statutory supervision are liable to
have their licences revoked.
In Northern Ireland after-care duties are likewise carried out by probation
and after-care officers; in Scotland responsibility for statutory and voluntary
after-care is vested in social workers from the local authority social work
departments.
Probation is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender while he
remains at work or at school under the supervision of a probation officer,
whose duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature of the
service is that it relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before making a
probation order, the court must explain its effects and make sure that the
probationer understands that if he fails to comply with the requirements of
the order he will be liable to be dealt with for the original offence. A proba¬
tion order can be made only if the offender is 17 years of age or over and must
have his consent; it usually requires the probationer to keep in regular touch
with the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to lead an industrious
life. It may also require him to live in a specified place, or to submit to treat¬
ment for his mental condition. A probation order is made for not less than one
year and not more than three years. _
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation officers
(who also undertake social work in penal institutions and duties in connection
with the statutory supervision and voluntary after-care of discharged offenders)
are available to every criminal court. In England and Wales their appointment
is the responsibility of probation and after-care committees, composed for the
most part of justices—first appointments, except in the case of professionally
trained officers, being subject to confirmation by the Home Secretary. In
Northern Ireland the Ministry of Home Affairs appoints probation officers.
Training facilities in England and Wales are provided by the Home Office on
the advice of the Advisory Council for Probation and After-Care and are made
available by arrangement to Northern Ireland officers.
In Scotland, where there is no separate probation service, the local authority
social work departments provide the services and officers required by the
criminal courts in their areas. Offenders subject to probation orders or to
after-care supervision following release from a penal institution are super¬
vised by specially approved social workers from these departments. Recruit¬
ment is the responsibility of the local authority concerned, and appointments
are not subject to ministerial confirmation. Unqualified staff appointed to posts
in social work departments can be seconded for professional training after
one year in post.
The borstal training system, which is available for offenders who have
reached the age of 15 but are not yet 21 (16 to 21 in Scotland and Northern
Ireland), consists of different borstals specialising in different types of young
offender, classified according to such criteria as age, intelligence and criminal
sophistication. There are also a few borstals for special purposes, such as
allocation or recall. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the period of
training ranges from six months to two years and is followed, in England and
LAW AND ORDER
IOI
Detention
Centres
Attendance
Centres
Children and
Young Persons
Act
Wales, by supervision for two years and in Northern Ireland for one year
from the date of release. In Scotland, where there is no minimum period of
detention, the maximum is two years and the supervision period is for one
year from the date of release. The system is essentially remedial and educa¬
tional, based on personal training by a carefully selected staff. Emphasis is
placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is much freedom of move¬
ment and many borstals are open establishments.
Detention centres provide a means of training, and are intended to deter
from further crime, young offenders for whom a long period of residential
training does not seem necessary but who cannot be taught respect for the
law by such measures as fines or probation. In England and Wales five junior
centres are available for boys of not less than 14 and under 17, and 13 senior
centres for young men aged 17 and under 21. In Scotland there is one senior
centre. Detention in England and Wales may be for not less than three and
not more than six months for those over 17; if consecutive sentences are passed,
the total term may not exceed nine months at any one time. Remission of up to
one-third of the sentence may be earned for good conduct. In Scotland the
fixed period for all detention centre sentences is three months and the age
ranges from 16 to 21.
The regime at detention centres, which is brisk and firm, with strong
emphasis on hard work and high standards of behaviour, provides a normal
working week of 44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to physical
training. Boys of compulsory school age have day-time and evening classes,
and further education is provided for others in the evenings. Nearly all young
offenders discharged from detention centres are subject to statutory super¬
vision for 12 months.
Over 50 attendance centres have been established in England and Wales
and they are to continue in existence until some alternative form of treat¬
ment can be devised for boys and youths under the age of 17 found guilty
of offences for which older people could be sentenced to imprisonment.
Boys ordered to attend must do so during their spare time on Saturday
mornings or afternoons; they may be required to attend for up to three hours
on any one occasion and for a total of not less than 12 hours (with certain
exceptions) and not more than 24. The activities include physical training
and instruction in handicrafts or some other practical subject. Efforts are made
at the centres to induce the boys to join a youth club or other suitable organisa¬
tion.
In Northern Ireland there is one attendance centre; it operates on the same
lines as the centres in England and Wales, but caters for boys between the
ages of 12 and 17.
Changes in the law relating to the care and treatment of juveniles, which
reflect the changing views of society on how best to deal with the problem of
children in trouble, have been made in England and Wales by the Children
and Young Persons Act 1969.
Under provisions of the Act, although children of 10 and over remain
capable, in law, of committing offences, the minimum age of prosecution
(except for homicides) may be higher, and the Government intends to raise
it to 12 when the social services have the necessary capacity to deal with the
change. A child below the minimum age who is alleged to have committed an
offence may be subject to care proceedings in a juvenile court (provided that it
Detention
Centres
Attendance
Centres
Children and
Young Persons
Act
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
can be proved not only that he has committed the offence, but also that he is in
need of care and control). Care proceedings may also be brought when a child
has been ill-treated or neglected, or, if of compulsory school age, is not attend¬
ing school regularly. . . 1 j j w 1
The principal orders available to the juvenile courts in England and Wales
in both care and criminal proceedings are: (a) an order requiring a parent or
guardian to enter into a recognisance to take proper care of the child or young
person and to exercise proper control over him, (b) a supervision order, under
which a child will normally remain at home under the supervision of the local
authority or a probation officer, (c) a care order, which commits the child to the
care of the local authority, and (d) a hospital or guardianship order in accord¬
ance with the Mental Health Act 1959. In criminal proceedings the courts also
have power to impose fines up to £50, to order payment of compensation,
or to grant a conditional or absolute discharge. They may also make attendance
centre or detention centre orders.
If a young person under the age of 17 is charged jointly with someone over
17, the case is heard in an adult magistrates’ court or higher court. This
practice will continue, but if the young person is found guilty, the adult court
will remit the case to a juvenile court, unless the case can be disposed of by
discharge or a fine.
Care Orders
A care order commits a child to the care of the local authority in whose area
he lives until he has reached the age of 18 or, if he was over 16 when the order
was made, until he is 19. In cases where further enquiries are necessary to
enable the court to take a final decision an interim order may be made which
commits a child to care for not more than 28 days. .
A child or young person, or his parent or guardian on his behalf, has the
right to apply to a juvenile court for the discharge of a care order at any time,
subject to the consent of the court being obtained if the^ application has been
refused within the preceding three months. There is a right of appeal agains
a refusal to discharge a care order. , , .
The local authority to whose care a child is committed has powers and duties
analogous to those of a parent or guardian; it must keep him in care notwit -
standing any claim by his parent or guardian; but it may not cause him to be
brought up in any religious creed other than that in which he would have been
brought up apart from the order.
Supervision Orders A supervision order runs for three years or for some
if made in care proceedings, however, it will not extend beyond the eighteen
birthday of the young person concerned. The order may include a requirement
that the person under supervision should live with a particular individual or that
he should have treatment for a mental condition. If authorised by the courts
the supervisor will also be able to direct him to live for a period at a specified
place, or to participate in certain activities such as social service or adventure
training, when schemes of facilities for this purpose have been drawn up.
The juvenile court has power to vary or discharge a supervision order, and
there will be a right of appeal against such a variation unless it is of a favourable
or of a minor kind.
The Social Work
(Scotland) Act
Fhe Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 provides that children under the age of
[6 (and in certain cases up to 18) who are, in the opinion of a local authority
ifficial (a reporter), in need of compulsory measures of care, may be broug
before a children’s hearing. Children may be in need of compulsory measures
LAW AND ORDER
IO3
Measures of
Care in Scotland
Northern Ireland
Criminological
Research
of care because they have committed offences; are beyond the control of their
parents; are exposed to moral danger; or are failing to attend school regularly
without reasonable excuse. Children’s hearings are tribunals of unpaid lay
men and women (children’s panels) appointed by the Secretary of State for
each local authority area in Scotland. Procedure is informal—the aim being to
encourage the child and his parents to discuss their problems with the members
of the panel.
In Scotland, if a children’s hearing decides that a child should be made subject
to compulsory supervision, it may make a supervision order which may
require, for example, that the child should live away from home at a residential
establishment. The oversight of a child who has been made the subject of a
supervision order rests with the social work department of the local authority;
conditions may be attached to the way in which treatment is carried out if
these are considered to be in the best interests of the child.
Appeals both for finding whether the grounds for bringing a child before
a children’s hearing have been established and against the decisions of
children’s hearings may be brought before the Sheriff Court. For such appeals
and for any subsequent appeal to the Court of Session, legal aid is available.
In Northern Ireland, a child or young person between the ages of 10 and 17
is normally dealt with in a juvenile court, unless charged jointly with an adult
or committed for trial by jury in the case of a more serious offence. Such
committal may take place at the request of the accused’s parents or at the
discretion of the juvenile court. In dealing with a child or young person found
guilty of committing an offence the court may grant an absolute or conditional
discharge, may impose a fine, or may commit the offender to the charge of a
fit person, normally the appropriate local authority, or to a remand home or a
training school approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Criminological research, particularly research directed to the question of the
treatment of offenders, is carried out by the Home Office Research Unit
(which also serves the Scottish Home and Health Department), by university
departments and by various other research organisations; much of it is
financed by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Studies undertaken by the Home Office Research Unit are mainly concentrated
on subjects of direct interest to the home departments. Research and teaching
in criminology are provided at the Institute of Criminology at Cambridge
University and at Edinburgh University, at both of which postgraduate
courses are available. Courses in criminology are also available at the univer¬
sities of Durham, Reading, Oxford, Manchester and Southampton; the London
School of Economics, and University College in the University of London;
and the universities of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Strathclyde in Scotland.
These institutions likewise conduct research.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised in a number of large forces
linked with local government and subject to the influence and eventual control
of the Home Secretary in England and Wales and the Secretary of State for
Scotland in Scotland. In Northern Ireland there is a single police force; final
responsibility rests with the Minister of Home Affairs.
104
POLICE IN
GREAT BRITAIN
Police Forces
Police
Authorities
and Chief
Constables
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are 67 regular police forces in Great Britain: 47 in England and Wales
and 20 in Scotland. Each police force is responsible for a separate police area,
but there is constant co-operation between them.
In England and Wales the forces are defined according to area of res¬
ponsibility as: county forces (5); county borough forces (6); combined forces
which are forces whose area of responsibility extends over two or more coun¬
ties or county boroughs (34); the Metropolitan Police Force, which is respon¬
sible for an area of approximately 15 miles radius from Charing Cross, but
excluding the City of London; and the City of London force. In Scotland
there are four burgh forces, 15 combined forces, and one county force.
The strength of the regular police force in Great Britain is approximately
95,000, the size of individual police forces depending on the area and popula¬
tion which they serve. In England and Wales, outside Greater London,
establishments range from about 700 to 'j.ooo, the average strength being
1,800 officers. The strength of the Metropolitan Police Force is about 21,000.
In Scotland forces range in strength from about 100 to 2,600.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are constabularies maintained
by the statutory transport and other public authorities, and by the Ministry
of Defence.
Each of the regular police forces is maintained by a police authority. In the
counties of England and Wales the authority is a police committee and in the
county boroughs a watch committee. Both are committees of the local council
and consist of councillors and justices in a proportion of two to one. Com¬
bined police authorities, which also consist of councillors and justices, contain
representatives from each constituent area covered by an amalgamation
scheme.
The police authority for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Sec¬
retary. In the City of London the Court of Common Council is the police
authority, although it usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all
police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the police authority for the county is the county council; in
the burghs it is the town council; and where there are combined forces there
is a joint police committee.
The primary duty of the police authority is to provide an adequate and
efficient police force for the area for which it is responsible. To enable it to
carry out this duty, it is empowered, subject to the approval of the Home
Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland, to appoint the chief constable
and the deputy and assistant chief constables of the force, and fix the authorised
establishment. It may also retire the chief constable in the interests of efficiency,
if the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland agrees, and
must keep itself informed of the way in which the chief constables deal
with complaints from the public against police officers. In addition, police
authorities, with the consent of the Secretary of State, provide the buildings
and equipment needed for their forces. In the Metropolitan Police District
the chief officer of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the
Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police
forces and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below
deputy or assistant chief constable; they are, however, generally answerable
to the police authorities on matters of efficiency, and are required to submit
a written annual report.
LAW AND ORDER
Central
Authority
Police Officers
105
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who have a
general responsibility for the preservation of law and order throughout Great
Britain, are concerned both in the overall organisation of the police service
and in its administration and operation. In this regard, they not only approve
the appointment of chief constables, but may require a police authority to
retire a chief constable in the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a
chief constable on any matters relating to the policing of his area, or cause
a local enquiry to be held. They are also empowered to make regulations as
to the government, administration and conditions of service in police forces.
The police regulations cover such matters as rank; qualifications for appoint¬
ment, promotion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and
allowances; and uniform and equipment. Some of these are first negotiable
on the Police Council; the others are discussed on representative advisory
bodies together with any general questions affecting the police service.
The Home Secretary is advised on all matters concerning police efficiency
by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and six inspectors, of whom
two have a special responsibility for crime and traffic respectively. The
inspectors are individually responsible for the inspection of a number of forces,
and must be satisfied of their continuing efficiency through formal annual
inspection, and informal visits and consultations when particular problems
arise. The inspectors report to the Home Secretary on the condition of all the
forces, with the exception of the Metropolitan Police Force. The Secretary of
State for Scotland is similarly assisted by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of
Constabulary in Scotland and one other inspector.
All police authorities receive a government grant equal to half their net
expenditure, except the Common Council of the City of London, which
receives one-third. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land are empowered to withhold the grant, in whole or in part, permanently
or for such time as they may determine, if they are not satisfied that a police
area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly maintained and administered,
or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved by them.
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the ages
of 19 and 30. Women entrants in England and Wales must be between the
ages of 19 and 35, and in Scotland between 19 and 30 years old. In England
and Wales men over 30 years old, and women over 35, may, however, be
appointed on the recommendation of the appointing authority in special
circumstances approved by the Home Secretary. In Scotland the individual
chief constables may approve appointments of both men and women over 30
years old.
There are about 200 graduates serving in the police forces of Great Britain,
and some 80 police officers at university, reading for degrees.
The standard police ranks1 in Great Britain, except in the Metropolitan
Police District, are: chief constable, superintendent, inspector, sergeant and
constable. Intermediate ranks may also be adopted in areas where varying
degrees of responsibility make them necessary. In the Metropolitan Police
District the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
He is assisted by a deputy commissioner and four assistant commissioners.
Next in rank are deputy assistant commissioners, commanders, chief superin¬
tendents and chief inspectors; the other ranks are the same as in the rest of
1 The rank structure of the police is being reviewed by a working party set up by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland in consultation with the local
authority associations and the police associations.
io6
Police Cadets
Civilian Staff
Special
Constables
Traffic Wardens
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the country. In the City of London the ranks are the same as in the regions
except that the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police and the second in
command is an assistant commissioner.
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union since it is a
basic principle of the service that its members must not only be free from
political bias, but must also be seen to be free of it. All ranks, however, have
their own associations which can make representations to ministers or to
police authorities on matters of interest or concern to their members.
Police cadets are recruited by most forces from among boys between 16 (15
in Scotland) and 18 years of age. They have no police powers but are given
some training in police work, partly as useful preparation for subsequent
appointment as constables and partly to give them sufficient insight into police
duties to enable them to decide whether or not they wish to make a career
in the police service. Some forces also recruit girl cadets.
Civilians are employed on a large scale by police authorities as shorthand-
typists, clerks, switchboard operators, mechanics, canteen staff and cleaners,
in order to release uniformed personnel for police duties.
All police forces have an attachment of special constables, who are volunteers
willing to perform police duties without pay in their spare time. In England
and Wales the function of special constables is to act as auxiliaries to the
regular force when required. In Scotland they are employed only in emer¬
gencies although they may be assigned for duty for training purposes.
Traffic wardens are extensively employed to discharge specified duties con¬
nected with road traffic and vehicles, normally undertaken by the police. In
this connection they may be authorised to serve fixed penalty notices1 for
minor offences to which the fixed penalty system applies; to man police car-
pounds; to enforce the vehicle excise laws; and to obtain the name and address
of people thought to have committed a traffic offence of the type with which
traffic wardens are competent to deal. They may also be employed to direct
traffic, to act as parking attendants at street parking places, and as school¬
crossing patrols, if the police agree. Traffic wardens remain under the control
of the chief constable of the force to which they are attached, whatever duties
they may perform.
Police Duties A police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office
and exercises his powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by
common law, by virtue of his office; he is an agent of the law of the land, not
of the police authority nor of the central Government and although his chief
officer of police has a vicarious liability for any wrongful act he may commit
in the performance of his functions as a constable, he himself may also be sued
in respect of his own wrongful act.
The many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from
the protection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic
control to crime prevention, criminal investigation and the apprehension of
offenders.
The main departments in all police forces are the uniform department and
the criminal investigation department; many forces also have specialised depart¬
ments, including traffic departments, river police (in districts which include
1 A fixed penalty notice gives the recipient the option of paying a specified sum to the
clerk of the appropriate magistrates’ court, instead of having his case tried in the
ordinary way.
LAW AND ORDER
107
long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted branch (for maintaining
order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
In all aspects of police work, the application of scientific aids has reached
an advanced stage: nearly £12 million is spent annually on police equip¬
ment, including £2 million on radio communications; the police have 23,000
personal radio sets operational; and a police computer project is being
developed for rationalising the keeping of records and speeding up the
dissemination of information.
Co-ordination
between
Police Forces
Scientific Research
and Planning
Metropolitan
Police Force
Services
During recent years a number of common services have been provided by
the central government departments for the benefit of all forces; they supple¬
ment those provided by the police authorities for their own use and by
communal arrangements made between the forces themselves. The most
important of these services are: training services, which in England and Wales
provide training centres for recruit training and a central police college for
higher training and in Scotland a central police college with courses of recruit
training and higher training; a forensic science service in England and Wales
which provides eight regional laboratories (in addition to the Metropolitan
Police Laboratory); regional wireless services and wireless depots, which in
England and Wales supply and maintain wireless equipment for the police;
and central and provincial criminal records which are available to all forces.
In addition, regional crime squads, consisting of teams of experienced detec¬
tives from several forces, operating under a committee of chief constables,
are employed in England and Wales to investigate major crimes involving
enquiries in more than one police area. In Scotland the Scottish Crime Squad
assists Scottish police forces in the investigation and prevention of crime and
in the collection and maintenance of information concerning criminals. Arrange¬
ments are also made for everyday assistance by one force to another.
There are three inter-related branches of the Home Office Police Department
devoted to scientific research and medium- and long-term planning. The Police
Scientific Development Branch and the Police Research Services Branch,
which are staffed by senior police officers, are concerned with operational
research into police methods and the development of equipment for police
forces throughout Great Britain; the Police Management and Planning group,
which is composed mainly of economists and accountants, is responsible for the
development of a planning-programming-budgeting system for the police, and
for the medium- and long-term planning of police resources.
Services provided by the Metropolitan Police Force for other forces include
(1) the publication of the Police Gazette,1 which contains particulars of people
wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is supplied without charge
to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain other Common¬
wealth and foreign forces; (2) the organisation and control of the special branch
of the criminal investigation department at New Scotland Yard, whose duties
include the protection of royalty, some ministers and distinguished foreign
visitors; and (3) the carrying out of extradition orders made by the courts. The
Metropolitan Police Force is also available, on request, to assist any other
police force in England and Wales in criminal investigations. Similarly, the
services of the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police Force
and the City of London Police, are available throughout Great Britain for the
investigation of serious company frauds. The National Central Bureau, which
1 The Scottish Criminal Record Office in Glasgow is responsible for the publication of
the Scottish Police Gazette.
io8
POLICE IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
handles the business of the International Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol) on behalf of Great Britain and the British dependencies, is part of
the Metropolitan Police Force. For certain of these services, the Metropolitan
Police Force receives an additional Exchequer grant.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) operates under the direction of a
chief constable who is responsible, through a police authority, to Northern
Ireland’s Minister of Home Affairs.
The RUC, which has a strength of some 4,000, undertakes the policing
of the whole of Northern Ireland, its cost being borne by the Northern
Ireland Exchequer. The police authority, which consists of a chairman, a
vice-chairman and between 14 and 20 other members appointed by the Gover¬
nor of Northern Ireland, has the same powers and duties as the police author¬
ities in Great Britain.
The chief constable has under his command a deputy chief constable and
assistant chief constables. The area is divided into divisions under chief
superintendents and superintendents who have under their command in¬
spectors, sergeants and constables. Conditions of service and pay follow closely
on the lines of the police service in Great Britain, and the general duties
pertaining to the various ranks are much the same.
The RUC is assisted in its normal police duties by a reserve of special
constables who are paid a small ‘bounty’ for their services. While on duty,
members of the reserve have the same powers, privileges and duties as (by
the law for the time being in force) may be exercised by, or are conferred
upon, a member of the RUC.
4 DEFENCE
Europe
Far East
Dependencies
The United
Nations
POLICY
Britain’s basic security depends on the strength of the North Atlantic Alliance,
and it is to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) that by far the
greater part of Britain’s military forces is committed. Britain makes a major
contribution to the full range of deterrent capabilities, both conventional and
nuclear, required by the present NATO strategy of flexible response. At the
same time the British Government supports the Alliance’s efforts to engage the
Soviet Union and its allies in discussions which could lead to a real and lasting
relaxation of tensions between East and West, and hopes that progress in
negotiations on such questions as Berlin could make improvements possible
over a wider field in Europe.
Within NATO Britain has played a leading part in the efforts of the European
members of the Alliance to take a fuller and more effective share of the common
defence burden: in a European Defence Improvement Programme Britain
and nine other of the European NATO countries have adopted measures to
improve the Alliance’s conventional capabilities. Currently engaged in a num¬
ber of co-operative equipment projects with European allies (see p. 119),
Britain is ready to explore those possibilities of defence collaboration which
would contribute to the cohesion and effectiveness of the European defence
effort.
At the same time it is recognised that British interests and responsibilities
are not confined to the NATO area, and that Britain has a shared interest in
the stability of such areas as the Far East and Gulf. Britain is therefore willing
to play, on a scale appropriate to national resources, a part in countering threats
to stability outside Europe. Britain is a member of the Central Treaty Organisa¬
tion (CENTO) and the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO). In
South-east Asia, Britain contributes, with Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia
and Singapore, to the Five-Power defence arrangements in Malaysia and
Singapore; this involves the continuing deployment of British forces in this
area. In the Gulf, Britain is willing to help to maintain stability in the area
by the loan of British personnel to serve with local forces, and by training and
liaison visits from units of all three services.
Britain is also responsible for the defence and internal security of its re¬
maining dependencies. Recently British troops have operated within the United
Kingdom in aid of civil authorities, to halt communal disturbances. In general,
Britain’s armed forces assist civil communities at home and abroad, particularly
in emergency and development tasks.
Britain supports the peacekeeping and other efforts of the United Nations
and other international authorities working to eliminate the sources of tension
and conflict between nations and to promote arms control and disarmament.
Having played a leading part in the negotiations for the 1963 Partial Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty, the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, and a constructive
no
Service
Organisations
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
role in the negotiation of the 1971 Sea-Bed Treaty, Britain has proposed a
draft convention for the prohibition of biological methods of warfare.
Information about defence policy and the armed forces is provided by the
Government in an annual Statement on the Defence Estimates (Cmnd. 4592
in 1971) usually published in February. ^
The Government is concerned to keep defence costs within the country’s
resources, and since 1965 there have been substantial reductions in the annual
defence estimates as calculated at constant prices. The defence budget for
!97:1-72 totalled £2,545 million, which represents about 5-5 per cent of the
gross national product. Projections of expected defence expenditure for the
next five years are published each December (Cmnd. 4518 in i97°): a rise by
an average of O'l per cent between I970-71 an<^ I974—75 planned.
PLANNING AND CONTROL
Supreme responsibility for national defence rests with the Prime Minister and
the Cabinet, who are responsible to Parliament. Defence problems and their
implications for foreign and economic policy are dealt with on the Cabinet s
behalf by the Committee on Defence and Oversea Policy, under the chair¬
manship of the Prime Minister.
The formulation of defence policy is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Defence. In recent years the emphasis in defence organisation has
been on a greater degree of Service co-ordination, and on overall functional
planning of the defence effort as a whole. Since the unified Ministry of Defence
was created in 1964, the central organisation of defence has been regularly
reviewed and a series of changes made to increase efficiency and economy.
The former two Ministers of Defence (for administration and equipment
respectively) were replaced during 197° a s^n§^e Minister of State for
Defence who is responsible for the Armed Forces and in 1971 a Minister of
Defence Procurement (see p. 5°) was appointed. The two ministers together
with the three Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State for the Navy, Army
and Air Force respectively, the Chief of the Defence Staff, the three Service
Chiefs of Staff, the Chief Scientific Adviser, and the Permanent Under¬
secretary of State for Defence, sit on the Defence Council, which deals with
major defence policy under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State. The
Chiefs of Staff Committee, comprising the Chief of the Defence Staff as chair¬
man and the Chiefs of Staff of the three Services, is responsible for giving pro¬
fessional advice on strategy and operations, and on the military implications
of defence policy. The day-to-day management of the three Services is the
responsibility of the Admiralty, Army and Air Force Boards of the Defence
Council.
The Royal Navy has four main arms. These are: the Naval General Service,
which mans and maintains the surface fleet; the Fleet Air Arm; the Sub¬
marine Service; and the Royal Marines, who provide a seaborne and airborne
land striking-force. # . .
The Army is organised into some 3° arins and services which include
the Household Cavalry, the Royal Armoured Corps, the Royal Regiment of
Artillery, the Corps of Royal Engineers, the Royal Corps of Signals, the five
regiments of Foot Guards, the Infantry of the Line (grouped into divisions),
the Army Air Corps, the Royal Corps of Transport, the Royal Army Medical
Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance Corps and the Royal Electrical and Mechan¬
ical Engineers.
DEFENCE
III
Women’s
Services
COMMANDS
Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Five-Power
Defence
TRAINING
The Royal Air Force is organised in commands, on a functional basis at
home and on a geographical basis overseas.
The three women’s services, the Women’s Royal Naval Service (WRNS), the
Women’s Royal Army Corps (WRAC) and the Women’s Royal Air Force
(WRAF), are integral parts of the Navy, Army and Air Force respectively.
Servicewomen serve alongside servicemen in Britain and overseas. Nursing
services are provided by Queen Alexandra s Royal Naval Nursing Service,
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps and Princess Mary’s Royal
Air Force Nursing Service.
The home and overseas commands of the Services are set out below.
Under a phased programme shore commands have been reorganised under a
single Commander-in-Chief, Naval Home Command, Portsmouth, with sub¬
ordinate Area Flag Officers at Plymouth, Chatham and Rosyth. Sea command
has been reorganised to bring under a single major operational commander, the
Commander-in-Chief Western Fleet, an area comprising the North Sea, the
North and South Atlantic Oceans, the Mediterranean and part of the Pacific
Ocean. British naval forces in the North Atlantic and Mediterranean are ear¬
marked for assignment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
Naval forces in the Far East come under the Commander, Far East Fleet (see
P- II5)-
Army Strategic Command, Northern Command, Southern Command,
Western Command and two Independent Districts (HQ Northern Ireland
and HQ Scotland). During 1972 the four major commands will be replaced by
a single command, United Kingdom Land Forces. The overseas commands
are: British Army of the Rhine (BAOR); Far East Land Forces; Near East
Land Forces; Land Forces Hong Kong; and British Troops Malta and
Gibraltar.
Strike Command, which has a number of subordinate Groups taking the
place of the former Bomber, Fighter and Coastal Commands; Air Support
Command, Training and Maintenance Commands. Overseas commands are
Royal Air Force Germany; Near East Air Force; and Far East Air Force.
After 1971 British forces in the Far East will, along with the forces of Australia
and New Zealand, be under the operational control of an integrated command
in Singapore.
Britain’s armed forces consist of regular Service personnel. Entrants to the
non-commissioned ranks of the three Services are given basic training, and
further training is given during the course of their careers. Young service¬
men have the opportunity to read for the General Certificate of Education
‘O’ level (see p. 154). Trade and technical training, though primarily designed
for Service purposes, leads in many cases to nationally recognised qualifica¬
tions; completion of many Service trade or technical courses followed by
experience is recognised by trade unions as a qualification for membership
by men who have left the Services.
Commissions may be granted for short, medium or long terms. Promotion
from the non-commissioned ranks is possible in all three Services. In the
Royal Navy, the largest entry is through cadetships in the Britannia Royal
112
Higher Defence
Training
RESERVE AND
AUXILIARY
FORCES
Royal Navy
Army
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Naval College, Dartmouth; in the Army through cadetships in the Royal
Military Academy Sandhurst. This is followed by specialist training which
may include degree courses. In the RAF entry is through cadetships in the
RAF College, Cranwell, or civilian universities. There is also a scheme in all
three Services for the award of University Cadetships, which enable young
men to take a degree before commencing their Service training. There are
also schemes for the entry of graduates and other qualified specialists.
All three Services provide training facilities for the armed forces of Common¬
wealth and foreign nations.
Selected officers of all three Services who have had previous staff training or
have been to the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich (London), the Army
Staff College at Camberley (Surrey), or the Royal Air Force Staff College
at Bracknell (Berkshire) go to the National Defence College (formerly the
Joint Services Staff College) at Chesham (Buckinghamshire). Here, in an
intensive and broad-based programme of courses, particular attention is paid
to the inter-Service aspect of staff work. Specially selected and more senior
officers from the Services, the Civil Service, and from the Commonwealth, the
United States, and allied European countries attend the Royal College of
Defence Studies (formerly the Imperial Defence College) in London. Con¬
siderable training is done through joint-Service and inter-allied exercises, on
which increasing emphasis is placed.
In the defence estimates for 1971-72 £34 million is allocated to reserve and
auxiliary forces. Apart from their essential military role, these are considered
to form an important link between the Services and the civil community.
The Regular Reserve consists of various categories of former full-time officers
and ratings liable to recall in emergency. The Volunteer Reserves comprise
the Royal Naval Reserve (with its associated women’s reserve) and the Royal
Marines Reserve; they carry out regular part-time training and man a number
of operational minesweepers.
The Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, a civilian organisation composed of
men and women volunteers, is responsible in time of war for minewatching
duties around the coast and the waterways, and other duties.
Men who have completed the Colour portion of their service with the Regular
Army are retained on the Regular Army Reserve to complete a total engage¬
ment of seven or 12 years, according to their initial commitment; they are
liable to recall to the Colours. Thereafter they are transferred to the Long
Term Reserve (LTR) where they remain until the age of 45 and are liable to
recall in an emergency. The Army General Reserve consists of certain former
National Service specialists.
The Territorial and Army Volunteer Reserve (T & AVR) consists of
independent and sponsored units. Independent units are raised on a terri¬
torial basis and each is based on one or more training centres. Sponsored
units consist of specialists and have to be recruited on a nation-wide basis.
These units are divided, for administration purposes, into Group A, which
has a liability for call-out when warlike operations are in preparation or in
progress; and Group B, which consists of miscellaneous units (for example,
University Officer Training Corps) with various liabilities. The establishment
of the T & AVR has been increased to provide an uncommitted reserve of
10,000 infantrymen and an additional armoured car regiment.
DEFENCE
113
Royal Air Force
CIVIL DEFENCE
In January 1970 recruiting began for the Ulster Defence Regiment, a
locally recruited, part-time force under the General Officer Commanding
Northern Ireland, whose role is to support the regular forces in the Command.
The annual cost will be some £1 million, and numbers will not exceed 6,000
officers and men.
The Regular Reserve consists of former full-time officers and airmen, of
whom a few are detailed for specific tasks in emergency and the remainder
have a statutory liability for recall. The Royal Auxiliary Air Force, consisting
of three maritime headquarter units which would, in an emergency, reinforce
Strike Command (see p. in), and the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve,
which includes the 16 University Air Squadrons, are liable for part-time train¬
ing and for recall in an emergency.
In 1968 civil defence arrangements were put on a care and maintenance basis.
The physical assets of civil defence organisations are being preserved so far
as is practicable, and training and planning continues at the minimum level
required to maintain knowledge and techniques and to enable more active
preparations to be resumed if this should appear to be necessary. Total annual
public expenditure on civil defence is between £8 million and £9 million.
The arrangements being maintained include an emergency system for
decentralised governmental control and communications, and the United
Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation, including the Royal
Observer Corps, which would provide public warning of an attack, of the
location and power of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level of
radioactive fall-out; also planning for the police and fire services. Central
training courses are provided at the Civil Defence Training Establishment,
near York.
NATO COMMITMENT
The basis of the present NATO strategy of flexible response, which retains
the principle of forward defence, is that credible deterrence of military actions
of all kinds is necessary, and that this can be secured only through a wide
range of forces equipped with a well-balanced mixture of conventional and
tactical and strategic nuclear weapons. While NATO must be ready to use
nuclear weapons if necessary, the capability of its conventional forces must be
maximised and their number maintained at a level which would give NATO an
alternative to a nuclear response against anything but a major attack: thus
permitting a flexible range of responses able to meet aggression with direct
defence at approximately the same level; to gain time for negotiations to end
a conflict; and to reassert deterrence through the possibility of escalation to a
higher level of conflict.
The strategy, with its emphasis on the need to be prepared for attacks of
varying scales in any region of the NATO area, requires a comprehensive
range of mobile and well-equipped conventional forces, and tactical and
strategic nuclear weapons. Britain makes a contribution to the North Atlantic
Alliance unmatched by any other European member of NATO. The British
Polaris force forms the contribution to the Western strategic deterrent.
Virtually the whole of the Royal Navy is earmarked for assignment; the
British Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and RAF Germany (a tactical air-force)
are assigned; and most of the air and ground combat units based in the United
Kingdom are also formally committed, to provide an important part of
114 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NATO’s mobile reinforcement capability. As part of its contribution to the
European Defence Improvement Programme, Britain has increased the
capabilities of air and naval forces committed to the Alliance.
DEPLOYMENT
In January 1971 forces (including locally-enlisted troops and the Royal Navy
at sea) were distributed as follows:
Britain, 258,800; European Continent, 62,500 (nearly all in Germany);
Mediterranean, Near East and Gulf, 24,700; Far East, 34,000 (including
Gurkhas); and elsewhere, 5,700.
The deployment of forces is summarised below.
Europe The Western Fleet operates in European sea areas; frigates, submarines and
coastal minesweepers carry out training, trials and fishery protection, and
Britain ships of all classes spend periods at home for refitting. All major ships have
NATO commitments in the Channel, Eastern Atlantic, and Mediterranean;
a frigate is assigned to the Standing Naval Force Atlantic. Submarines of the
British Polaris force are on continuous deterrent patrol.
The majority of the field force headquarters and units stationed in the
United Kingdom are in the Army Strategic Command. This includes the
land elements of the United Kingdom Mobile Force (of which No. 38 Group,
Royal Air Force, provides the air element), the British contribution to the
land element of Allied Command Europe Mobile Force (Land), and 22 Special
Air Service Regiment, all of which have roles in support of NATO. Other
field force units and training organisations are stationed in the United King¬
dom together with units engaged on logistic tasks.
The combat units of the Royal Air Force in Britain are provided by Strike
Command and Air Support Command. The former provides strike and
strategic reconnaissance squadrons, interceptor squadrons for the air defence
of Britain, and long-range maritime reconnaissance squadrons. It also pro¬
vides some forces for maritime air defence and strike attack. Plans to transfer
the remaining fixed-wing operational support to the Royal Air Force from the
Royal Navy have been deferred until the late 1970s. These forces are all com¬
mitted to NATO. Air Support Command is responsible for both strategic and
tactical transport forces, tactical reconnaissance, and for the force of Phantoms
and Harriers in No. 38 Group designed for the close support of the Army in
the field. The Phantoms and short-range transport aircraft in No. 38 Group
provide the RAF part of the UK Mobile Force which is committed to NATO,
while the Harriers provide the British contribution to NATO’s Allied Com¬
mand Europe Mobile Force (Air). There are also units of the Royal Air Force
Regiment, responsible for airfield defence.
Federal Ground forces in the Federal Republic of Germany consist of the British
Republic Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and an independent brigade in West Berlin.
of Germany BAOR is organised as a corps of three divisions each of two brigades, plus corps
troops including two artillery brigades and an armoured reconnaissance force.
The BAOR brigades have been reorganised to produce a better balance
between armoured units and mechanised infantry. Royal Air Force Germany
is a tactical air force including strike/attack, reconnaissance, close support, and
air defence aircraft, all assigned to Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
(SACEUR). Helicopters for army support are also committed to NATO.
Surface-to-air missiles and light anti-aircraft squadrons are deployed for the
defence of RAF Germany’s airfields.
DEFENCE
115
Mediterranean
and Near East
Far East
Five-Power
Defence
Caribbean and
South Atlantic
Nuclear
Strategic Force
In the Mediterranean Britain’s maritime presence includes two frigates and a
guided missile destroyer which are earmarked for assignment to SACEUR,
one of which participates in the NATO ‘on call’ force; these are reinforced by
the occasional deployment of an aircraft carrier, a commando ship, and
frigates and submarines earmarked for other NATO commands.
Royal Air Force units in the area consist of strike/attack, maritime recon¬
naissance, photographic reconnaissance, air defence and transport squadrons;
surface-to-air missiles; and RAF Regiment squadrons. These forces are based
in Cyprus and Malta. RAF support for NATO is provided from the forces in
Malta, while support for the Central Treaty Organisation comes from forces
in both locations. Britain also supplies at its own expense about 900 men for
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (the largest national
contingent). There are small garrisons in Malta and Gibraltar.
Britain continues to declare forces to certain contingency plans of the South-
East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO).
During 1971 combat units were maintained in Malaysia, Singapore and
Brunei, and a garrison in Hong Kong (which will remain unchanged after
^V1)-
Naval forces in the Far East comprise an amphibious ship, destroyers,
submarines and frigates. These forces operate in the Indian and Pacific
Oceans and undertake patrol duties in the Mozambique channel. Ships of the
Royal Australian and Royal New Zealand Navies operate with the Far East
Fleet. The Far East Air Force is made up of units of the RAF and Royal
Australian and Royal New Zealand Air Forces. Although the strength of the
RAF contribution has continued to run down, it comprises air defence air¬
craft, long-range maritime reconnaissance aircraft, support helicopters and a
medium-range transport squadron.
From the end of 1971 the British contribution to the Five-Power defence
arrangements for Malaysia and Singapore, which is designed to complement
the forces of the other four countries, will consist of a battalion group, in¬
cluding an artillery battery and engineers, in Singapore; a detachment of long-
range maritime reconnaissance aircraft and support helicopters; and six
frigates or destroyers, a submarine and mine counter-measures vessels.
Two frigates, equipped with helicopters and carrying a detachment of Royal
Marines, operate in the Caribbean. A small Royal Marine force and a
Royal Navy hovercraft unit are maintained in the Falkland Islands, and the
Royal Navy’s ice-patrol ship, HMS Endurance, operates there seasonally.
A small Army garrison remains in British Honduras. Some Royal Engineers
are stationed in Anguilla.
COMBAT FORCES
Combat forces may be functionally divided into six major groups, as described
below.
Responsibility for the British contribution to the Western strategic deterrent
now rests with the Royal Navy Polaris submarine force whose four nuclear
submarines—Resolution, Repulse, Renown and Revenge—are now in service
and provide a continuous deterrent patrol. Each has indefinite underwater
cruising range and carries 16 Polaris A3 missiles (with a range of about 2,500
miles and thermonuclear warheads).
European
Theatre Ground
Forces
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equipment
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Polaris and other submarines operate from the Clyde submarine base
completed in 1968. Britain also provides facilities for a depot ship for United
States Polaris submarines at Holy Loch on the Firth of Clyde.
Britain’s nuclear strategic force is assigned to NATO. Within the Alliance
Britain has played an active part in the discussions designed to associate the
non-nuclear members of NATO with the Alliance’s nuclear planning. Political
guidelines for the defensive use of tactical nuclear weapons have been approved,
and procedures for consultation on the possible use of nuclear weapons have
been refined.
The cost of nuclear strategic forces for 1971-72 is estimated at £34 million.
The European theatre ground forces consist of the BAOR and an independent
brigade in West Berlin. Their cost in 1971-72 is estimated at £263 million.
Armoured regiments have completed re-equipment with the Chieftain main
battle tank, which incorporates new features in protection and mobility and
mounts the fully stabilised 120 mm gun. Armoured regiments are also being
equipped with Swingfire anti-tank guided missiles on a version of the armoured
personnel carrier. The field artillery has been re-equipped; its weapons now
include the British Abbot self-propelled 105 mm gun, and the American self-
propelled 155 mm and 175 mm guns; the issue of the new Field Artillery
Computer Equipment (FACE) gives improved accuracy and response times, as
does the Cymbeline light-weight mortar-locating radar. Surface-to-surface
tactical nuclear support is provided by the Honest John free-flight missile and
the 8 in. (203 mm) howitzer. Infantry mobility has continued to improve;
infantry battalions have tracked armoured personnel carriers (FV 432), some
of which are modified to carry the 81 mm mortar or the Wombat 122 mm anti¬
tank gun. The Stalwart (high mobility cross-country load-carrying vehicle)
has come into service. Mechanised infantry battalions have been equipped
with a new 66 mm anti-tank rocket. Surveillance and target acquisition
capability has been improved by a new drone (unmanned reconnaissance air¬
craft) and by the issue of ground surveillance radar and additional night¬
fighting devices. For chemical defence an improved range of clothing is being
issued. Air defence is provided by Thunderbird and Rapier anti-aircraft guided
missiles; both systems are fully mobile. The field trunk communications
system, Bruin, has proved valuable and effective, and is being extended.
The naval general purpose combat forces comprise the following: amphibious
forces; aircraft carriers and squadrons; submarines (excluding the Polaris
force); cruisers, destroyers and frigates; mine countermeasure forces; and
support and other ships. Any of these ships can be sent to other theatres if
needed in an emergency, either as reinforcements or to carry out joint opera¬
tions with the Army and Royal Air Force. Their cost, including aircraft and
overseas bases, in 1971-72 is estimated at £301 million.
The aircraft carriers HMS Ark Royal (having been refitted to carry Phantom
aircraft) and HMS Eagle were in service during 1971. HMS Ark Royal will
be retained until the late 1970s, but HMS Eagle will not operate beyond 1972.
HMS Hermes has been phased out of the fixed-wing-flying role, and is under¬
going conversion to the commando ship role, to replace eventually HMS
Bidwark. The carrier-borne strike and air-defence aircraft consist of the
Buccaneer, Sea Vixen and Phantom. The Buccaneer Mk 2 is a long-range, low-
level strike aircraft, equipped with the Bullpup air-to-surface missile. The Sea
Vixen Mk 2 is an all-weather interceptor/ground attack aircraft, and carries
Firestreak and Red Top air-to-air missiles in its air defence role: the Phantom,
Army General
Purpose
Combat Forces
DEFENCE 117
an advanced interceptor, is equipped with Sparrow and Sidewinder air-to-air
missiles. Gannet aircraft provide airborne early warning.
Amphibious forces are provided by the commando ships HMS Albion and
HMS Bulwark, with Royal Marine Commandos, helicopters and landing-
craft, and the assault ships HMS Fearless and HMS Intrepid, both of which
have been fitted with a communications satellite terminal, working through
the Skynet system. The command-helicopter cruiser HMS Blake is in service,
equipped to carry a squadron of Wessex Mk 3 helicopters; HMS Tiger's con¬
version, to equip her to carry Sea King helicopters, is in progress. The County
class series of eight guided missile destroyers is completed; they are equipped
with Seaslug and Seacat ship-to-air guided missiles (both of which have a
capability against surface targets), an anti-submarine helicopter and under¬
water detection equipment, and four 4-5 in. (124 mm) fully automatic quick-
firing guns with appropriate control equipment. Twenty-six Leander class
frigates will have been completed by the end of 1971, they are equipped with
advanced anti-submarine equipment, including sonar and mortars. They and
the Tribal class carry Wasp anti-submarine helicopters and Seacat anti¬
aircraft guided missiles. All ships of frigate size can carry helicopters; the
Wasp and Wessex 3 (with an advanced anti-submarine system) are at present
in service. The Sea King is being deployed during 1971 on the carriers and
major fleet units; the Lynx (WG 13, see p. 119) is expected to replace the Wasp
in the mid-seventies. These helicopters have an anti-submarine role and a
capability against surface vessels. The strike capability of surface ships will be
improved by the introduction of the French Exocet, a surface-to-surface
guided missile system.
Progress is being maintained on the three classes of surface ships to be
introduced during the seventies. Four of the new Amazon class frigates (Type
21), to be equipped eventually with the Sea Wolf surface-to-air missile system,
are under construction, and the first of the new destroyers (Type 42) to carry
the Sea Dart surface-to-air missile (with a surface-to-surface capability) is
under construction. HMS Bristol, the new Type 82 guided missile destroyer,
with Sea Dart and Ikara, an anti-submarine missile, is complete. Some of the
Leander class frigates are being equipped with Ikara. A new type of cruiser,
to carry helicopters, with a ‘through-deck’ design giving the option of operat¬
ing V/STOL aircraft, is being designed; it too will be armed with Sea Dart.
A new general purpose frigate is also being designed.
Six nuclear fleet submarines (hunter-killer) are now in service—Dread¬
nought, Valiant, War spite, Churchill, Conqueror and Courageous) three more
are under construction, and a tenth has been ordered. A force of 26 conven¬
tional patrol submarines is also in service. Studies are in hand for submarine-
launched anti-ship missile systems.
Maintenance and repair facilities are provided by fleet maintenance ships, a
submarine depot ship, a heavy repair and maintenance ship, and a mine
countermeasure support ship—all manned by naval personnel. Ships of the
Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service provide afloat logistic support such as fuel, food,
ammunition, stores and spare gear. These ships fly the Blue Ensign and are
manned by civilian personnel. The dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport,
Chatham and Rosyth provide the Navy with major repair and supply facilities
in Britain.
Army general purpose combat forces consist of the ground forces deployed
outside Europe to meet Commonwealth and treaty commitments; the Army
Strategic Command; and other front line units in Britain. Their cost in 1971-
Equipment
Royal Air Force
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equipment
Air Mobility
Forces
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
72 is estimated at £154 million including those deployed outside Europe (^54
million).
Army Strategic Command’s (see p. m) primary role is in support of
NATO, but the forces in the command also form part of the general capability
for deployment elsewhere.
Equipment is in general similar to that of the European theatre ground
forces. The standard NATO general purpose machine-gun and the 81 mm
mortar have been introduced. Some infantry battalions have the Combat and
Wombat heavy anti-tank guns, while others are equipped with Vigilant anti¬
tank guided missiles.
The Army’s force of helicopters is being increased and will be equipped
with the Anglo-French Gazelle (SA 34*) an<^ Lynx (WG 13)* Canadian
Beaver light aircraft are used for liaison purposes. The Landing Ship Tank
(LST), for support operations, has been superseded by the faster and more
advanced Landing Ship Logistic (LSL). Winchester SRN6 hovercraft are
operated by the Royal Corps of Transport.
The Royal Air Force general purpose combat forces comprise all front line
formations and units except those designated Air Mobility Forces (transport
and tanker forces). They fall into five main categories: strike/attack, offensive
support, tactical reconnaissance, long-range maritime reconnaissance and air
defence. Their cost in 1971-72 is estimated at £379 million.
Interceptor squadrons are equipped with the Lightning, which is supersonic
and can carry Firestreak or Red Top air-to-air missiles. Bloodhound and
Tigercat surface-to-air missiles are also available for air defence. The air
defence system is fully co-ordinated, with ground radars. New military radars
and centralised data-handling equipment are being installed in Britain as part
of the integrated plans for air defence and national air traffic control (the
Linesman/Mediator system). The Ballistic Missile Early Warning Station at
Fylingdales would provide warning of a missile attack on Britain, it also
detects, tracks and identifies objects in orbit.
A number of Phantom and Harrier squadrons have been formed in Air
Support Command. The Harrier, with its unique vertical take-off and
landing capacity, will concentrate mainly on quick reaction close support, while
the Phantom will cover the longer range ground attack and reconnaissance
functions. The ground attack version of the Anglo-French Jaguar (see p. 119)
will release further Phantoms from this role to replace in turn the Lightning
interceptors, and it is planned to increase the Jaguar front-line by a further
four squadrons. The Buccaneer Mk 2, already in service in a maritime strike
role, has been deployed to RAF Germany to start replacing the Canberra in
the tactical strike and reconnaissance role. Vulcan aircraft also operate in the
strike/attack role, and Victor aircraft in the reconnaissance role. The Shackleton
has been largely replaced by the Nimrod, the only land-based jet maritime
reconnaissance aircraft in the world, in the maritime reconnaissance and anti¬
submarine role. Some Shackleton aircraft are being converted to provide air¬
borne early warning.
Phantom FG 1 squadrons are now operational in Strike Command, in the
maritime air defence role; Buccaneer Mk 2 squadrons are operational in the
maritime strike/attack role.
Air mobility forces are made up of the strategic and tactical transport forces,
tanker aircraft to refuel combat aircraft in flight, support helicopters and
Equipment
Production
Co-operative
Projects
Research and
Development
DEFENCE II9
communications aircraft. Their cost in 1971-72, together with that of
associated stations and other support, is estimated at £110 million
The strategic transport force is equipped with Comet 4C, Britannia, Belfast and
VC10 aircraft. Tactical transport support over medium ranges is provided by
the Hercules, while for short-range tasks the Wessex and Whirlwind helicopters
and the Andover aircraft are available. The Anglo-French Puma support
helicopter is now entering service to replace the Whirlwind and supplement
the Wessex. A force of Victor tanker aircraft provides in-flight refuelling, which
gives added range and flexibility to the operations of air defence, strike and
other aircraft.
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT AND SUPPORT
Responsibility for the procurement of defence equipment, including aircraft,
ships, ordnance, guided weapons and electronics, lies with a Procurement
Executive within the Ministry of Defence. The executive, set up in 1971
following a reorganisation of the government departments responsible for
defence procurement and civil aerospace (see pp. 56-7), has taken over this
aspect of the work of the former Ministry of Aviation Supply, an interim
department which took over the defence and aerospace role of the former
Ministry of Technology in late 1970.
A substantial part of the equipment used by the Services is developed and
produced in Britain, some by private industry on a contract basis and some
by the Royal Ordnance Factories, the Royal Dockyards and other establish¬
ments operated by the Ministry of Defence.
Because it is too costly for Britain or any other European country to develop
all its own defence equipment, a balance, which reconciles economic, industrial,
and political objectives with defence requirements, is maintained between
national development, development in collaboration with allies, and foreign
purchase. In 1971-72 the total value of exports of British defence equipment
was estimated at some £270 million, the Ministry of Defence share being
estimated at about £58 million.
There has been continued progress towards increased European co-operation
in the development and procurement of defence equipment. The most
important collaborative venture at present is the multi-role combat aircraft
(MRCA) in which Britain is co-operating with the Federal Republic of
Germany and Italy. Successful collaboration with France on the Jaguar strike-
trainer, the Martel air-to-surface missile, and the Gazelle (SA 341), Puma (SA
330) and Lynx (WG 13) helicopters, is at an advanced stage. Britain is
collaborating with the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy on a 155 mm
towed gun, and with Australia for the Ikara anti-submarine missile. Belgium
has become a partner in the programme for armoured combat vehicles.
Regular consultation takes place between Britain and her European allies
to harmonise the tactical doctrines on which joint operational requirements
for weapons systems are based.
The bulk of research work is carried out in the 26 research establishments
under the control of the Ministry of Defence; these establishments also
evaluate the development work undertaken by private industry for the
Government. Consultation and collaboration between Government and
120
General
Logistic and
Administrative
Support
TABLE 7
Cost of the
Defence
Programme
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry is secured through the National Defence Industries Council and the
Defence Scientific Advisory Council. These establishments are being organ¬
ised increasingly on a functional rather than on a single service basis. Research
and development work is in six major fields—aircraft, guided weapons, satellite
communications, electronics, ship construction and naval weapons, ordnance
and military vehicles.
Since 1967 efforts have been made to reduce the resources directed to
defence research and development, to make increased resources available for
civil research and development (see p. 319). The 1971 estimate for defence
research is £264 million. Analysis of the implications of policy is made by the
Defence Operational Analysis Establishment. The Controller, Research and
Development, is responsible for the oversight of the whole equipment research
and development programme, and exercises control through the Defence
Research Committee, the Operational Requirements Committee, and the
Weapons Development Committee, which evaluate the options on the various
weapons systems required by current strategy and defence policy.
Over 30 major projects are at present in hand, including the MRCA, the
Sea Dart and Sea PEoZ/'ship-to-air guided weapons, Blowpipe, an infantry air-
defence missile, Clansman, a net radio system for field communications,
LinesmanjMediator, an integrated control and reporting system for air defence
and air traffic control, gas turbine development for ship propulsion, the
adaptation of hovercraft for naval purposes, a field artillery rocket system, and
two families of air-portable armoured combat reconnaissance vehicles. The
defence research establishments also undertake civil work, and publicise the
many industrial applications of their research.
In addition to research and development, there is support of a general nature
supplied in Britain to the Services as a whole. The major items include:
general training; the overhead costs of naval dockyards, ordnance factories
and repair, maintenance and storage units; Ministry of Defence and local
administrative services in Britain; and military pensions. Work continues to
rationalise and reorganise these support services. The total estimated cost for
1971-72 is £953 million.
USE OF MANPOWER AND RESOURCES
During recent years reductions have been made in both uniformed and
civilian personnel; a strength of about 350,000 military personnel is envisaged
for the mid-1970s. Table 7 below shows the allocation of expenditure between
relevant government departments, and table 8 on p. 121 shows the active
strengths of the three services, including female personnel, for 1st January
£ million
Ministry of Defence
Department of the Environment
Atomic Energy Authority
1971-72
(estimated)
2,334-2
206-0
4-9
2,545-1
DEFENCE
121
1971 and those estimated for 1st April 1972. The diagrams below and on
p. 122 show a functional analysis of defence personnel, both military and
civilian, and the use of monetary resources.
Thousands
TABLE 8
Active Strength
of the Services
1971-72
1 January 1971
Royal
Navy
Army
RAF
Total
1 April 1972 (estimate)
Royal
Navy
Army
RAF
Total
Male:
Officers
Servicemen
Female:
10-7
69-7
3-3
18-6
149-6
5-5
19-0
87-2
5-8
48-3
306-5
14-6
10-2
68-1
3-2
17-6
145-5
5-2
18-9
83-9
6-0
46-7
297-5
14-4
Totals®
83-8
173-6
111-9
369-3
81-5
168-3
108-8
358-6
0 Discrepancies in totals are due to rounding.
Note: In addition, forces enlisted outside Britain totalled 16,300 and volunteer reserves
and auxiliary forces 59,500 at 1st January 1971. The Regular Reserves totalled 347,700.
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL 1971-72
] MILITARY f'""'1  1 CIVILIAN
Nuclear Strategic Forces
Average
Strengths
3,000
3,800
European Theatre Ground Forces
 Navy
General Purpose
Combat Forces"
-Army
-Air Force
Air Mobility
58.100
30.200
39.200
10,800
61,900
14.100
50,000
15,400
16,700
3,600
Reserve and Auxiliary Formations
Research and Development
Training
Production, Repair and
Associated Facilities in the UK
Other Support Functions
2,400
3,100
1,300
28,700
82,100
24,500
10,200
139,900
50,700
59,000
Total Military 375,600 (Non-UK Forces 16,300)
Total Civilian 333,100 (Industrial 190,500, Non-Industrial 142,600)
122
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE EXPENDITURE 1971-72
Nuclear Strategic Forces*
European Theatre Ground Forces
■ Navy
General Purpose_
Combat Forces
-Army
I—Air Force
£ million
34
263
301
154
379
Air Mobility
Reserve and Auxiliary Formations
Research and Development
Training
Production, Repair and
Associated Facilities in the UK
War and Contingency Stocks
Other Support Functions
Miscellaneous Expenditure
and Receipts
Special Materials
]
□
'■Excludes Special Materials and Research and Development
112
34
264
265
214
29
474
2
20
Total 2,545
5 SOCIAL WELFARE
Voluntary
Organisations
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain the State is responsible, through either central or local government,
for a range of services covering family allowances, national insurance, help for
war victims, financial assistance to those in special need, health and welfare
services for mothers and young children, the sick, mentally disordered, elderly
and handicapped and for families in difficulties of various kinds, and the care
of children lacking a normal home life (all described in this chapter); and for
education (see Chapter 6) and housing (see Chapter 8). Public authorities in
Britain are spending £ 10,443 million a year on this range of services, that is,
over £187 a year per head of the population.
Voluntary organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of
nearly all the social services. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics,
dispensaries, and social and recreational clubs before these were provided by
the State. They made themselves responsible for the welfare of the very young
and the very old, the homeless and the handicapped. Gradually the State
accepted the primary responsibility for the major services, supplementing the
voluntary services and developing a comprehensive structure that ensured a
minimum standard of living and well-being for all citizens.
State and voluntary social services are now complementary and co-operative.
The State may work through voluntary agencies specially adapted to serve
particular needs and ensures that necessary standards are maintained. The
officers of central and local government, in carrying out their duties, co-operate
with the workers of many voluntary social service societies, while the
residential provision made by the State and by local authorities for the care of
children, the chronic sick and the aged is supplemented by voluntary homes
of various types. Most of the sick and elderly receive State pensions or benefits.
The Charity Commission, a government department, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate
their administration when necessary; it maintains central and local registers
of charities which are open to public inspection; and it works to promote co¬
operation between charities and State services.
The number of voluntary organisations in Britain runs into thousands; they
range from national organisations to small individual local groups. Most
organisations, however, are members of larger associations or are represented
on local or national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly
concerned with giving personal service, others in the formation of public
opinion and exchange of information. A number are concerned with giving
help to immigrants. In recent years there has been an increase in organised
service by young people.
Organisations concerned with personal and family problems include the
voluntary family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Association,
Family Service Units, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage
Guidance Council; the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her
Child; and the Samaritans, who help people near to committing suicide.
124
Social Workers
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled in general is given by—among
others—the British Red Cross Society, the St. John Ambulance Association
and Brigade, the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service and the Leagues of
Hospital Friends, but an increasing number of societies exist to help people
with particular disabilities and difficulties, such as the Royal National Institute
for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the National Associa¬
tion for Mental Health, the National Society for Mentally Handicapped
Children, the Spastics Society, the constituent members of the Central
Council for the Disabled, Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous and
their Scottish equivalents.
Bodies working on a national scale whose work is specifically religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Com¬
mittee on Social Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England
Children’s Society, the Church of England Council for Social Work, the
Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion, the Society of Friends, the Crusade of Rescue, the Society of St. Vincent
de Paul, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Jewish Welfare
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women s Royal
Voluntary Service, which gives help in every kind of practical difficulty, brings
‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and old people, provides flatlets
and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family problems and assists in
hospitals and clinics, as well as doing relief work in emergencies.
A central link between voluntary organisations and official bodies concerned
with social services is provided in England and Wales by the National Council
of Social Service, which brings together most of the principal voluntary
agencies for consultation and joint action, either as a whole or in groups of
those concerned with particular aspects, such as youth work or work among
the handicapped. There are also the Scottish Council of Social Service and the
Northern Ireland Council of Social Service, which perform similar functions.
The Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, of which there are now some 500 in Britain,
are steadily increasing in number. The primary role of the bureaux is to give
explanation and advice to the citizen who is in doubt about his rights or who
does not know about the State or voluntary services which could help him.
While the voluntary worker giving full-time or part-time service has done
pioneer work in many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an
essential part, social services of all kinds increasingly depend for their opera¬
tion chiefly on professional social workers, that is, full-time salaried workers
trained in the principles and methods of social work. Most professional social
workers are employed by local authorities (for the personal social services and
probation work), by hospitals (for medical and psychiatric social work), or by
voluntary organisations. Training for most types of social work consists of a
basic university degree, diploma or certificate course in social science followed
by a university course in applied social studies or specialised training for a
particular service. Training is also possible in colleges of further education.
The statutory central training council for the United Kingdom is the Central
Council for Education and Training in Social Work which,in WTL replaced
the two former national councils for social work training, the Council tor
Training in Social Work and the Central Training Council in Child Care and
which also undertakes the training functions carried out formerly by the
Advisory Council for Probation and After-Care. Advice on social work training
is given by the Social Work Advisory Service.
SOCIAL WELFARE
125
Urban A four-year urban programme providing for government-aided local authority
Programme expenditure of some £20 million-^25 million was launched at the end of 1968
to assist areas of special social need, in particular to relieve problems resulting
from overcrowding, inadequate housing and schools, and other forms of
deprivation. In 1970 the programme was extended to 1976 with total expendi¬
ture for the period 1968-76 of £60 million-^65 million. Projects being under¬
taken include help for play groups and the provision and improvement of
nursery schools and classes, day nurseries and playgrounds, language classes
for immigrants, in-service training courses for teachers, children’s homes,
family advice centres, housing aid services, family planning clinics, help for
community centres and summer holiday schemes for deprived children. A
particular aim of the programme is to support the work of voluntary bodies.
An experiment in community development has also been started by the
Government. This involves bringing together those services, both statutory
and voluntary, which are concerned with relieving various forms of social
handicap and encouraging the resources of self-help within the community.
SOCIAL SECURITY
National insurance, industrial injuries insurance, family allowances, family
income supplements and supplementary benefits together with (in a special
category) war pensions constitute a comprehensive system of social security in
the United Kingdom.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers these services
in Great Britain; within the Department the Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission is responsible for the system of supplementary benefits. In Northern
Ireland the first five of these schemes are administered by the Ministry of
Health and Social Services which contains the Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission for Northern Ireland. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners
and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Health and
Social Security throughout the United Kingdom. Appeals relating to claims
for the various benefits and allowances are decided by independent authori¬
ties.
Although the development of public provision for social security in Britain
can be traced back for several centuries (the Poor Relief Act of 1601 may
be regarded as specially important in England and Wales), the modern system
of comprehensive provision is a creation of the twentieth century. Non¬
contributory old age pensions were introduced in 1908, and the first con¬
tributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans in 1926. A contributory
National Health Insurance Scheme was begun in 1912, and in the same year
a scheme of unemployment insurance was introduced which in 1920 was
extended to cover the great majority of employees. By the beginning of the
second world war social security provision in Britain was among the best in
the world, but lacked co-ordination because of its piecemeal development, and
not everyone came within its scope. In the immediate post-war years a series
of Acts introduced the present comprehensive system, which became fully
operative in July 1948. Statutory provision for the war disabled goes back to
the end of the sixteenth century, but the main lines of the present war pension
provisions were laid down during the first world war.
Family allowances and national insurance and industrial injuries benefits
or allowances, other than maternity, unemployment, sickness, injury or dis¬
ablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which income tax is
assessed. On the other hand, various income tax reliefs and exemptions are
126
Reciprocity
FAMILY
ALLOWANCES
FAMILY INCOME
SUPPLEMENT
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
allowed on account of age or liability for the support of dependants. Family
income supplements and war disablement pensions are not taxable.
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a
single system. Reciprocal agreements on industrial injuries, family allowances
and most national insurance benefits are in operation with Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Jersey and Guernsey, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia; a similar agreement with Austria is
expected to be ratified in 1972. Agreements with Cyprus, France, the
Republic of Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and
Turkey cover industrial injuries and most national insurance benefits. With
Australia and New Zealand there are agreements on family allowances and
most national insurance benefits. There are limited agreements with Bermuda,
Canada and the United States. Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man are also
party to most of these agreements with other countries.
Family allowances are provided in Great Britain under the Family Allowances
Act 1965 (which consolidated the Acts of 1945^^4)> ^ Northern Ireland
under its own legislation. They are being paid in Great Britain to more than
4 million families with over 11 million children, and in Northern Ireland to
138,000 families. The allowances are payable to families with two or more
children below the age limits which are 15 years for children who leave school
at that age, 16 years for certain incapacitated children, and 19 for children
who remain at school or are apprentices with low earnings.
The rates of the allowances are £0-90 a week for families with two children
below the age limits and a further £1 a week for each additional child.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit
the family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid either to
the mother or to the father. There is no insurance qualification for title to the
allowances, but there are certain residence conditions.
Family Income Supplement is a new social security benefit introduced in
August 1971 to help families (and single people) with small incomes where the
wage-earner is in full-time work and there is at least one dependent child. It is
payable when the weekly sum of a family’s resources falls below a prescribed
amount, fixed at £18 a week where there is one child plus £2 for each additional
child. The weekly rate of the supplement is half the difference between the
family’s income and the prescribed amount up to a maximum of ^4' Some
190,000 households containing about 500,000 children are expected to benefit,
including about 54,000 single people with children.
The National Insurance Acts apply, in general, to everyone over minimum
school-leaving age living in Great Britain. There are similar schemes in
Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. (The National Insurance Act 1965
consolidated the provisions of the National Insurance Acts i94^—^40
The national insurance scheme provides benefits in specified contingencies
where contribution conditions have been fulfilled. The benefits are paid for
partly by insured persons’ contributions, partly by contributions of employers
in respect of their employees, and partly by a contribution made by the
Exchequer out of general taxation.
The original system was based on flat-rate contributions and benefits.
Contributions varied only with the sex and insurance class of the insured
SOCIAL WELFARE
127
Contributors
person and benefits were at standard rates. (In both cases lower rates apply to
those under 18.) Two modifications were subsequently introduced to provide
additional earnings-related contributions and benefits. For retirement, grad¬
uated contributions and pensions were introduced in 1961; and for the first
six months of sickness, unemployment or widowhood the National Insurance
Act 1966 introduced a scheme for earnings-related supplements to the flat-
rate benefit and contributions.
In November 1970 pensions were introduced for elderly people who were
over pension age when the scheme started and had therefore been previously
excluded, and in April 1971 for widows aged between 40 and 50 when widowed
or when entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ended. From September
1971 an old person’s pension became payable to all other non-pensioners aged
80 and over; at the same time an invalidity pension was introduced for anyone
who had received sickness benefit for six months, with an additional invalidity
allowance for people becoming chronically sick more than five years before
retirement age. An attendance allowance for severely disabled people needing
constant supervision will become payable in December 1971.
Contributors under the national insurance scheme are divided into three
classes:
Class 1. Employed people. Most of those who work for an employer under a
contract of service or are paid apprentices—over 23 million.
Class 2. Self-employed people. Those in business on their own account and
others who are working for gain but do not work under the control of an
employer—about million.
Class 3. Non-employed people. All those insured who are not in class 1 or
class 2—about a quarter of a million.
There is a general liability to pay flat-rate contributions according to this
classification but certain people are excepted. These include full-time students,
prisoners and most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. Self-
employed and non-employed persons whose income is below £468 a year can
apply for exception. Married women can choose to pay contributions and
receive benefit in their own right or not to pay flat-rate contributions (if they
are working they must pay graduated contributions) and rely upon their
husband’s insurance for maternity grant, retirement pension (at a lower rate),
widow’s benefit and death grant. If a married woman works for an employer
he must pay his full share of the flat-rate contributions even if she has chosen
not to pay flat-rate contributions.
Flat-rate contributions are credited to students up to the age of 18, and
to most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. People who are
excepted from liability to pay but are not entitled to credits may pay con¬
tributions at the non-employed rate if they wish to safeguard entitlement to
retirement pension and widow’s benefit.
An employed person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions
at the age of 70 (for a man, 65 for a woman), or when he retires from regular
employment after reaching minimum pension age (65 for men, 60 for women),
whichever is the earlier. If he does any work as an employed person thereafter,
he must pay an industrial injuries contribution; the employer still has to pay
his full share of the flat-rate contribution.
Contributions
Flat-rate contributions are normally paid by means of national insurance
128
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
stamps bought from a post office and fixed, for each contributor, to a single
contribution card. All three classes pay flat-rate contributions (see Table 9).
The stamps for class 1 contributors also include the employer’s redundancy
contribution (to help to provide for payments in certain circumstances to
employees whose work is terminated, see p. 398) and the selective employ¬
ment tax paid by employers (see p. 345); and for all contributors the national
health service contribution (which for convenience is paid with the national
insurance contribution although the two services are separate). It is the
employer’s responsibility in the first place to see that the class 1 contributions
are paid, but he can deduct the employees’ share from their wages. The self-
employed and non-employed must stamp their own cards. Flat-rate contribu¬
tions are usually credited for weeks of unemployment, sickness or injury, or if
certain widow’s benefits are being paid.
TABLE 9
Weekly National
Insurance,
National Health
Service and
Employers’
Redundancy
Contributions
and Selective
Employment Tax“
CLASS 1
Employed men (18-
70) not contracted
out of the
graduated pension
part of the scheme
and not retired:
Paid by employee
Paid by employer
Total ..
Employed men (18—
70) contracted out
and not retired:
Paid by employee
Paid by employer
Total ..
CLASS 2
Self-employed
men
CLASS 3
Non-employed
National
Insur¬
ance
flat
rate6
0-722
0-804
0-842
0-924
1-333
1-033
Health
Service
0-158
0-083
0-158
0-083
0-167
0-167
Employ¬
ers’
redun¬
dancy
contribu¬
tion
0-063
0-063
Selec¬
tive
employ¬
ment
tax
1-20
1-20
Total
flat
rate
0-88
2-15
3-03
1-00
2-27
3-27
1-50
1-20
Graduated
contribution
(additional)
from
0-01
0-01
0-01
0-01
to
1-47
1-47
1-08
1-08
a Rates given to three decimal places are expressed in this way for accounting purposes
only. Lower rates of contribution are payable for boys and girls and for certain married
including, for class 1, the industrial injuries insurance contribution of £0-05 from
employee and £0-06 from employer.
In general graduated contributions are payable by employed people (in¬
cluding married women but not retirement pensioners) aged between 18 and
70 (65 for women) who earn more than ^9 a week. The range of graduated
contributions is given in Table 9. Employees whose job provides them with
an occupational pension of at least £3-48 a year for each year of service (£2-90
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Benefits
Amounts
for women) may be ‘contracted out’ of part of the graduated pension scheme.
Contracted out employees pay graduated contributions at the rate of 0-5 per
cent of that part of their weekly pay lying between £9 and £18 and 4-35
per cent on earnings between £18 and ^42; their employers pay the same
amount. Employees who are not contracted out pay graduated contributions
at the rate of 475 per cent of the part of their weekly earnings between £9 and
£18 and 4-35 per cent of the part between £18 and £42. Their employers pay
the same amount.
Graduated contributions provide a graduated addition to retirement pension
and meet the cost of earnings-related supplements to sickness and unemploy¬
ment benefit and to widow’s allowance. The contributions are collected
through the same machinery as is used to collect pay-as-you-earn (deduction
at source) income tax.
The scheme provides payments to contributors in the event of unemployment
(if normally working for an employer), incapacity for work and invalidity (if
normally working for an employer or self-employed), and confinement and the
weeks immediately before and after (for women normally working for an
employer or self-employed and paying national insurance contributions at the
full rate). Retirement pensions are paid to people who have reached 65 (60 for
women) if they have retired from regular work and from the age of 70 (65 for
women) even if they continue to work; people aged 80 and over who have not
participated in the scheme are eligible for an old person’s pension; widows
normally receive benefit in the first 26 weeks after bereavement and sub¬
sequently while they have young children or if they have reached the age of
40 when widowed or when their children have grown up; and there are two
kinds of allowance in respect of orphan children where a widow’s pension is
not payable. The scheme also provides lump-sum cash grants for two expen¬
sive contingencies—the birth of a child and a death.
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before
benefit can be paid at all, a minimum number of contributions must actually
have been paid since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit
cannot be paid unless a specified number of contributions have been paid or
credited over a specified period. There are special rules to help a widow who
does not become entitled to a widow’s pension at widowhood or when her
children have grown up, to qualify for sickness or unemployment benefit in
the period before she can have established or re-established herself in insur¬
ance through her own contributions; there are also provisions to help a
divorced woman who was not paying contributions during her marriage.
The basic amount of the majority of flat-rate benefits is ^6 a week which
may be reduced if insufficient contributions have been paid, but is not affected
by other unearned income or the previous level of earnings. Earnings received
while the benefit is in payment, however, may cause its reduction or with¬
drawal : unemployment benefit cannot be paid to a person earning more than
a specified amount from a subsidiary occupation; retirement pensioners under
the age of 70 (65 for women) have their pensions reduced in step with earnings
over certain specified amounts; sickness benefit, though not affected by con¬
tinued payment of wages during illness, is not normally payable to a person
doing any actual work. Widows’ benefits, however, are not affected by earn¬
ings. Exceptions to the basic flat rate are the higher rate of £8-40 a week
payable to widows during the first 26 weeks after bereavement, the increased
retirement pension earned by someone who has continued at work and paid
130 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
contributions beyond minimum pension age and the invalidity allowance paid
to people becoming chronically sick more than five years before pension age;
and the lower rate of jC4,20 a week unemployment or sickness benefit payable
to married women who pay contributions and the rates for widows between 40
and 50 which reduce on a scale to ^1-80 a week for a woman aged 40 at the
date of entitlement. The standard rate of retirement pension for a woman on
her husband’s insurance is £370 a week and the old person’s pension is ^3-60
for a single person and £5-8° for a married couple. An age addition of ^0-25
a week is paid to pensioners aged 80 and over. Invalidity allowance is £0-30,
£o-6o or £1, depending upon the age at which incapacity begins. Attendance
allowance will be ^4'80 a week.
Standard increases of flat-rate benefit are payable for dependants at the rate
°f £370 for an adult (generally a wife), £1-85 for the first or only child under
the family allowances age limits; £0-95 for the second child and ^0-85 for each
other child over and above any family allowances payable (see p. 126). The
sum payable for the children of widows, invalidity and retirement pensioners
is £2-95 for each child inclusive of family allowances.
A guardian’s allowance of £2-95 a week is payable to a person who has in
his or her family a child who has lost both parents, one of whom was insured
under the National Insurance Acts. The allowance can sometimes be paid
on the death of one parent. For certain fatherless children there is a child’s
special allowance also of £2-95 a week inclusive of family allowances; this is
payable to a woman whose marriage has been dissolved or annulled and who
has not remarried, if her former husband dies and she has a child to whose
support he was contributing before he died.
The graduated addition to retirement pension is at the rate of £0-02% a
week for each £7-50 of all graduated contributions paid by a man and for each
£9 of such graduated contributions paid by a woman (with in each case, the
matching amount of graduated contribution coming from the employer). The
earnings-related supplements to flat-rate unemployment and sickness benefits
are one-third of that part of a person’s average weekly earnings between £()
and £30,1 but the supplements cannot raise the total benefit, including in¬
creases for dependants, beyond 85 per cent of earnings. The supplement is
also paid to widow beneficiaries who have the appropriate record of earnings,
if they become unemployed or sick.
An earnings-related supplement is paid in addition to the widow s allowance
to widows whose husbands were under 7° and had not retired from regular
employment; this supplement is one-third of that part of the husband s
average weekly earnings between £<) and £30.1
The rates of grants are varied: £25 maternity grant is payable for a con¬
finement and a further £2$ for each additional child born at the same con¬
finement living 12 hours after birth; and £^0 death grant on the death of an
adult (less for a child, or for an adult who was within ten years of minimum
pension age when the scheme started).
Duration In general, national insurance payments are paid as long as the situation
requiring them lasts. However, invalidity pension cannot be paid if fewer than
156 contributions have been made (possible in three years for a contributor
continuously at work) and unemployment benefit is payable for a maximum of
one year. The supplement to unemployment and sickness benefit is paid for a
maximum of six months starting from the thirteenth day of unemployment or
1 From the end of the 1972-73 financial year it is proposed to relate the supplement to
earnings between £10 and £42.
SOCIAL WELFARE
I3I
incapacity for work. Maternity allowance begins 11 weeks before the expected
week of confinement and ends after the sixth week following the expected week
or the actual confinement if this is later.
Similarly, a widowed mother’s allowance at the full rate ceases when her
children are no longer dependent on her, though a mother can continue to
receive £6 a week for herself while she has living with her a son or daughter
under 19. The widow’s pension payable to the childless widow, provided she
is 40 or over at the time of being widowed, or the similar pension payable to
the widowed mother who has reached 40 when her widowed mother’s allow¬
ance ends, normally continues until she has reached minimum pension age and
retired, or at most till the age of 65. On retirement she receives a pension at a
rate not lower than her widow’s pension.
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
(INDUSTRIAL
INJURIES)
The industrial injuries insurance scheme, which, in 1948, replaced the work¬
men’s compensation scheme (first introduced by the Workmen’s Compensa¬
tion Act of 1897), provides benefits for personal injuries caused by accidents
arising out of, and in the course of, employment, and for prescribed diseases
due to the nature of employment. It covers practically everyone in class 1 of
the national insurance scheme and certain others. Like the national insurance
scheme, the industrial injuries scheme is financed partly from contributions
(see Table 9) and partly from taxation. The legal basis of the scheme is the
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act 1965 which consolidated the 1946
Act and subsequent legislation. Similar cover against industrial injuries and
diseases is provided by Northern Ireland’s legislation.
Benefits
Injury Benefit
Disablement
Benefit
Injury benefit for an adult is £8-75 a week plus £2>'l0 f°r an adult dependant,
^1-85 for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits, £0-95
for the second child and £o’8$ for each other child in addition to any family
allowance payable. It is paid when the insured person is incapable of work as
a result of an industrial accident or prescribed disease, and payment can
continue for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning on the date of the accident or
development of the disease. A person entitled to sickness benefit who draws
injury benefit instead, also receives any earnings-related supplement (see p.
130) to which he is entitled.
Disablement benefit may be paid (but not at the same time as injury benefit)
when, as the result of industrial accident or prescribed disease, there is a loss
of physical or mental faculty. The amount depends on the extent of the
disablement as assessed by a medical board; it varies from £10 for 100 per
cent disablement to £2 a week for 20 per cent disablement, but for disable¬
ment of less than 20 per cent a gratuity of up to £660 is normally paid.
In certain circumstances disablement benefit may be supplemented as
follows: unemployability supplement, at the weekly rate of £6; constant
attendance allowance of up to £\ weekly normally, or a special rate of £6 or £8
a week in exceptionally severe cases; an allowance of £4 a week for exceptionally
severe disablement; a special hardship allowance of up to £4 for a person who
is unfit to return to his regular job or to do work of an equivalent standard;
and hospital treatment allowance which raises the benefit to that for a 100 per
cent assessment during hospital treatment for the industrial disability. In¬
creases of benefit for dependants are payable with unemployability supplement
and hospital treatment allowance. People receiving unemployability supple¬
ment may also receive an additional allowance similar to invalidity allowance
(see p. 130).
132
Death Benefit
SUPPLEMENTARY
BENEFITS
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit
may be paid to the dependants.
For a widow a pension of ^8-40 a week is payable for the first 26 weeks of
widowhood. In addition she receives any earnings-related supplement (see p.
130) that would have been paid had she claimed widow’s allowance under the
main national insurance scheme. Thereafter, the widow can receive a pension
of £6-55 a week if she was aged 50 at the date of her husband’s death, or has
dependent children or other special needs; otherwise she receives j£i-8o a
week. If she had been living apart from her husband, the pension is limited to
the weekly rate of maintenance he was paying, if less than the rate otherwise
appropriate.
In addition, allowances are paid for children under the family allowances
age limits. For widows, these allowances together with any family allowance
payable amount to £2-95 a week for each child. For other beneficiaries, the
rate is j£i‘85 each.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, may be
entitled to pensions, allowances or gratuities.
The Ministry of Social Security Act 1966 provided for a scheme of supple¬
mentary benefits to replace the system which had been administered by the
former National Assistance Board since 1948. The Act established within the
then Ministry of Social Security a Supplementary Benefits Commission re¬
sponsible for guiding the scheme and for determining awards of benefit.
Parallel legislation in Northern Ireland made similar provision.
Every person in Great Britain aged 16 or over who is not in full-time work,
attending school or involved in a trade dispute and whose resources are in¬
sufficient to meet his requirements is entitled to a supplementary benefit. The
benefit takes the form of a supplementary allowance for people under the
statutory retirement age, and a supplementary pension for those over. The
benefit is the amount by which a person’s requirements exceed his available
resources, both being defined by rules laid down by the Act. The calculation
of requirements is based on different amounts for single people and family
groups (for blind people there are special higher amounts) with, in each case,
an addition for rent. For the old and most other long-term cases a special
addition is made. Available resources include certain income and capital; the
main national insurance and industrial injury benefits, family allowances and
maintenance payments from a husband or the father of the claimant s children
are taken into account in full but some part of all other resources is disregarded.
The payment of a supplementary allowance in the case of an able-bodied
person of working age may be conditional on registering at an employment
exchange of the Department of Employment and in the case of fit people under
the age of 45 may be limited to four weeks in areas where there is plenty of
work available. The allowance is then paid at the exchange; otherwise it is paid
weekly through a post office.
The Supplementary Benefits Commission also has a duty to influence people
without a settled way of living to lead a more normal life. The Commission
provides temporary accommodation for them in 17 reception centres, four of
which are administered by local authorities on behalf of the Commission. For
men who have been unemployed for long periods and who are receiving
supplementary allowances or are using reception centres, it runs 13 re¬
establishment centres, three of which have residential accommodation where
they are given help to fit them again for work.
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
WAR PENSIONS
AND RELATED
SERVICES
Pensions and allowances for people disabled or bereaved through war or
service in the Forces since the second world war are paid under Royal
Warrants and other instruments administered by the Department of Health
and Social Security.
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private soldier
is £10 a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the degree of
disablement. The latter is assessed by comparing the condition of the person
disabled by service with that of a normal healthy person of the same age and
sex. Allowances for a wife and children are paid in addition to the basic
pension. There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones
being for unemployability (£6-55 a week), constant attendance (up to £4 and,
exceptionally, £8 a week), comforts (£0-85 or ^170 a week), and lowered
standard of occupation (up to £4 a week). An additional allowance of £4 a
week is payable to war pensioners who are receiving constant attendance
allowance at a rate above the normal maximum. An age allowance (between
£0-50 and £1-40 a week) is payable to disablement pensioners who are aged
65 or over and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary allowances are
free of income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any
family allowances payable.
Pensions are also paid to war widows and war orphans. The standard rate
of pension for widows of private soldiers is ^7-80 a week, with additional
allowances for their children and, in certain cases, an allowance for rent (up to
£2 a week). There is an additional allowance for widows aged 65 or over.
Parents or other relatives who were dependent on a person whose death
resulted from service in the Forces may receive pensions if they are in financial
need.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service
for war pensioners and war orphans which is available to help any who require
advice or assistance. War pensioners have priority for treatment of their war
disablements in National Health Service hospitals subject only to needs of
emergency and other urgent cases.
Many voluntary associations and ex-Service organisations give financial aid
and personal service to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
The Department’s welfare officers work in close co-operation with these and
other statutory bodies.
HEALTH
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of
the years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second half
of the nineteenth century was notable for the growth of the environmental
or public health services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal
of refuse and cleaning of streets, and the first half of the twentieth century
for the development of publicly provided personal health services, as distinct
from environmental services, culminating in the introduction in 1948 of a
comprehensive National Health Service available to every resident. Scientific
discoveries of importance to medicine and health, including the development
of new drugs, and the improved services of the last 70 years, particularly in
maternity and child welfare, school health services and school meals, are
reflected in declining mortality rates (see p. 9) and improved physique. The
infant mortality rate has more than halved since the National Health Service
was inaugurated; this and the maternal death rate are among the lowest in the
I34
PUBLIC HEALTH
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
Pure Food
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
world. The health of children has steadily improved and emphasis is now
placed on prevention or early detection of disease or disability. Deaths from
such diseases as tuberculosis, poliomyelitis and diphtheria have fallen so
markedly that they are no longer major health problems. Diseases now in the
forefront of research programmes include cancer and diseases of the central
nervous system, such as muscular dystrophy. Efforts are also being made to
combat some of the most prevalent diseases, which include, besides the
common cold and influenza, bronchitis, rheumatism and arthritis, and heart
diseases.
The Public Health Acts of 1936 and 1961 and the Health Services and Public
Health Act 1968 constitute the present basic public health code in England and
Wales. Local authorities (under the general direction of the Department of
Health and Social Security or the Welsh Office and the Department of the
Environment) have extensive powers for making and administering by-laws on
matters of public health. The local authorities chiefly concerned are the
councils of county and non-county boroughs, London boroughs and the City
of London, urban and rural district councils and, to a limited extent, parish
councils.
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed
on much the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on
separate Acts and there is a different allocation of services between the various
types of local authority (working under the direction of the Scottish Home and
Health Department and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Health and Social
Services). The Public Health (Scotland) Act 1897 and the Burgh Police
(Scotland) Act 1892 as amended by later statutes constitute the basic legisla¬
tion for Scotland. The local authorities concerned are the councils of counties
and burghs. In Northern Ireland the councils of county and non-county
boroughs and urban and rural districts are mainly responsible for administer-,
ing the Public Health Acts (Northern Ireland) 1878-1966.
The medical officers of health of local authorities are responsible for investi¬
gating outbreaks of infectious diseases and for disinfection and various other
preventive measures.
Port health authorities supervise health control at seaports and airports, the
primary object of which is to prevent the introduction of infectious disease
into the country. This health control is undertaken by health authorities using
the services of medical officers, public health inspectors, rodent inspectors
and others.
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by the Food and
Drugs Act 1955 in England and Wales, by the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act
1956 in Scotland and by the Food and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland) 1958
in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales the question of the composition, adulteration and
description of food are the concern of food and drugs authorities (county,
county borough, London borough and City of London councils and, generally,
the larger borough and urban district councils) and questions of soundness,
purity and hygiene are the concern of all local authorities, except parish
councils. The Department of Health and Social Security and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are the central departments responsible for
giving advice and making regulations. Places where food for sale for human
consumption is prepared, sold or stored must conform to certain hygienic
TRANSPORT
TECHNOLOGY
The control panel
of a new
ultrasonic rail
testing diesel
powered unit.
The scanning
probes slide along
the surface of the
rails on a thin film
of water.
The new 155 mph
advanced
passenger train
under
construction at
British Rail’s
Derby research
centre.
HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT
Above: A wheelchair tilter giving frequent changes of position
to relieve areas of maximum pressure.
Below left: ‘Matron’ a safe, positive and rapid steriliser.
Below right: Two trolleys-part of a comprehensive system of
transporting, transferring and treating patients.
Air-conditioned bed enabling a patient’s microclimate to be
controlled between i50-55° C.
Below left: Chromatography equipment, used for chemical analysis.
Below right: Advanced glass distillation unit for clearing water of pyrogens.
ANTI¬
POLLUTION
AND SAFETY
EQUIPMENT
The heat
exchanger of a
black liquor
evaporator.
Beloiv left:
Atomic absorption
spectro¬
photometer for
recording the
mercury level in
contaminated
foodstuffs.
Above right:
Firewall steam
safety curtain
for plants
handling liquefied
hydrocarbons.
Right:
Semi-automatic
filter presses for
industrial sewage
disposal.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Other Public
Health Duties
THE NATIONAL
HEALTH SERVICE
Health Service
Administration
in Great Britain
135
standards. Authorised officers of the councils may take for analysis or for
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food for sale for human
consumption. Special regulations are in force for certain foods such as milk,
meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of
counties and large burghs.
In Northern Ireland administration is in the hands of the county and county
borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry of
Health and Social Services.
Local authorities are also responsible for the public health aspects of water
supply, sewerage and drainage; street paving and housing; and the abatement
of noise nuisance. They have power to establish smoke-controlled areas to
secure cleaner air, and to arrange with statutory water undertakings for the
addition of fluoride to water supplies to reduce dental decay.
The Acts setting up the National Health Service—the National Health Service
Act 1946, the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947 and the Health
Services Act (Northern Ireland) 1948—came into force simultaneously on 5th
July 1948.
The object of the National Health Service Act 1946 was ‘to promote the
establishment in England and Wales of a comprehensive health service
designed to secure improvement in the physical and mental health of the
people of England and Wales and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of
illness, and for that purpose to provide or secure the effective provision of
services’. The service is available to people normally resident according to
medical need, without regard to any insurance qualification. It was originally
free to users but various charges have been introduced under subsequent
legislation, though these can be waived under certain conditions.
National insurance contributors are required to pay a weekly national health
contribution (see Table 9) but contributors and non-contributors are entitled
to the same full range of services. Visitors from other countries who come to
Britain specifically for treatment are expected to pay for it, but treatment can
be given under the emergency provisions of the National Health Service to any
who fall ill or meet with an accident during a visit to Britain. Reciprocal health
agreements have been concluded between Britain and certain countries.
The services provided by the National Health Service fall into three main
groups1:
1. The hospital and specialist services for which the Secretary of State for
Social Services, the Secretary of State for Wales, and the Secretary of State
for Scotland are directly responsible. These are administered through 20
regional hospital boards and some 450 hospital management committees,
or, in the case of teaching hospitals in England, boards of governors. The
three special psychiatric hospitals in England for people with criminal
propensities are directly administered by the Secretary of State for Social
Services and the similar hospital in Scotland by the Secretary of State for
Scotland.
1 Proposals for the integration of the administration of the health services under 14 area
health boards for Scotland were published in July 1971. Consultative documents have
also been published for England and for Wales proposing integration under a two-tier
structure of regional and area health authorities in England and under a single-tier
structure of area health authorities in Wales.
TmnTTmTTnmiimiiimmmrnTTn 
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
2. The general practitioner services consist of the family doctor service, the
dental service, the pharmaceutical service and the ophthalmic service. They
are administered by 159 local executive councils on which doctors, dentists,
pharmacists, ophthalmic medical practitioners and opticians are represented.
The health ministers have indirect overall responsibility for the services.
3. The local authority health services.
ORGANISATION OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH
SERVICE IN ENGLAND
Health Service
Finance
Jote: In England the responsible government department is £0 Department of ^s^^metn^He^^D^aOnmem indfr^he
rec"r»»ors^
In addition, the Secretary of State for Social Services has power to conduct,
or assist others to conduct, research work and he provides a public health
laboratory service and a blood transfusion service. He is advised by the
Central Health Services Council, by standing advisory committees on various
aspects of the service and by the Hospital Advisory Service, set up in 1969, on
hospital problems, in particular those of ‘long stay’ hospitals.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the health ministers
in England and Wales but it is their responsibility to provide hospital clinical
facilities for the training of medical students. The universities are responsible
for the provision of teaching. ^ .
The Secretary of State for Scotland has similar duties. The teaching
hospitals in Scotland come under the control of the regional hospital boards
but special medical education committees consider matters relating to medical
teaching. The Scottish Health Services Council and the standing advisory
committees advise the Secretary of State and keep closely in touch with the
Central Health Services Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 143.
Expenditure on the health and welfare services in Britain was estimated at
12,269 million in 1970-71. The greater part of the cost falls on the Exchequer
and is met from general taxation, and a small part is met from local rates.
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
Practitioner
Services
Other income is derived from the national health service contribution paid
with the national insurance contribution and from charges paid by people
using certain services.
There are charges for prescriptions (except for children, expectant and
nursing mothers, the elderly, patients suffering from certain medical condi¬
tions, war pensioners and people in receipt of supplementary benefits and
family income supplement), for treatment in the dental service (but not for
examination only or for treatment given to people under 21 years or to nursing
or expectant mothers), for dentures (except for children under 16 or still at
school, and expectant and nursing mothers) and spectacles (except children’s
standard spectacles), and for some local health authority services. Certain
exemptions or refunds are made and anyone may apply to the Supplementary
Benefits Commission for help in meeting any of these charges. A limited
number of beds may be made available for hospital patients wishing for
privacy, provided that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds
for non-paying patients; a charge for part of the cost of the accommodation and
treatment is made. Provision is also made at certain hospitals for patients to be
treated as private patients on payment of the whole cost of their accommoda¬
tion and treatment. Such patients may make private arrangements for treat¬
ment by doctors of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried, or part-time; part-
time medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept
private patients. General medical practitioners in the National Health Service
are paid according to the amount of work and responsibility they undertake;
certain practice expenses are also directly reimbursed.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees according to the treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists
dispensing on their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions they
dispense. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking
part in the general ophthalmic service are paid approved fees for each sight
test made; opticians who dispense spectacles are paid according to the number
and type of pairs supplied.
The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to in¬
dividuals by doctors and dentists of their own choice from among those
taking part in the service. Doctors and dentists normally work at their own
surgeries; practice in health centres established under the National Health
Service Acts is increasing. About 24,000, or almost all, general medical
practitioners (principals and assistants) in Great Britain take some part in the
service, more than three-quarters of them in partnership or group practice.
The attachment of local authority midwives, health visitors and home nurses
to doctors’ practices is becoming more widespread.
Doctors wishing to enter practice have to apply through the executive
council for the area to the Medical Practices Committee, so that a balanced
distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated. The maxi¬
mum number of patients’ names permitted to be on a family doctor’s list is
normally 3,500; the average number in Great Britain is about 2,430. It is
normally through the patient’s own doctor that access to most other parts of
the health service is obtained.
There are over 10,800 dentists in England and Wales and some 1,090 in
Scotland in the general dental service.
Some 917 ophthalmic medical practitioners and over 6,100 ophthalmic
and dispensing opticians in England and Wales, and 67 ophthalmic medical
138
Hospital and
Specialist
Services
Hospitals
Rehabilitation
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
practitioners and 646 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in Scotland are
engaged in the general ophthalmic service. These services provide for the
testing of sight and provision of spectacles. Patients requiring treatment are
dealt with through the hospital eye service.
Over 13,700 retail pharmacists take part in the National Health Service.
They are responsible for the dispensing of all prescriptions except for the
small number dispensed by certain general practitioners.
The hospital and specialist services provide hospital accommodation of all
kinds, including district general hospitals with treatment and diagnostic
facilities for in-patients, day-patients and out-patients, hospital maternity
departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and geriatric facilities, con¬
valescent homes and rehabilitation centres, and all forms of specialised
treatment.
A large proportion of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built
in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable
foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’s and St. Bartholomew’s Hospitals
in London. Much has been done in recent years to improve and extend existing
hospitals, some of which are housed in inconvenient buildings, and a number
of new hospitals have been built. In 1962 long-term plans for hospital building
were published by the Government and a revision made in 1966 set out the
probable future pattern of the hospital service and contained assessments of
the work to be undertaken in the ten years ahead; it is expected that roughly
£1,000 million will be spent in England and Wales on hospital buildings during
the ten-year period beginning 1966-67.
Nearly 2,500 of the existing hospitals in the National Health Service are in
England and Wales, including the 26 teaching hospitals in London (actually
groups of hospitals, convalescent homes, branches, annexes, or treatment
centres, numbering over 100 altogether) and the 10 teaching hospitals else¬
where in England and Wales (comprising some 80 hospitals and other
establishments). They have 461,000 beds available for use and a nursing and
midwifery staff of some 189,000 full-time and about 101,000 part-time. There
are 364 hospitals in Scotland with over 65,400 beds and more than 28,100 full¬
time and over 14,800 part-time nurses and midwives.
A small number of hospitals remain outside the service for special reasons.
Most of these are run by religious orders. Some, such as the Italian and Jewish
Hospitals, serve a special group of patients; others are maintained for the
chronic sick or for convalescents by charitable organisations. There are also
private nursing homes which must be registered.
Rehabilitation is an important aspect of medical care and today treatment is
not limited to the relief of pain or cure of pathological conditions but aims at
helping people to resume normal living as soon as possible. Medical rehabilita¬
tion has been applied with advantage in the care of many patients, including
the chronic sick, the mentally disabled, the aged and the handicapped and has
enabled many patients to become self-sufficient and to resume an independent
life in their own homes. Specialised rehabilitation facilities are provided at the
main hospitals and at medical rehabilitation centres. The work is carried out
under the guidance of the appropriate medical specialist by physiotherapists,
remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists and social workers acting as a team.
The hospital departments work closely with the Disablement Resettlement
Service of the Department of Employment. .
Medical rehabilitation includes the provision, free of charge, of artificial
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Medical and
Psychiatric Social
Work
Drag Dependence
Abortion
Blood Transfusion
Chest Radiological
Service
Bacteriological and
Virological
Laboratory Services
limbs and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, invalid chairs, certain types of
invalid vehicles, and other appliances. Nursing aids for the handicapped at
home can be borrowed through the service.
Most hospitals have social workers who are an integral part of the hospital
team and help those patients who have difficulties connected with their ill¬
ness. They help in tackling social and emotional problems and are concerned
with the rehabilitation and resettlement of patients especially where the illness
has been long or where the disability results in changes in the patient’s life.
The hospital service plays a major part in the treatment of drug dependence,
providing treatment for both in-patients and out-patients either in specialised
drug dependence units or as part of the general psychiatric service. Only
doctors licensed for the purpose by the Home Secretary may prescribe heroin
and cocaine to addicts in the treatment of addiction and all medical practi¬
tioners are required to notify the Home Secretary of any person they consider
to be addicted to dangerous drugs.
The Abortion Act 1967, which came into force in Great Britain in 1968,
permits the termination of a pregnancy by a registered medical practitioner if
two registered medical practitioners are of the opinion that its continuance
would involve risk to the life of the pregnant woman, or of injury to the physical
or mental health of the pregnant woman or of any children in her family
greater than if the pregnancy were terminated, or if there is a substantial risk
that if a child were born it would be seriously physically or mentally handi¬
capped. An abortion may be carried out in National Health Service hospitals
or in premises approved for the purpose by the Secretary of State concerned.
The National Blood Transfusion Service in England and Wales is administered
by the regional hospital boards under the National Health Service. Donors
give their blood voluntarily without payment. There are two central labora¬
tories administered by the Medical Research Council on behalf of the Depart¬
ment of Health and Social Security: the Blood Group Reference Laboratory,
which prepares grouping serum and investigates blood grouping problems
referred to it, and the Blood Products Laboratory, which prepares dried plasma
and plasma fractions. In Scotland the Blood Transfusion Service is under the
direction of the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Association, which is an
independent voluntary body but is supported in the main by a grant from the
Scottish Home and Health Department. In Northern Ireland the Blood
Transfusion Service is operated by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
A Chest Radiological Service, which is freely available, is provided by chest
clinics and the radiological departments of general hospitals. The success of
mass radiography units has been such that their work is being phased into the
hospital radiography service. Mobile X-ray units are still used among specially
susceptible groups.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological
and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct
research and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic
diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection
of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms.
In Scotland there is no separate public health laboratory service and
bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories. In Northern
140
Safety of Medicines
Local Health
and Social
Services
Vaccination
Services for
Mothers and
Young Children
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the bacteriological work with
hospital laboratories.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are respon¬
sible for licensing the marketing, importation and manufacture of medicines
for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission has been estab¬
lished as an advisory body to the ministers on policy regarding medicines and
a statutory Committee on Safety of Medicines will follow similar procedures
to those undertaken by the former Committee on Safety of Drugs in assessing
the safety, efficacy and quality of new medicines.
Local authorities play a major part in promoting the health and welfare of
people in the community often in co-operation with voluntary organisations,
to which they may make grants, lend premises or give help in other ways.
Most of the needs for which the services are designed arise among four
broad groups of people; mothers and young children 5 the elderly, the mentally
disordered; and the physically handicapped. Other smaller groups include the
ill and convalescent at home, and the homeless. To ensure that the services
bring the maximum benefit to those who use them, local authorities work in
close co-operation with the general practitioner and hospital and specialist
branches of the National Health Service.
The authorities responsible for health and social services are the councils
of counties, county boroughs, London boroughs and the City of London and,
in Scotland, counties and large burghs. Plans for the development of health
and welfare services in England and Wales over the ten years ending 1975-76
were published in 1966 and the authorities keep the plans constantly under
review. Services provided by the local health authorities include domiciliary
midwifery, health visiting, home nursing, vaccination and immunisation and
the prevention, care and after-care of illness. The new social services depart¬
ments, which local authorities have set up under the Local Authority Social
Services Act 1970 to integrate the personal social services, are responsible for
the care and control of children (see p. 146) and the welfare of the elderly, the
physically handicapped and the mentally disordered.
In Scotland, under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, social work com¬
mittees have been set up by local authorities to integrate functions which
include welfare, probation and the care and control of children.
Charges may be made for some local authority health and social services
(for example, domestic help, supplies from family planning clinics, day
nurseries, the loan of equipment and laundering of bed linen for people being
nursed at home, and chiropody services) but arrangements are made for free
provision to people with very low incomes.
Under the National Health Service all local health authorities have planned
programmes of vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, measles,
rubella, poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. Such pro¬
tection is usually given by the family doctor or at child health clinics.
Maternity and child health centres offer regular supervision by doctors, mid¬
wives and health visitors to expectant and nursing mothers and young children.
Special sessions are held for vaccination and inoculation and for early testing
of babies for deafness and other defects. A feature of the service is the education
of mothers before and after the birth by means of talks, discussion groups,
demonstrations and classes. Some 78 per cent of babies born in England and
Wales and some 66 per cent of those born in Scotland are taken to the centres.
The Elderly
SOCIAL WELFARE 141
Family planning clinics, often run by the Family Planning Association on
behalf of local authorities, are frequently held at maternity and child health
centres.
The expectant mother may arrange to have her baby in hospital or at home
according to the advice given by the doctor or midwife. Some 79 per cent
of confinements in England and Wales and 94 per cent in Scotland take place
in hospital. For a home confinement the services of either a general practitioner
obstetrician or her own family doctor besides those of a trained midwife and,
if necessary, a consultant obstetrician, are available to every mother. The mid¬
wife cares for mothers and babies (whether born at home or in hospital) in
their own homes, generally for up to 14 days after the birth. After this health
visitors visit the home to give advice to parents on the care and development
of young children and on health education in general. The majority of prema¬
ture babies are cared for in hospital but special arrangements for those who
are fit to remain in their own homes are made by many local health authorities
who lend equipment and appoint experienced nursing staff to supervise their
care.
Domestic help (commonly called ‘home help’) is made available by local
authorities during periods of special need, for example, confinement or during
the absence of the mother when children might otherwise have to be cared for
away from home.
Some local authorities make direct provision for the special needs of un¬
married mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work done
by voluntary organisations and other bodies (see p. 144).
Under the welfare foods service free milk is available to all but the first two
children under school age in any family; to expectant mothers who already
have two children under school age; to expectant mothers and all children
under school age in families in special financial need; to certain handicapped
children; and to children attending registered day nurseries. Welfare foods
sold by local health authorities at a special price are dried milk, orange juice,
cod liver oil and, for expectant and nursing mothers only, vitamins A and D
tablets. These are provided free to all beneficiaries in families with low incomes.
Orange juice and cod liver oil are being replaced by vitamins A, D and C in
liquid form for children and as tablets for mothers. Some authorities also
provide through clinins other proprietary foods at reduced prices.
There are about 460 day nurseries (apart from nursery schools and play¬
groups) for children under five in Great Britain provided by local authorities
or voluntary associations working with them. Private nurseries must be regis¬
tered with the local authority to ensure that their premises and management
are satisfactory. People who mind children (other than relatives) under five
years of age in their homes for payment must also be registered.
A number of services for elderly people in their own homes are provided by
statutory and voluntary bodies to help them to live there for as long as possible.
Local authorities supply, under the National Health Service Acts, home nurs¬
ing and domestic help and many arrange a chiropody service, sitters-in, night
attendants and special laundry services. Under other legislation authorities
have been empowered since 1962 to provide day centres, clubs, recreational
workshops and meals for old people. Health visitors and social workers
employed by local authorities are spending an increasing proportion of their
time helping old people with their problems and in many areas ‘good neigh¬
bour’ and friendly visiting services are also arranged by the local authority or
a voluntary organisation.
142
The Mentally
Disordered
The Physically
Handicapped
BRITAIN 1972 AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local authorities provide residential accommodation, under the National
Assistance Act, for the elderly and infirm and have powers to register homes
run by voluntary organisations or privately (see p. 144). The newer homes
provided by local authorities for elderly and other infirm people usually have
accommodation for 30 to 50 residents; for the elderly mentally infirm the
present development is towards homes of not more than 35 places. About
2,250 homes for elderly people are provided by local authorities in England
and Wales which house about 2 per cent of the population over 65.
For many years local authorities have, under the Housing Acts, provided an
increasing number of smaller dwellings for old people, and flatlets for frail or
infirm old people who can lead independent lives with some help. Local
authorities may contribute towards the cost of employing a warden to under¬
take welfare duties in such specially designed housing.
Treatment for mental disorder is provided as part of the National Health
Service. Patients can consult the family doctor, and receive specialist advice
at hospital out-patient clinics as they would for any other kind of illness, and
can enter hospital for in-patient treatment without formalities.
In England and Wales under the Mental Health Act 1959, and in Scotland
the Mental Health (Scotland) Act i960, mentally disordered patients can,
where necessary in the interests of their health or safety or for the protection
of other people, be compelled to enter hospital for treatment. There are
procedural safeguards to protect patients from unnecessary detention in
hospital; in England and Wales patients may apply to a Mental Health Review
Tribunal for discharge and in Scotland to the Mental Welfare Commission or
to the sheriff.
Local health authorities have a duty to make arrangements for helping the
mentally disordered in the community, and before or after hospital treatment.
Recent developments in the treatment of mental illness, which enable patients
to be discharged from hospital more quickly provided support is available in
the community, are adding to the demands for these services. Arrangements
include training centres for the mentally handicapped, occupational centres
for the mentally ill, as well as social centres and residential accommodation
for the mentally-disordered of all ages. If necessary, the local health authority
can place a mentally disordered person under guardianship within the
community. In Scotland education authorities share the responsibility for
providing training or occupation and in England and Wales responsibility for
mentally-handicapped children has been transferred to the education depart¬
ments.
Local authorities have a duty under the National Assistance Act 194^ and>
England and Wales, under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act
1970 to provide welfare services for people who are blind, partially sighted,
deaf, hard of hearing, or otherwise substantially or permanently handicapped.
They are required to secure full information on the number of handicapped
people in their area and on their needs. A wide range of facilities with which
voluntary organisations give important help is available, including advice on
occupational, social and personal problems arising from disability; assistance
in overcoming the effects of disability; help in carrying out adaptations in the
home—for example, by fitting ramps, wide doorways, ground floor toilets,
guide rails, and the provision of various aids to living to meet individual needs,
including, in certain circumstances, a telephone; social and occupational
centres and clubs; teaching of handicrafts and other occupations either at
SOCIAL WELFARE
H3
Health Centres
Health Education
Ambulance Services
HEALTH
AND WELFARE
SERVICES IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
home or in centres; and the provision of recreational facilities, outings and
holidays. The blind welfare services are largely staffed by social workers who
are specially qualified to assist the blind in all matters including teaching them
craftwork and the use of embossed symbols for reading and writing. Services
for the deaf are also staffed by specialist welfare officers qualified to com¬
municate with the deaf.
Help available from other sources includes financial aid, preventive and
medical treatment, special education, training for employment and placement
in suitable occupations, specially designed housing and the means of access to
public buildings for those with walking aids and wheelchairs.
(For the provision of special educational treatment for handicapped children
see p. 153, and the child health clinics and the school health service, which
keep a watch for abnormalities, pp. 140 and 152.)
There has been a marked increase of interest in health centres at which
facilities can be made available for the provision of medical, dental and
pharmaceutical services and consultant and other hospital out-patient
services in association with local authority services. In December 1970, 213
were in operation in England and Wales, 114 were under construction and
many more planned. In Scotland, where the provision of health centres is
primarily the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, there were
18 centres in operation, 14 under construction and many more planned.
Health education in England, Wales and Northern Ireland is the responsi¬
bility of the Health Education Council which assists in the development of
programmes of health education with local authorities, professional organi¬
sations, voluntary bodies and industry. There are separate arrangements in
Scotland. Expenditure is met from both central and local government funds.
Free conveyance by ambulance in England and Wales between home and
hospital is provided, where needed, by local authorities either directly or by
arrangement with voluntary organisations. The Hospital Car Service (orga¬
nised by the St. John Ambulance Association and Brigade, the British Red
Cross Society, and the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service) augments the
ambulance service in many areas by the conveyance of sitting patients. In
Scotland ambulances are run by the St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Service on behalf of the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland
they are run by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
The health services established under the Health Services Acts (Northern
Ireland) correspond fairly closely to the medical care system established under
the National Health Service in Great Britain and they are financed in the
same way as in the rest of the United Kingdom. Welfare services are provided
under the Welfare Services Acts (Northern Ireland) by separate statutory
welfare authorities.
The hospital and specialist services, which include mental health services,
are administered on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Social Services by
the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority (which corresponds approximately
to a regional hospital board in Great Britain) through hospital management
committees. The Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority has under its control
93 hospitals containing in all about 17,000 beds. The administration of the
general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and general eye services is in the
hands of the Northern Ireland General Health Services Board, which takes
the place of the executive councils in Great Britain. There are some 750
general practitioners (with an average of 2,080 patients each), 330 dentists,
144
VOLUNTARY AID
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
SCHEMES
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
13 ophthalmic medical practitioners and 127 ophthalmic and 12 dispensing
opticians. The provision of health centres is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Health and Social Services. Local health and welfare services are adminis¬
tered by the six county councils, one county borough council and one De¬
velopment Council in Northern Ireland. The range of local authority services
and the arrangements made by the Northern Ireland General Health Services
Board for the provision of services, and for the remuneration of the people
providing them, are similar to those already described for the rest of the
United Kingdom.
Voluntary organisations provide many services in co-operation with, or
supplementary to, the provision made by central and local authorities.
In many areas invalid children, old people and others needing care in their
own homes are visited and helped by voluntary organisations. The National
Society for Mentally Handicapped Children, for example, gives help through
advice and services. The National Association for Mental Health does
advisory, educational and therapeutic work. There are specialist societies
concerned with the blind, the deaf and people with other disabilities. The
extensive work done for elderly people is co-ordinated by old people’s welfare
committees which have been established in some 1,600 areas and are affiliated
to Age Concern (the National Old People’s Welfare Council). In Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland there are also national councils which co¬
ordinate the work of local committees. The National Corporation for the Care
of Old People, established by the Nuffield Foundation, stimulates and under¬
takes research into the welfare of the elderly. In 1970 some 3,000 homes
for old and disabled people, run by voluntary bodies or privately, were
registered with local authorities. In Northern Ireland voluntary homes are
registered with the Ministry of Health and Social Services and private homes
with the welfare authorities. _
Most of the homes and hostels for unmarried mothers and their children
are provided by voluntary organisations, which employ specially trained
workers to help the mothers to plan their future.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people belonging
to a number of national and local organisations, for example, the Young
Volunteer Force Foundation, Community Service Volunteers, Task Force,
Scouts, Guides and school groups. .
A great deal of help is given to hospitals by voluntary bodies and individual
voluntary helpers. Many hospitals have their own Leagues of Friends or
similar groups of voluntary workers who organise and undertake a variety of
services. Help is also given by the British Red Cross Society, the St. John
Ambulance Association and Brigade, the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service,
and other organisations. The operation of canteens for out-patients, and
trolley-shops and book and picture library services for in-patients, visiting
in the wards, and escort services in out-patient departments, are among the
tasks commonly undertaken. Many convalescent homes are provided by
voluntary effort.
There are a number of private health insurance schemes, membership of
which has grown considerably in recent years. It is estimated that over
2 million people are now covered by these schemes. Subscribers who wish for
private medical treatment outside the National Health Service can insure
against all or nearly all the cost of hospital treatment and certain medical
treatment outside hospital.
SOCIAL WELFARE
145
THE MEDICAL,
DENTAL,
NURSING AND
ALLIED
PROFESSIONS
Only people whose names are on the medical and dental registers respectively
may practise as doctors and dentists under the National Health Service. Dental
auxiliaries (who have undergone a two-year training course) may carry out
some kinds of simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The minimum qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven
years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year’s
experience as a resident assistant doctor in a hospital; for a dentist, four or
more years at a dental school are required. The governing body of the medical
profession is the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858; that of the
dentists is the General Dental Council which succeeded the Dental Board in
1956. The British Medical Association is the doctors’ main professional
association; that of the dentists is the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registra¬
tion as a nurse is normally three years. Training may be in general, sick
children’s, mental or mentally sub-normal nursing. An enrolled nurse takes a
two-year course. The examining bodies of the nursing profession in England
and Wales and in Scotland are the General Nursing Councils, and in Northern
Ireland the Joint Nursing and Midwives Council. Midwives in England and
Wales and in Scotland must have the certificate of the appropriate Central
Midwives Board, and in Northern Ireland of the Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council. Most pupil midwives are already registered general nurses or sick
children’s nurses; for them the two-year midwifery training period is reduced
to one year and, for other registered and enrolled nurses, to 18 months. The
Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Midwives are the professional
bodies for nurses and midwives. Health visitors are registered general nurses
who have undergone at least the first part of the midwifery course or obstetric
nursing before taking a year’s course in health visiting, promoted by the
Council for the Training of Health Visitors.
To practise as a retail or hospital pharmacist, a pharmaceutical chemist
must have his or her name entered in the register maintained by the Pharma¬
ceutical Society of Great Britain, the governing body of the profession, or by
the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland. Four or five years’ academic
study and practical training are necessary for registration. The dispensing of
all medicines and the sale of certain specified medicines can be carried out
only by, or under the supervision of, a registered pharmaceutical chemist.
Under the Opticians Act 1958 the General Optical Council regulates the
professions of ophthalmic optician and dispensing optician; only registered
ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practitioners) may test sight.
Training of ophthalmic opticians takes four years including a year of practical
experience under supervision. Dispensing opticians may take a two-year
full-time course with a year’s practical experience or a part-time day-release
course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory technicians, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiotherapists,
radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies are eight boards
(called, for example, the Chiropodists’ Board or the Dietitians’ Board) under the
general supervision of the Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine.
A professional training lasting two to four years is needed to qualify for
registration. Only members of these professions who are state registered may
be employed in the National Health Service and some other public services.
Medical and psychiatric social workers take either a recognised university
course or a course at a college of further education. Speech therapists need a
good general education and three years’ professional training.
146
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
CHILD CARE
Local Authority
Services
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government funds for medical research in Britain are channelled through
the University Grants Committee whose general grants to universities cover
research as well as teaching; the Medical Research Council which administers
two research institutes and numerous research units as well as providing
grants for research teams and individuals; and the Health Departments which
support research in aid of the National Health Service in universities, hospitals,
other government departments and industry. Further support is provided
by a large number of charitable foundations and organisations, such as the
Cancer Research Campaign and the Nuffield Foundation; and there is sub¬
stantial investment in medical research and development by the pharma¬
ceutical and medical equipment industries (see also p. 327).
Local authorities in England and Wales have a duty under the Children and
Young Persons Act 1963 to make available such advice, guidance and assis¬
tance as may promote the welfare of children by diminishing the need to
receive or keep them in the authority’s care or to bring them before a juvenile
court. The Children and Young Persons Act 1969 (for England and Wales)
provides for the care and treatment of young offenders and gives local authori¬
ties wider responsibilities for undertaking, through social workers, enquiries
and consultations with parents, schools and the police, and for the super¬
vision of a child or young person alleged to be an offender and in need of
care and control. In England and Wales a child may be committed to the
care of a local authority under a care order (which replaces a ‘fit person’ and
approved school order) if the juvenile court, having considered all the child s
circumstances, is satisfied that he is in need of care or control which he
would be unlikely to receive unless the court made an order. In England and
Wales local authorities have a further duty, under the Children Act 1948, to
receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has no parent or
guardian, or who has been abandoned or whose parents are unable to provide
for him temporarily or permanently. A child so received remains in the care
of the local authority until he is 18 years old unless the authority finds it to
his advantage to return him sooner to his parents or guardian or to entrust
him to friends. Both categories of children are treated so as to further their
best interests and afford them opportunity for their proper development. In
Scotland, under the provisions of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, the
juvenile courts were replaced by a system of children’s hearings which have
powers to impose compulsory measures of care on a child by means of a
supervision requirement which can remain in force until he is 18 years old.
When practicable, children in care are boarded out with foster parents,
who receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home
cannot be found for a child, or he is not suitable for boarding out, he may be
placed in residential accommodation usually provided by a local authority
or a voluntary organisation. The Children and Young Persons Act 1969
provides for the regional planning of accommodation for children in the care
of local authorities and the provision of community homes. These homes
will comprise local authority children’s homes and the voluntary homes which
become ‘assisted’ or ‘controlled’ together with approved schools and remand
homes which will gradually cease to function as such. In Scotland local
authorities are responsible for providing appropriate accommodation for
children in their care. The desirability of returning a child to his family circle
as soon as possible is fully appreciated, and work is carried out to rehabilitate
the family where this is necessary.
The Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 provides for local authority
SOCIAL WELFARE
H7
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
child care functions in England and Wales to be the responsibility of the new
social services committees. In Scotland child care work is undertaken by
local authority social work departments set up under the Social Work
(Scotland) Act 1968. Regulations for England and Wales for children in care
of local authorities and voluntary organisations and the conduct of children’s
homes are made by the Secretary of State for Social Services and the Secretary
of State for Wales and, for Scotland, by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the welfare authorities of each county and county
borough (under the general direction of the Ministry of Home Affairs) are
responsible for caring for homeless and neglected children under the Children
and Young Persons Act (Northern Ireland) 1968. Legislation relating to
children and arrangements for their care follow the same general principles
as in Great Britain.
War orphans are the responsibility of the Department of Health and Social
Security.
Voluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care, continue
to play a valuable part in this work. The larger societies, such as Dr. Barnardo’s,
the Church of England Children’s Society and the Catholic Child Welfare
Council are constituent societies of the National Council of Voluntary Child
Care Organisations, to which a large number of smaller voluntary homes are
also affiliated. In Scotland a valuable contribution is made by the churches
and by many other voluntary organisations. Children’s homes run by voluntary
organisations (with some 12,000 places in Great Britain) are required to
be registered under the Children Act in England and Wales, in Scotland
under the Social Work (Scotland) Act and in Northern Ireland under the
Children and Young Persons Act. Arrangements for the care of children and
their accommodation are subject to inspection by social work service officers
of the Department of Health and Social Security, the Welsh Office, the Scottish
Education Department and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Home Affairs.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own
homes include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units,
which undertake prolonged and intensive casework with families. The old-
established National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and
its Scottish counterpart between them maintain inspectors and visitors
throughout the United Kingdom for the investigation of cases of reported
cruelty to, or neglect of, children in their own homes; when necessary, they
resort to law after consultation with the local authority, but they prefer to
achieve their purpose by warning and advice.
Provision for legal adoption was first made in England and Wales in 1926, in
Northern Ireland in 1929 and in Scotland in 1930. About 26,000 adoption
orders are made annually by the courts in Great Britain and some 500 in
Northern Ireland. Adoption is now regulated by the Adoption Act 1958 in
Great Britain and by the Adoption Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 in Northern
Ireland. The Registrars General keep registers of adopted children; adoption
societies (over 70 societies arrange adoptions) must be registered with the
local authority (in Northern Ireland with the Ministry of Home Affairs).
Local authorities have had the power since 1959 to act as adoption agencies
and increasingly do so. Adoption law in Great Britain is being reviewed by a
departmental committee.
148
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
IMMIGRATION AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS
Since the 1950s considerable numbers of people have entered Britain from
Commonwealth countries in the West Indies, Asia and Africa to take up
employment, many with the intention of settling permanently (see pp. 11
and 395). It was estimated that coloured Commonwealth immigrants and
their families numbered nearly 1-4 million in mid-1970, about 2% per cent of
the total population of Britain.
Welfare of Commonwealth immigrants are making an important contribution to the
Immigrants economy and public services by relieving shortages of labour; but their
concentration in areas where opportunities for employment are greatest
60 per cent have settled in Greater London and the West Midlands, including
Birmingham—has led to an increased demand for housing and additional
pressures on the social services. The problems of these inner urban areas are
being met by continuous social service programmes in housing, education,
hospitals and health and welfare, which benefit the whole community, and
the urban programme (see p. 125) which is directed at areas of special need.
Additional teachers have been appointed to schools in immigrant areas and
government grants are available to local authorities with substantial immigrant
populations towards the salaries of extra staff, such as interpreters, health
visitors and helpers in schools and community homes. The welfare of
immigrants and good relations between immigrant groups and the local
community are promoted in a variety of ways by voluntary community
relations councils and other voluntary bodies.
Community The co-ordination of government action to promote the welfare of immigrants
Relations is the responsibility of the Home Office. Voluntary efforts to achieve the
integration of immigrants as part of a wider aim of promoting harmonious
community relations are co-ordinated nationally by the Community Relations
Commission, a statutory body set up under the Race Relations Act 1968.
The Commission co-ordinates the activities of local community relations
councils, of which there are now 75 operating in areas where there is. an
immigrant population. It makes grants towards the salaries of full-time
community relations officers and assistants and towards special projects which
help improve community relations.
Race Relations Discrimination on grounds of colour, race, or ethnic or national origin in places
of public resort was first made unlawful in Great Britain by the Race Relations
Act 1965, which established a Race Relations Board to secure compliance with
the Act. The Race Relations Act 1968 replaced the 1965 Act and is much
wider in scope, making discrimination unlawful in the provision of goods,
facilities and services, and in employment and housing. The Race Relations
Board has a statutory duty to receive and investigate complaints and seeks to
resolve them by conciliation. The Board constitutes regional conciliation com¬
mittees which between them cover all areas of Great Britain. If conciliation
fails the Board can seek remedies in the courts. Employment complaints are
dealt with in the first instance by the Department of Employment whose
function it is to see whether voluntary machinery exists within industry to
deal with them. Where no such machinery exists the complaints are investi¬
gated by the Board.
6 EDUCATION
Educational
Administration
There are over 10-5 million children and young people in full-time attendance
at schools, universities, colleges of education and technical colleges in Britain.
The great majority of schools, attended by some 95 per cent of school children,
are publicly provided or assisted. Most technical colleges and other centres of
further education are also publicly maintained. Universities are autonomous
self-governing institutions but are aided from public funds.
The bulk of expenditure on education in Britain comes from public funds
although some older-established schools and colleges continue to benefit from
private endowments. In 1970-71 estimated total public expenditure on educa¬
tion, including school meals, milk, and local libraries, was £2,523 million
(more than double the expenditure in 1960-61), which was 14 per cent of all
public expenditure.
In England and Wales the main development of publicly provided primary
education started a hundred years ago. In 1833 the Government had begun to
make annual grants to the voluntary societies which were providing schools,
but the Elementary Education Act of 1870 first established the principle of
compulsory education. By the end of the nineteenth century elementary
education had become virtually both compulsory and free of charge. Public
provision of secondary education (already begun in Wales) started in England
under the Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now governs public educa¬
tion in England and Wales. The Scottish and Northern Ireland educational
systems both have long and separate histories, but the same general policy is
implemented throughout Britain, with some national variations. The govern¬
ing acts are the Education (Scotland) Act 1962 (a consolidating measure) and
the Education Act (Northern Ireland) 1947.
Educational responsibilities are devolved in varying degrees to ministers of the
four countries of Britain: the Secretary of State for Education and Science is
responsible for all aspects of education in England, for further education in
Wales, and for universities, civil science and the arts (see p. 50) throughout
Great Britain; the Secretary of State for Wales is responsible for nursery,
primary and secondary education in Wales; the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland have full educational
responsibilities in their countries except that the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land is consulted about Scottish universities but is not responsible for them.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is divided
between the central government departments (the Department of Education
and Science, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Education Department, and the
Northern Ireland Ministry of Education), local education authorities, and
various voluntary organisations. The relation between these three groups is
based on consultation and co-operation, both by direct contact between them
and through Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools who act as liaison officers.
The local education authorities are responsible for ensuring that adequate
provision is made in their areas for the two stages of school education (primary
and secondary), for further education (see p. 155), and for seeing that those
I5°
SCHOOLS
Management
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
pupils who would profit by proceeding to higher education are not deterred by
lack of financial means.
In England and Wales colleges of education (for teacher training) are under
the financial and administrative control of local education authorities or
voluntary organisations. The organisation of courses is based on university
institutes of education. The Scottish colleges of education are under the
control of specially appointed governing bodies; in Northern Ireland they are
under the control of the Government or voluntary agencies.
The universities are administratively independent of the central govern¬
ment departments. The Government exercises its responsibilities in relation
to the universities through the University Grants Committee (see p. 159)1
Their governing bodies are appointed according to the terms of their individual
charters or statutory provisions.
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive efficient
full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 15.
(The school-leaving age is to be raised to 16 in 1972-73.)
At present there are over 9'8 million school children at over 37>7®® schools.
In England and Wales there were 8 million children in publicly maintained
schools in 1970 besides some 129,430 others at schools receiving direct grants
from the Department of Education and Science; there were also about 420,636
children of all ages at some 2,775 independent schools. In Scotland 971,045
children were attending education authority or grant-aided schools and nearly
17,000 were at independent schools. In Northern Ireland about 344,000
children were attending publicly maintained or assisted schools; there were
few at independent schools.
The number of school children in Britain is increasing mainly because the
birth rate rose steadily between 1955 an<^ Each year, too, more children
stay on at school beyond the minimum leaving age. The school population is
expected to rise, altogether, by 1 million by 1975. There is, therefore, a
continuing need for more teachers and more school buildings.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland it is usual for boys and girls to
be taught together in primary schools but about half the secondary schools
are for boys or girls only. Mixed schools are more common in Wales and in
Scotland. In the independent sector most of the schools for younger children
are co-educational; but of those providing secondary education the majority
are either for boys or for girls.
Schools supported from public funds are of three kinds in England and
Wales: county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained
by local education authorities wholly out of public funds; voluntary schools
(mostly ‘aided’ or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been provided by a
voluntary body, usually of a religious denomination;1 and direct-grant schools
which are completely independent of local education authorities but receive a
grant from the Department of Education and Science or the Welsh Office.
These last (the smallest group) are mainly grammar schools; they include some
schools of ancient foundation. In Scotland most of the schools supported from
1 The local education authority is responsible for the running cosls ^ h
schools and for the cost of all building work at controlled schools. Aided schools have
more independence than controlled schools and are responsible for part of the cost of
external repairs and any building work (see p. 155). Over a third of the 29,810 schoo s
maintained by local education authorities in England and Wales are voluntary schools
and the majority of these are Church of England schools. There are some 2,526 Roman
Catholic voluntary schools and smaller numbers belonging to other religious bodies.
EDUCATION
Fees
Curricula
Religion in
Schools
JS1
public funds are provided by education authorities and are known as public
schools (in England this term is used for a type of independent school, see
p. 154)* There are also 29 grant-aided secondary schools comparable to the
English direct-grant schools. In Northern Ireland county schools, managed by
local education authorities, and voluntary schools, under voluntary (usually
clerical) management, are both grant-aided by the Government.
In England, Wales and Scotland no fees are charged to parents of children
attending schools maintained by local education authorities (that is over 90
per cent of the school population) and books and equipment are supplied free.
The direct-grant grammar schools in England and Wales and a few of the
grant-aided secondary schools in Scotland take pupils paid for by local educa¬
tion authorities as well as those whose fees are paid wholly or partly by parents.
(For independent schools, see p. 154.) In Northern Ireland no fees are charged
to parents of children attending grant-aided schools, with the exception of
grammar schools, where qualified pupils receive from the local education
authorities scholarships which cover the whole or most of the fees charged by
the school.
In England and Wales school curricula are under the control of the local
education authorities, though there is in practice a high degree of devolution
to the schools themselves. Teachers may seek help and advice from Her
Majesty’s Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of all schools
including independent schools; they review and report on the content and
value of the education provided and are available as advisers. Local education
authorities also employ inspectors to advise on the schools which they main¬
tain. Further advice and encouragement for school-based research and develop¬
ment is made available to teachers through the Schools Council for Curriculum
and Examinations. The council, an independent body representative of all
educational interests in England and Wales, acts as an advisory body and
carries out research and development work on curricula, teaching methods and
examinations in primary and secondary schools. In Scotland the function of
Her Majesty’s Inspectors is in general the same as that of the Inspectorate in
England and Wales. The content and balance of the curriculum is kept under
continuous review by the Consultative Committee on the Curriculum. North¬
ern Ireland has a Schools Curriculum Committee which works in close liaison
with the Schools Council, and the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Education
provides help and advice to teachers.
The schools’ freedom to frame their own curricula has facilitated a rapid
increase in study and experiment in recent years, partly stimulated by the
Schools Council and other organisations and partly prompted by the plans
to raise the school-leaving age in 1972-73. The general purpose is to adapt the
curriculum to the everyday life and needs of children and young people.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools
receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of worship
unless their parents wish them to be withdrawn. In county schools, and in
certain circumstances in voluntary schools, religious instruction of an un¬
denominational Christian character is given. In all kinds of voluntary school
there is opportunity for denominational instruction. In Scotland, subject to
safeguards for the individual conscience, religious instruction must be given,
but the content is entirely in the hands of the education authorities; in the
more populated areas there are separate schools for Roman Catholics. In
Health and
Welfare of
School Children
Primary
Schools
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
county schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a right of access to give religi¬
ous instruction to children of their denomination for a limited period each week.
The voluntary schools in Northern Ireland are almost all Roman Catholic
schools.
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum
of all schools. Those receiving financial assistance from public funds must
have the use of a playing field and most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
Organised games include tennis, cricket, football, hockey, lacrosse and netball.
The School Health Service provides medical inspection and arranges,
usually in co-operation with the National Health Service, for free medical and
dental treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local
education authorities. Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child
guidance centres.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to children of 7 years
or under, to children up to the age of 12 if they have a medical requirement,
and to pupils in special schools. The School Meals Service provides a mid-day
meal at a subsidised price, (remitted where there is need). The price is gradu¬
ally being raised to cover the running cost. About 7° Per cent of pupils in
England and Wales and about 42 per cent of pupils in Scotland in education
authority schools have school mid-day meals. Education authorities have a
duty to provide free transport for children who live more than a certain dis¬
tance from the schools they attend.
Nursery schools provide informal educational and pHy facilities for a small
proportion of children between two and five years old; many more are needed
to meet the demand and under the Urban Programme started in 1968 (see
p. 125) additional schools and classes are being provided in areas of special
need. Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and
Wales go to infant schools or departments; at seven they go on to junior
schools or departments. At present the usual age of transfer from primary to
secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland but an in¬
creasing number of local authorities in England are establishing middle schools
which take pupils between the ages of 8 and 13 • In Scotland, the primary schools
take children from 5 to 12, normally having infant classes for children under 7,
although in some areas there are separate infant schools.
The content of curricula is very largely a matter for the schools themselves.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland there are no compulsory secular
subjects but generally a curriculum includes the teaching of reading, writing,
arithmetic, English, music, art and handwork, nature study, history and geo¬
graphy. Additionally, in Wales, the Welsh language is taught. Children who
speak Welsh at home normally receive the early stages of their primary educa¬
tion in Welsh and are taught English as a second language. Local authorities
in Wales have reviewed their policy in order to meet the demand for bilingual
education. In Scotland the scope of the curriculum is outlined in the Schools
(Scotland) Code, but it is for each head teacher and his staff to determine
precisely what is to be included.
Primary education is undergoing considerable change with the introduction
of new subjects and new teaching methods, and a greater emphasis on meeting
the needs of the individual child. In England recommendations of the
Plowden report, Children and their Primary Schools, published in 1967 (see
Bibliography, p. 472), are being adopted by a number of local education
authorities, including the establishment of ‘middle schools , the increased use
EDUCATION
Secondary
Schools
England and Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Special
Educational
Treatment
153
of teachers aides in primary schools, more in-service training for teachers
facilitated by the rapid growth of the number of teachers’ centres (now about
480) for the dissemination of new ideas, and the channelling of special help to
educational priority areas’ in poorer neighbourhoods in the form of more
teachers and increased salaries for teachers in schools of exceptional difficulty.
The public or state system of education aims to give all children an education
suited to their particular abilities. The majority of school children in England
and Wales receive their secondary education in schools to which they are
allocated after selection procedures at the age of 11 (often referred to as the
eleven-plus examination). Schools receiving pupils on this basis are: about
1,216 grammar schools providing academic education (including a small
number of direct-grant grammar schools) j some 2,691 secondary modern
schools giving a general education with a practical bias; a few secondary
technical schools offering a general education related to industry, commerce
and agriculture; and schools providing all three, or any two, types of education,
in separately organised streams and known as multilateral or bilateral schools.
Nearly a third of the maintained secondary school population, however,
attend some 1,145 comprehensive schools which take pupils without reference
to ability or aptitude and provide a wide range of secondary education for all or
most of the children of a district. They can be organised in a number of ways
including schools that take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18;
the middle schools whose pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools at
12 or 13, leaving at 16 or 18; and the comprehensive school with an age-range
of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form college for pupils over 16.
Secondary education in Scotland is largely organised on comprehensive
lines and in 1970 nearly 193,000 pupils (about 64 per cent of all pupils in edu¬
cation authority secondary schools) were in schools with a comprehensive in¬
take. There are also a number of other types of secondary school which fall
mainly into one of three categories or are a combination of all three: (1) junior
secondary schools for pupils likely to leave school at the statutory leaving age
(tS, rising to 16 in i972-73)» (2) schools which, in addition to junior secondary
courses, provide courses leading to the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certifi¬
cate of Education; and (3) senior secondary schools which provide Certificate
courses of four, five and six years.
In Northern Ireland there are grammar schools and secondary (intermediate)
schools, which are the equivalent of the secondary modern schools in England
and Wales. Some comprehensive type schools exist, and arrangements for
transfer between the other types of schools are flexible.
Special educational treatment is provided for children who require it because
of any physical or mental disability, including maladjustment, either in
ordinary schools or special schools (including hospital schools). For children
at special schools attendance is compulsory up to the age of 16, and a number
of children remain at school beyond this age. There are nearly 1,200 special
schools in Britain, including hospital schools, day and boarding schools. There
are also boarding homes for handicapped children attending ordinary schools.
In 1971 responsibility for the education of mentally handicapped children
was transferred to the Department of Education and Science from the Depart¬
ment of Health and Social Security and about 400 additional special schools
were formed from former training centres and hospital provision.
There are ten categories of handicapped pupils in England, Wales and
i54
Independent
Schools
School Leaving
and Secondary
School
Examinations
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland and nine in Scotland for whom local education authorities
must provide special educational treatment: blind, partially sighted, deaf,
partially hearing, delicate, educationally subnormal, epileptic, maladjusted,
physically handicapped and children suffering from speech defects. There is no
separate category for the delicate in Scotland.
Independent schools in England and Wales receive no grants from public
funds but all are open to inspection and must register with the Department of
Education and Science or the Welsh Office which has power to require them to
remedy any objectionable features in their premises, accommodation or in¬
struction and to exclude any person regarded as unsuitable to teach in or to be
the proprietor of a school. In default, the appropriate Secretary of State can,
in effect, close a school, but schools have a right of appeal to an Independent
Schools Tribunal against any of the requirements. The schools whose stan¬
dards are regarded by the Department or the Welsh Office as broadly com¬
parable with those of well-run maintained schools are, on application, granted
the status of ‘recognised as efficient’. Such schools (some i,424 °f ^bout
2,775 independent schools registered) contain 727 per cent of the pupils in
independent schools. In Scotland where there are about 111 registered schools,
the position is the same except that there is no ‘recognised as efficient’ status.
Independent schools cater for pupils of all ages and abilities. They include
the preparatory schools and the public schools. ^ The preparatory schools
cater mainly for boys from about 8 to 13 years of age who are intending to
enter public schools, the largest and most important of the ‘recognised as
efficient’ independent schools. Combined tuition and boarding fees in public
schools generally range between £500 and £860 a year. There are some 270
public schools about half of which are for girls. The boys’ schools in particular
include a high proportion of boarding schools and it is among these that some
of the most famous schools are numbered.
The minimum school-leaving age for all but children at special schools (see
above) is 15; it will be raised to 16 in 1972-73- Most grammar school pupils
remain at school at least until they are 16; many leave between the ages of 17
and 19. The number of pupils in all schools staying on beyond the minimum
leaving age has been steadily increasing, and in 1970 35-5 per cent of the 16-
year-old age group in England and Wales was still at school.
There is no national leaving examination in England or Wales, but secondary
school pupils (and candidates not attending school) may take the General
Certificate of Education (GCE) or the Certificate of Secondary Education
(CSE). The GCE is conducted at ‘Ordinary’ (O) and ‘Advanced’ (A) levels.
Most candidates for the O-level are about 16 years of age, although some take
it earlier, at the discretion of their head teacher. Most grammar, direct-grant
and independent school pupils and a number from other secondary schoo s
take the O-level examination, and passes in various subjects are widely accepted
for entry to courses of further education and training. Between 1959 an<^ I97°
the annual number of O-level GCE passes almost doubled. The advanced
examination is at university entrance level and is accepted also for purposes of
entry to many forms of professional training. Since 1955 the number o
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Head¬
masters’ Conference, the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of
Girls’ Schools Association. Some other schools, mainly direct grant, which are not
independent schools, are also represented on these bodies. They should not be confused
with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
EDUCATION
155
School Building
FURTHER
EDUCATION
nstitutions
school-leavers obtaining two or more A-levels (often regarded as the minimum
qualification for university entrance) has almost trebled. The CSE is designed
for pupils completing five years’ secondary education at the age of 16; it is
controlled by teachers serving in the schools providing candidates. The highest
grade in the CSE is widely accepted as being of the same standard as a pass
in the GCE O-level. Control over the scope and standards of examinations is
exercised by the Schools Council (see p. 151) to ensure national comparability.
It does not lay down model syllabuses or examination papers but it puts for¬
ward ideas and promotes research and development.
In Scotland examinations are conducted by the Scottish Certificate of
Education Examination Board. School pupils in the fourth year of secondary
courses sit an examination at 16 years for the award of passes on the Ordinary
grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education, and pupils in the fifth or sixth
year are presented for the Higher grade. For those who have completed their
main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue their studies in particu¬
lar subjects there is a Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the Junior Certificate Examination
(JCE) at about the age of 14 and the Northern Ireland General Certificate of
Education at about the age of 16. From 1972 the JCE is being replaced by the
Northern Ireland Certificate of Secondary Education.
Local education authorities and voluntary bodies are responsible, under the
general supervision of the central departments, for providing the schools and
other buildings needed for public education in their areas. The central
departments decide on the size and nature of the authorities’ individual
programmes in the light of national priorities; they also offer guidance to
authorities by means of building bulletins and in other ways.
An extensive school building programme has been carried out in recent
years. This has resulted in the completion of nearly 13,000 new schools in
Britain since 1945; together with extensions, alterations and remodelling of
existing state schools, nearly 6-9 million new places have been provided.
Grants of up to 80 per cent of the approved cost are normally available from
the Department of Education and Science for the building of new voluntary
aided schools and for alterations and external repairs to existing aided schools.
In Northern Ireland capital grants of 80 per cent are available for voluntary
schools which have a one-third proportion of local education authority nomi¬
nees on their governing boards.
The extensive school building programme has been accompanied by new
ideas and methods in design and construction. Industrialised building
techniques have been widely adopted. The new schools are light, airy and
colourful, with a high standard of finish and generous provision of teaching
area and outdoor games space. In primary schools especially, traditional
classroom designs are being modified to allow more flexible use of space.
Further education is a broad term which covers all education beyond the
secondary stage; it may be full-time or part-time, vocational or non-voca-
tional. It includes adult education (see. p. 157) and higher education (defined
on p. 159). For convenience, advanced work at the level of higher education,
but carried out at institutions regarded as within the further education system,
is included below.
In England and Wales there are 700 major establishments of further education
including polytechnics (see p. 162), technical colleges, colleges of commerce,
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
colleges of art, and a number of agricultural establishments. They provide
both full-time and part-time courses up to the levels of first and higher de¬
grees. There are also over 6,500 evening institutes (see p. 157).
In Scotland there are about 92 local further education colleges offering
full- and part-time day courses and a number of evening courses and 13 central
institutions for further education doing mainly advanced work.
In Northern Ireland there are 28 institutions of further education, of which
23 conduct advanced courses.
Since most of the technical colleges and other further education establishments
in Britain are either maintained or aided from public funds, tuition fees are
moderate, and nearly always remitted for young people under 18 years of age.
Where industrial training is provided by the colleges, charges (the responsi¬
bility of the employer) broadly reflect the economic cost of provision. Many
full-time students are helped by awards from local education authorities.
The awards, generally based on the results of the General Certificate of
Education or a corresponding examination, are assessed to cover tuition fees
and a maintenance grant, but parents who can afford to contribute towards the
cost are required to do so. There are also some scholarships available from
endowments, and from particular industries or companies for the most
promising of their young workers.
Students In 1970 there were 310,851 full-time and sandwich course (see below) students
and 1,647,893 (including evening) part-time students in further education
colleges in Britain (a total of 1,759,384 in England and Wales, 162,446 in
Scotland and 36,914 in Northern Ireland). In 1970 the total number of students
on advanced courses in England and Wales was about 197,300, in Scotland
17,710 and in Northern Ireland 2,776.
Courses The courses provided are full-time, sandwich (up to five years in length,
generally consisting of alternate periods of about six months of full-time study
in a technical college and supervised experience in industry), block release (on
similar principles, but with shorter periods in college), day release (generally
attendance at a technical college for one day a week during working hours),
and evening classes. > ^ .
Sandwich courses in higher education are becoming increasingly popular.
At the lower levels the numbers of day release and block release courses are
expanding, and to a large extent replacing evening classes in certain vocational
subjects. Many students attend integral courses in which further education
and industrial training are combined.
Technical Courses There is a wide variety of courses for young people in various trades and occu¬
pations, leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course of up to five
years. Other, more academic, courses lead to the National Certificates and
Diplomas approved by joint committees consisting of representatives of edu¬
cation departments, teacher organisations and the appropriate professional
bodies.1 These courses are normally at two levels, ordinary and higher. The
Ordinary National Certificate courses normally last two years part-time and
students usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19; the level of the
1 Proposals for the establishment of a Technician Education Council and a Business
Education Council to administer technician and business courses at aU levels in England
and Wales have been accepted by the Government (the Haslegrave Report, see Biblio¬
graphy, p. 473), and similar proposals have been made by a committee in bcotland.
EDUCATION
Business and
Secretarial Courses
Idult Education
I57
certificate is generally considered to approach that of GCE A-level. The Ordi¬
nary National Diploma courses are the full-time or sandwich counterparts of
the Ordinary National Certificate but involve study to a greater depth. In 1970
nearly 4,000 Ordinary National Diplomas were granted, about three times the
number for 1963. The Higher National Diploma, which requires a further
two years’ full-time or three years’ sandwich study, is recognised, within its
more restricted field, as approaching the standard of a pass degree; the Higher
National Certificate (after two further years’ part-time study) is lower in
standard because it is more narrowly based. (For degree courses, see p. 160.)
Many technical colleges, evening institutes and independent colleges offer
courses in shorthand, typing and book-keeping. Most local technical colleges
offer some lower-level work in business and commerce; higher-level work is
generally concentrated in colleges with a department of business studies or in
specialised colleges of commerce. There are a number of part-time and full¬
time courses leading to the Certificate or Higher Certificate in Office Studies.
Some business education is related to the specialised examination require¬
ments of various professional bodies; large numbers of the candidates taking
such courses do so through correspondence courses. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland there are part-time courses leading to the Ordinary National
Certificate and Higher National Certificate in Business Studies. There are
also full-time and sandwich courses leading to the Ordinary National Diploma
and Higher National Diploma in Business Studies. In Scotland, similar courses
lead to the Scottish National Certificate, the Scottish Higher National Certifi¬
cate and the Scottish National Diploma in Business Studies awarded by the
Scottish Council for Commercial, Administrative and Professional Education.
Adult education is generally taken to mean courses of non-vocational education
for people over 18. In 197° an estimated 2*25 million people registered for these
courses which were provided by local education authorities, various voluntary
bodies, of which the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA) is the most
notable, certain residential colleges, and the adult education ('extra-mural’)
departments of universities. The aim and effectiveness of adult education in
England and Wales, and Scotland are under examination by committees of
enquiry.
The residential colleges, the university departments and the voluntary
bodies, such as the WEA, recognised as competent to provide adult education,
receive government grants. So do various national bodies which promote
educational activities of a non-political kind, such as the National Federation of
Women’s Institutes and the National Council of Young Men’s Christian
Associations. Many of these bodies also receive grants from local education
authorities for services rendered locally.
A major share in the provision of adult education is increasingly being as¬
sumed by local education authorities. Most of it is on a part-time basis, mainly
in evening institutes (day schools used by adults in the evening) which have a
total of well over a million students, and also in colleges of further education,
schools of art, adult education centres, community centres, literary institutes
and youth clubs. There are about 30 short-term residential colleges or centres
in Great Britain maintained or aided by local education authorities, providing
courses varying in length between a weekend and a fortnight. Many of the
courses are practical, but there are widespread opportunities for academic study.
The Village Colleges pioneered in Cambridgeshire and variously adapted in
Cumberland, Monmouthshire, Leicestershire, Peterborough and Somerset
i58
TEACHERS AND
TEACHING
Teaching Aids
and Educational
Techniques
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are a local education authority development mainly in rural areas. The col¬
leges are secondary schools planned also as cultural community centres, pro¬
viding educational, social and cultural opportunities for adults in the areas
served. Community centres in general have a more social character and, though
aided by the local education authorities, are usually managed by voluntary
community associations many of which are affiliated to the National Federation
of Community Associations. The training of community centre wardens is
linked with that of youth leaders (see p. 168).
Seven residential colleges (six in England and Wales, one in Scotland) pro¬
vide courses of one or two years, some of which lead to a diploma. The colleges
aim at providing a liberal education and do not apply academic entry tests.
In general, courses at the highest levels in liberal studies are provided by the
extra-mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time staff
appointed for this purpose and can also call on the services of other members
of the university staff; and by the Workers’ Educational Association, which also
employs organising tutors and works closely with the university extra-mural
departments. In 1970 some 300,000 students in Britain attended such courses.
Similar work is also promoted in some of the centres maintained by local
education authorities.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of
information, research and publication for adult education, as well as a channel
of co-operation and consultation for the many organisations in England and
Wales which are interested in this subject. It is mainly financed by contribu¬
tions from local education authorities and assisted by a grant from the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science. The Scottish Institute of Adult Education is
the corresponding body in Scotland. ^ . .
In Northern Ireland extra-mural departments of the Queen’s University of
Belfast and the New University of Ulster organise and staff adult education
classes which are supplemented by classes organised by various non-official
bodies. The Workers’ Educational Association is responsible for classes at other
than university level and receives grants from the Ministry of Education.
Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing
bodies or managers. In 1970 there were about 388,220 full-time and 49,529
part-time (equivalent to 22,700 full-time) teachers in publicly maintained
primary and secondary schools in Britain, an average of one teacher to 22-1
pupils. The increase in teachers is more than keeping pace with the rise in the
school population so that there continues to be improvement in the ratio of
teachers to pupils; greater numbers are entering the colleges of education (see
p. 161), more university graduates are turning to teaching, and many married
women, formerly teachers, are returning to the profession. Many more are
needed if the Government’s aim of eliminating all classes over 30 is to be
achieved. In 1970 there were over 57,000 full-time teachers in grant-aided
establishments of further education in Britain, and many more part-time
teachers. Most teachers in technical colleges have had some industrial and
professional experience. . .
There are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
institutions maintained from public funds in England and Wales, in Scotian ,
and in Northern Ireland.
Radio broadcasts to schools and colleges of further education are well estab¬
lished. In 1970-71 the School Broadcasting Department of the BBC sent out
about 55 different radio series, some of which were repeated within each week
EDUCATION
159
HIGHER
EDUCATION
Universities
to make it easier for the schools to arrange their listening times. These pro¬
grammes were used by about 32,250 schools in Britain. Television reached
some 24,500 schools and the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Inde¬
pendent Television Authority between them provided some 24 hours of edu¬
cational programmes a week during term time.
Radio provides a great variety of educational programmes for adults, both
vocational and non-vocational; most of them are grouped in an hourly
study programme on five nights a week. Television programmes for simi¬
lar audiences have grown fast; they are mostly shown on Saturday and
Sunday mornings and in the evening during the week. There have also been
a number of experimental projects sponsored between the BBC, some of
the independent television companies, universities, local education authorities
and a voluntary body, the National Extension College. (For the Open Uni¬
versity, see p. 160.)
There has been a rapid development in the use of programmed learning and
its integration with other media. Language laboratories (using tape recorders
in individual booths) are being used throughout the educational system. Most
universities and a high proportion of colleges of education use closed-circuit
television; it is also used increasingly in medical schools, technical colleges and
schools—the Inner London Education Authority’s system links about 1,400
educational establishments and is one of the world’s biggest closed-circuit
networks.
Schools and colleges co-ordinate different methods of audio-visual presenta¬
tion, including radio, television, films, colour slides, wall charts, maps, models
and tape recordings. For example, the BBC’s ‘Radiovision’ programmes for
schools use coloured film strips synchronised with sound. The National Coun¬
cil for Educational Technology and the Educational Foundation for Visual
Aids advise all bodies connected with education and with training in industry
and in the Services on the availability and use of audio-visual aids for teaching
purposes.1
The system of higher education includes universities, colleges of education
and advanced courses at various colleges in the further education system.
(Advanced courses are dealt with on p. 162 and higher education in Northern
Ireland on p. 163.) The expansion of higher education was accelerated by the
report of the Committee on Higher Education under Lord Robbins’s chair¬
manship (published in 1963, see Bibliography, p. 473), which suggested that by
1973-74 there should be 390,000 places in full-time higher education in
Great Britain, of which 218,000 should be in university institutions. These aims
have already been achieved—there were 447,509 students pursuing higher
education courses in 1970-71, of which 228,000 were in the universities.
There are 44 universities (not counting the Open University) in Britain, com¬
pared with 17 in 1945. Although the Government is responsible for providing
about 80 per cent of universities’ income it does not control their work or
teaching nor does it have direct dealings with the universities. The grants are
distributed by the University Grants Committee, a body appointed by the
Secretary of State to advise her on state aid to the universities; its members are
drawn from the academic and business worlds.
The English universities are: Aston2 (Birmingham), Bath,2 Birmingham,
1 The Government has set up a committee to consider new central arrangements for
promoting educational technology in Britain.
2 Has received its charter since i960.
l6o BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bradford,1 Bristol, Brunei1 (London), Cambridge, City1 (London), Durham,
East Anglia,1 Essex,1 Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury,1 Lancaster,1
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough,1 Manchester, Newcastle
upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Salford,1 Sheffield, Southampton,
Surrey,1 Sussex,1 Warwick1 and York.1 The federated University of Wales
includes four university colleges, the Welsh National School of Medicine, the
University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology and St. David’s
College, Lampeter. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee,1
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt1 (Edinburgh), St. Andrews, Stirling,1
and Strathclyde1 (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there is Queen’s University,
Belfast, and the New University of Ulster1 in Coleraine (see p. 163).
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
There are five other institutions where the work is of university standard:
the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology; the two
postgraduate business schools which are supported jointly by industry and the
Government—the Manchester Business School and the London Graduate
School of Business Studies, associated with the London School of Economics
and the Imperial College of Science and Technology; Cranfield Institute of
Technology for mainly postgraduate work in aeronautics and other subjects;
and the Royal College of Art.
The Government has established the Open University to provide part-time
degree and other courses, using a combination of television, radio and corres¬
pondence courses together with a network of viewing and listening centres. No
formal academic qualifications are required to register for these courses, but
the standards of its degrees (to be awarded on a system of credits for each
course completed) will be the same as those of other universities. The uni¬
versity is financed by fees and a grant direct from the Department of Education
and Science. The first 25,000 students chosen from 40,000 applicants began
their courses in 1971.
University Finance In spite of the large sums of public money spent on universities they have
remained autonomous institutions, due largely to the existence of the University
Grants Committee. The Committee acts as a link between the Government
from which it receives a block grant and the universities to which it allocates
this grant. In this way the Government contributes over 70 per cent towards the
current income of universities and about 90 Per cent towards their capital
programmes for building work, purchasing sites and properties, professional
fees and furniture and equipment. Further sums are raised by the universities
themselves.
In Great Britain the recurrent grants for the academic year 1971-72 are
estimated to be about £225 million. Capital grants are expected to be about
£63 million. Total public expenditure on universities rose from £4 million
in 1945 to ^260 million in 1970-71. The Comptroller and Auditor General
(see p. 340) has access to the books and records of the University Grants
Committee and the universities to check that the funds entrusted to the
universities are efficiently administered. He cannot question decisions of policy
or those reached on academic grounds.
Courses in arts and science are offered by most universities. Imperial College,
London, the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology and
Studies and
Degrees
1 Has received its charter since i960.
Students
Staff
Colleges of
Education
EDUCATION l6l
some of the newer universities concentrate on technology although they may
also offer a number of courses in social studies, modern languages and other
non-technological subjects. About 41 per cent of full-time university students
in Great Britain are taking arts or social studies courses and 41 per cent science
and technology: about 10 per cent are studying medicine, dentistry and health,
and the remainder agriculture, forestry, veterinary science, architecture and
town and country planning.
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though
in medicine, dentistry and veterinary science five or six years are required.
The first degree of Bachelor (Master of Arts, in the older Scottish univer¬
sities) is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending on satisfactory
examination results. Further study or research is required at the modern uni¬
versities for the degree of Master and by all universities for that of Doctor.
Actual degree titles vary according to the practice of each university. A uniform
standard of degree throughout the country is ensured by having external
examiners on all examining boards. In the last decade there has been a ten¬
dency for degree courses to become more broadly based in subject matter,
particularly in the new universities.
University teaching combines lectures, practical classes (in scientific sub¬
jects) and small group teaching in either seminars or tutorials.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all
universities there are postgraduate students engaged in research.
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no
religious test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with
men for most subjects, but at Cambridge their numbers may be limited by
ordinance. The general proportion of men to women students is nearly three
to one; at Oxford it is over four to one, and at Cambridge seven to one. A third
of all full-time university students in Britain are living in colleges and halls of
residence, slightly under a half are in lodgings, and the remainder live at home.
Despite recent expansion programmes, applications for places at universities
for arts studies still exceed the number available. Prospective candidates for
nearly all the universities apply for places through the Universities Central
Council on Admissions. The only students to apply directly are applicants to
the Open University and British candidates who apply only for the universi¬
ties of Glasgow, Aberdeen and Strathclyde.
In 1970-71 there were about 228,000 full-time university students in Great
Britain including 41,000 postgraduates. In 1969-70 there were some 24,000
part-time students, more than 98 per cent of whom were working for university-
level qualifications. A further 22,131 registered for London University’s
external first degree examinations, the main external degree available in Britain.
In 1969-70 there were about 26,904 full-time university teachers in Great
Britain; about n-6 per cent of them were professors. The ratio of staff to
students was about one to eight, one of the most favourable in the world.
Teachers in maintained schools must hold qualifications approved by the
education departments. In England and Wales the majority qualify by under¬
taking a three-year course at a college of education. Some college students obtain
a degree—Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)—and a professional qualification
by means of a four-year course. An additional year’s compulsory professional
training for people with degrees and certain other specialist qualifica¬
tions, hitherto qualified by virtue of their qualifications, is gradually being
introduced. In Scotland all teachers in secondary schools must be graduates
162
Advanced
Courses in
Further
Education
Awards
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(or have equivalent qualifications) and must have taken a course of teacher
training but primary school teachers may qualify by taking a three-year course
at a college of education. The General Teaching Council has almost complete
powers over the profession excluding salary matters but includingthe function
of maintaining a register of qualified teachers. Proposals for a similar body for
England and Wales are under consideration.
In England and Wales there are 159 colleges of education, 16 of which are for
day students only, 7 departments of education in polytechnics, 30 university
departments of education, 4 colleges for training teachers for technical institu¬
tions and 13 art teacher training centres. In 1970-71 there were about 111,23°
students in colleges and departments of education outside universities (in¬
cluding over 7,330 in day colleges), about 6,270 in university departments of
education, and nearly 2,390 in colleges of education (technical) and art teacher
training centres. The total of 119,290 students is just over three times that for
1960-61. In Scotland there are 10 colleges of education; the number of stu¬
dents in training in 1970-71 was over 12,240 with a proposed increase to oyer
14,650 in 1974-75. The Robbins report target of 122,000 teacher training
places in Great Britain by 1973-74 was achieved in 1970. . .
The education departments, universities, local education authorities and
other bodies provide a variety of short in-service training courses for practising
teachers.1
In 1970-71 over 216,000 students in Great Britain were taking advanced
courses other than in universities and colleges of education in a wide variety
of subjects including architecture, art and design (see p. 423), catering, engin¬
eering, natural sciences and business studies. An increasing proportion 01 * °
students were taking courses leading to the awards of the Council for Nationa
Academic Awards. The Council has power to award degrees and other aca¬
demic qualifications, comparable in standard with those granted by universities,
to students who successfully complete approved courses of study in establish¬
ments which do not have the power to award their own degrees. In 1970-71
there were 324 courses being followed by about 23,857 students in 42 colleges.
These courses were mainly in science and technology but included the arts,
social studies, business studies and law, and some subjects in which there are
few or no courses offered in universities.
In England and Wales the Government is concentrating higher education
provision outside universities and colleges of education within 30 major
national institutions named ‘polytechnics’. They are comprehensive institu¬
tions providing all types of courses (full-time, sandwich, and part-time) at all
levels of higher education, and ultimately they will have at least 2,000 tu
time students each. By August 1971, 28 polytechnics had been designated.
Management studies are provided by universities, polytechnics and ot er
further education colleges, by individual companies and by trade and industrial
federations. (For the two postgraduate business schools, see p. 160.) Certain
independent colleges specialise in management training. Many universities
have introduced management studies into the curriculum and courses or t e
postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies are run by some technical
colleges. In Scotland courses leading to the Certificate of Business Administra¬
tion are provided for students in junior supervisory positions.
Awards to enable students to undertake higher education are made under one
1 The teacher training system in England and Wales is the subject of an enquiry by a
committee set up by the Government.
EDUCATION
163
of the most generous grant systems in the world. It is national policy that no
boy or girl should be prevented by lack of means from taking an advanced
course at a university or elsewhere. As a result, over 90 per cent of students in
higher education in Great Britain are aided from private or public funds. A
UNESCO survey has indicated that university students in Britain come from a
wider social background than those in any other western European country.
In England, Wales and Scotland most adequately qualified British students
can obtain awards from public funds in order to attend full-time at a university,
college of education or major further education establishment. In England and
Wales local education authorities provide awards. In Scotland students’
allowances for advanced courses are granted by the Scottish Education De¬
partment. The amount of these awards depends upon the income of the student
and his parents. Grants for postgraduate study are offered annually by the
Department of Education and Science, the Research Councils and the Scottish
Education Department.
Northern Two institutions provide university education in Northern Ireland—Queen’s
Ireland University of Belfast and the New University of Ulster, Coleraine. The New
University consists of four schools (biological studies, social and economic
studies, physical sciences and humanities) and an education centre with the
status of a school. Technological studies are provided at Queen’s University,
Belfast, in addition to a wide range of courses in other faculties. In 1970-71
there were 6,741 students at Queen’s University and 1,379 at the New Uni¬
versity. Government grants to the universities are made by the Ministry of
Education which first seeks the advice of the University Grants Committee.
Higher education outside the universities is mainly centred in the new
Ulster College, which has responsibility for the existing colleges of arts,
domestic science and physical education. Building work has begun on the Col¬
lege of Technology which is to become part of the Ulster College.
Teacher training takes place in the two university education departments,
three colleges of education, the Ulster College and one technical college. In
1970-71 there were about 2,800 students in training. The principal courses are
three-year (certificate) and four-year (Bachelor of Education) but there are
also one-year courses for graduates or holders of other appropriate qualifications.
University and further education scholarships are awarded by local authorities
and postgraduate awards and teacher training scholarships by the Ministry of
Education, the conditions of award being the same as those for Great Britain.
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of edu¬
cational services is supported financially by the education departments, local
education authorities, philanthropic organisations, universities and teachers’
associations. The Schools Council and the Social Science Research Council are
additional channels for government support.
The major institute undertaking research in education, outside the uni¬
versities, is the National Foundation for Educational Research, an autonomous
body which derives its income mainly from corporate members, including local
education authorities, teachers’ organisations and universities and from an
annual grant from the Department of Education and Science. There are also
the Scottish Council for Research in Education and the Northern Ireland
Council of Educational Research.
Some research is undertaken at colleges of education and polytechnics and
by a few independent research organisations.
There is no single central organisation for the co-ordination of educational
164
INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS
Overseas
Students
in Britain
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
research, but the central departments keep themselves informed of the work
being considered and undertaken.
Among philanthropic organisations that provide generously for research are
the Nuffield Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Gulbenkian Trust, the
Leverhulme Trust, the Bernard van Leer Foundation, the Rockefeller Foun¬
dation, the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, the Wolfson Foundation and the
Foundation for Management Education.
There are many opportunities for overseas students to study in Britain and for
British students to study abroad and British teachers are encouraged to serve
overseas for a period.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In
the academic year 1969-70 there were 74,757 overseas students in Britain, of
whom about 16,940 were at universities, another 14,455 at technical colleges
and the remainder learning English or training as teachers, doctors and nurses,
for the law, banking and accountancy, or in industry. About 59 per cent of all
overseas students were from the Commonwealth.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers from
other countries. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan,
the governments of certain Commonwealth countries have made awards
available at their own institutions of higher education to men and women from
other Commonwealth countries. At the beginning of the academic year 1970-
71, 646 scholarships and fellowships (including medical awards) were held in
Britain. In addition the Commonwealth Bursary Scheme achieved a total of
562 teachers and others training in Britain. An example of a smaller govern¬
ment scheme is the Indian Centres of Advanced Study Scheme in which, as
part of a plan for establishing links between British and Indian universities,
academic staff from 12 Indian universities spend a period with British uni¬
versities.
About 500 British Council1 scholarships, tenable usually for one year in
Britain, are offered annually to graduates of overseas universities. Twenty-four
Marshall Scholarships for two years’ study at any university in Britain are
offered annually by the British Government to graduates from the United
States of America and over 60 Rhodes Scholarships are awarded annually to
Commonwealth and United States graduates for two years of study at the
University of Oxford. A further two Rhodes scholarships are awarded to
graduates from the Federal Republic of Germany. Other universities and col¬
leges themselves offer many scholarships for which graduate students of any
nationality are eligible.2  
1 The purpose of the British Council (founded in 1934) is defined in its Royal Charter as
the promotion of a wider knowledge of the United Kingdom and the English language
abroad and the development of closer cultural relations between Britain and other
countries. The Council is governed by an executive committee of 30 members, broadly
representative of many elements of the life of Britain, and including elg
nominated by ministers. It is financed almost entirely from public funds. The activities
of the Council, which has staff in 76 overseas countries, are advising and assisting in
English teaching and other educational work including science; fostering personal con¬
tacts between British and overseas people, especially in the educational, professional and
scientific fields; running, or helping to maintain, libraries of British books and periodi¬
cals overseas; and presenting overseas the best in the arts in Britain. Its work m Brit
is concerned mainly with professional visitors and with the weifare of overseas_students.
2 The Association of Commonwealth Universities publishes a handbook, United Kingdom
Postgraduate Awards (see Bibliography, p. 471)- This is being replaced by two hand-
EDUCATION
Arrangements
for Overseas
Students
British Students
Overseas
165
Fellowships and training awards for study in British institutions are avail¬
able under the Central Treaty Organisation, the Colombo Plan, the Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Plan and British technical assistance pro¬
grammes for many countries. Large numbers of awards for study or training
in Britain are also made under the United Nations Programmes of Technical
Assistance and by the United Nations specialised agencies such as UNESCO,
FAO, and WHO.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. The
fifth Commonwealth Education Conference was held in Canberra in 1971.
The national representatives in London (Office of the High Commissioner or
Embassy) of a number of countries accept certain special responsibilities for
their students in Britain. The British Council acts as an agent for the British
Government in matters affecting the welfare of overseas students, and provides
certain services, such as meeting on arrival, introduction courses, an accom¬
modation bureau and a student centre in London which organises a varied
programme of lectures, discussions and social and other activities and arranges
introductions of students to people who wish to invite them to their homes. In
the vacations there are courses in many parts of the country which offer op¬
portunities for getting to know more about British life in town and country. In
term time there are visits to various places of interest, and theatre and con¬
cert parties are arranged.
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas
students are Rotary, Round Table, the Victoria League, the Royal Over-Seas
League, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the National Union of Students,
the English-Speaking Union and Churches of all denominations. The United
Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs, established in 1968, is an inde¬
pendent central body serving overseas students and organisations and indivi¬
duals concerned in overseas students affairs; it provides both a forum for the
exchange of ideas and machinery for consultation with government and other
authorities. In many London boroughs and in other large cities there are
committees which help students to make contact with local residents and
organisations. These organisations also help by entertaining overseas students
and many of them have established hostels with the financial help of the Over¬
seas Students Welfare Expansion Programme which is administered by the
British Council. By the beginning of 1971 grants had been approved for 130
projects, providing places for about 5,700 students.
Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, a number of
scholarships are made available annually to United Kingdom students by the
governments of other Commonwealth countries for study in their universities,
colleges and other institutions of higher learning. In 1970-71, 23 awards were
accepted by United Kingdom students in seven Commonwealth countries. In
addition the Study and Serve Scheme, administered by the Inter-University
Council for Higher Education Overseas, enables British students to undertake
a year’s postgraduate study at universities in the developing countries on
books, one listing sources of financial aid for university teachers and the other for post¬
graduate students who want to study or undertake research in a Commonwealth country
other than their own. The Association promotes co-operation between Commonwealth
universities. It provides publication and information services, and also makes available
secretariats for various bodies affecting its member institutions, such as the Common¬
wealth Scholarship Commission and the Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission.
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
condition that they also work in appropriate employment in the country con¬
cerned.
The United States/United Kingdom Educational Commission (still some¬
times called the Fulbright Commission) offers travel grants for postgraduate
study in the United States. Notable among more recently established scholar¬
ships are the Kennedy scholarships, to enable British students to study at three
American universities, and the Churchill travel scholarships, for men and
women in all walks of life. British students are also offered scholarships at
institutions of higher education in 22 European and 10 non-European countries
outside the Commonwealth.
About 1,900 teachers were recruited in Britain during 197° f°r P08*8 in schools,
colleges of education, technical colleges and universities in developing countries,
including about 1,500 for posts in the developing countries of the Common¬
wealth ; almost all of them are supported by public funds. Steps taken by the
Government to help school teachers to serve for a period overseas have in¬
cluded the establishment of a National Council for the Supply and Training of
Teachers Overseas and the introduction of special measures to safeguard their
interests both while abroad and on their return home. Recruitment is carried
out by the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, the British Council and the voluntary teacher recruit¬
ing agencies, such as the Overseas Appointments Bureau and Catholic Over¬
seas Appointments.
There are about 1,000 British university teachers serving overseas, most of
them recruited through the Inter-University Council for Higher Education
Overseas in collaboration, in some cases, with the Association of Common¬
wealth Universities and the British Council. Government encouragement also
includes support for a number of schemes of assistance for overseas universi¬
ties which are administered by the Inter-University Council, including the
scheme for Special Commonwealth Awards, which are made to leading scholars
from British universities who are willing to work for a minimum of two years
in important posts in the universities of developing Commonwealth countries.
Outside the schemes, an increasing number of graduate and qualified volun¬
teers, also cadet volunteers (including school leavers), nearly 2,000 in 1970-71,
are going overseas for one or two years, a large number to teach. Recruitment
is carried out by four voluntary organisations (co-ordinated under the British
Volunteer Programme) which receive financial assistance from the Govern-
ment.
Interchange schemes, under which teachers in Britain exchange posts for a
year with teachers overseas, include one with the United States and another
with Commonwealth countries whereby each year over 100 British teachers
exchange posts with teachers from Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Official
exchange schemes also operate between Britain and several European countries
both for teachers and for temporary assistants’ posts for language specialists.
Britain provides, on request, assistance to the developing countries in several
other ways, including the loan of educational experts for technical and con¬
sultant services and specialist missions, through various educational organisa¬
tions and the ODA. The Centre for Educational Development Overseas
(CEDO) is the British centre to which those who are concerned with the
modernisation of education in developing countries may apply for informa¬
tion, advice and assistance.
EDUCATION
167
Organisation
and Finance
THE YOUTH SERVICE
The aim of the youth service in Britain is to encourage the development of
young people by helping them to broaden their interests, to enjoy recreational
pursuits, and to mix socially in their leisure time.
The service (which in Scotland forms part of the Youth and Community
Service) is provided by local education authorities and voluntary organisations,
in co-operation with the government education departments. Membership of
youth groups is voluntary and groups vary greatly in their activities, there
being no attempt to impose uniformity or to create anything in the nature of a
national youth movement.
Organised activities for young people were first promoted by voluntary bodies,
often of a religious nature, during the nineteenth century, and the number of
such organisations and the range of their activities have continued to grow
over the past 100 years. The involvement of local authorities and the education
departments in the youth service dates back principally to the 1940s when the
service first became recognised as part of the education system.
The education departments formulate broad policy objectives for the service
and encourage their achievement through financial assistance and advice.
They make known the Government’s attitude by means of circulars to local
education authorities and through contacts between departmental officials and
representatives of the authorities and the voluntary organisations. Ministers in
Scotland and Northern Ireland are advised on the finance and development of
the service by councils representing all those concerned in youth work.
Financially the departments in Great Britain assist voluntary organisations
through grants towards their costs for central administration and local build¬
ing projects; in 1970-71 these amounted to £608,000 and £1-18 million re¬
spectively. In Northern Ireland, the Ministry of Education gave some
£118,000 in capital grants to the voluntary organisations and £7,000 in grants
towards their running costs in 1970-71.
Almost all local education authorities assist local voluntary groups by lend¬
ing premises and equipment and some contribute to their capital and running
costs. To supplement the work of voluntary groups, many authorities now
construct and run youth centres and clubs; in Great Britain there are over
2,800 youth centres fully run by local education authorities. Most authorities
have appointed youth committees on which official and voluntary bodies are
represented, and employ youth organisers to help in the promotion and en¬
couragement of youth work. In 1970-71, local education authorities contri¬
buted some £14-1 million to the youth service in England and Wales and
£575,ooo in Scotland.
Although the number of local education authority youth clubs and centres is
growing, national voluntary organisations still promote the largest share of
youth activities through local groups, which raise most of their day-to-day
running expenses by their own efforts; these have an estimated membership
in Britain of 3-5 million. Twenty-four national organisations (with member¬
ships of at least 10,000) are constituent members, and a further 36 are asso¬
ciate or observer members, of the Standing Conference of National Voluntary
Youth Organisations (SCNVYO), a consultative body which takes action only
in the name of its member bodies and with their consent. In Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland there are similar representative bodies.
Among the most important of the voluntary youth organisations belonging
to SCNVYO are the Scouts and Girl Guides Associations (with 540,000 and
l68 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
721,000 members), the National Association of Youth Clubs (302,000), the
National Association of Boys’ Clubs (162,000), the Boys’ Brigade (137,000),
and the Young Men’s Christian Association (89,000).
Certain pre-Service organisations for boys, which provide facilities for
social, educational and physical development along with training for possible
entry to the armed forces, are also members of SCNVYO; the Ministry of
Defence assists them financially.
Membership
and
Activities
Local education authority youth groups in England and Wales normally cater
for young people of both sexes mainly in the 14-20 age-range. Voluntary
organisations frequently cater for young people on a single-sex basis and their
membership often covers a wider age-range. Of young people between the ages
of 14 and 20 an estimated 29 per cent participate in youth service activities, and
of these three times as many belong to voluntary as to local education authority
youth groups. A smaller proportion of girls than boys take part. The main in¬
volvement is between the ages of 13 and 16.
Training of Most youth workers operate part-time and many of them are unpaid. Part-
Youth Workers time workers usually have no professional qualification in youth work but
many have allied qualifications, for instance as teachers, and a large number
attend short courses and conferences on youth work.
In England and Wales, for full-time youth workers there is a basic two-
year training undertaken in conjunction with the training of community centre
wardens. Provided at colleges of education and further education, the course
leads to a professional qualification. In addition a number of colleges of educa¬
tion provide a study of youth work as a principal or subsidiary subject within a
teacher training course. In Scotland one- and three-year courses are provided
at certain colleges of education. There are over 2,000 qualified youth workers
in Great Britain.
Other There are in Britain a number of organisations, which, although primarily
Organisations concerned with the welfare and out-of-school pursuits of young people, operate
Concerned with in a context broader than that of any individual youth movement. Among the
Young People most important are the Central Council of Physical Recreation, which provides
practical and advisory services for many youth organisations; the National
Playing Fields Association, which advises local authorities and sports organisa¬
tions on the acquisition, layout, construction and use of sports grounds; and
the Outward Bound Trust, which maintains six sea and mountain schools in
Britain offering physical training and character building courses for young
people.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies
such as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, is
designed as a challenge to young people to reach certain standards in leisure¬
time activities with the voluntary assistance of adults. Some 150,000 young
people between the ages of 14 and 21 from Britain and other Commonwealth
countries took part in the scheme in 1970. There are three awards—Bronze,
Silver and Gold—for each of which young people must attempt activities in
four out of five sections: service; interests; expeditions; and either physical
activity or design for living.
The King George’s Jubilee Trust is a charitable body which, since its
creation in 1935, has distributed more than £2 million in grants to the volun¬
tary organisations and towards experimental youth projects.
EDUCATION
Community
Service by
Young People
169
A notable trend in recent years (both within and outside the youth service)
has been the growth in voluntary service by young people to those in need in
the community, for example, the elderly, the sick, the mentally ill and the
handicapped. Organisations such as International Voluntary Service, Task
Force and Community Service Volunteers receive grants from the Department
of Education and Science, and through them thousands of young people are
doing full- or part-time voluntary work for the community. Many schools
organise community service activities as part of the curriculum. Young people
also play an active part in fund-raising for charitable organisations.
The Government established the Young Volunteer Force Foundation in
1968 as an independent body to advise interested organisations in England and
Wales on methods of involving young people in providing service to the com¬
munity. The Foundation receives a grant of £55,000 a year from the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science and employs a team of 40 young people who
are available on request to assist such bodies as local authorities, voluntary
organisations and hospital boards in encouraging and promoting voluntary
service. In Scotland, a similar organisation, ‘Enterprise Youth’, has been
established to co-ordinate and promote voluntary service to the community.
7 TOWN AND
COUNTRY
PLANNING
Development
Plans
Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world; it is, therefore,
essential to plan land use for a satisfactory national distribution of employment
and population, to undertake a programme of urban renewal, to build new
towns and to preserve the amenities of the countryside.
From 1909 successive Acts of Parliament recognised the principle of the
planned use of land, but because the pattern of development over much of
the country had already hardened into large unplanned urban concentrations
the powers granted to local planning authorities were inadequate.
The period between the two world wars—one of rapid social change and of
development in industry, engineering, housebuilding and transport—brought
a greater need for systematic land planning. The Town and Country Planning
Acts of 1932, which remained the basis of the law for 15 years, attempted to
strengthen planning law and to extend the planning powers of central and
local authorities. Although there were improvements in sanitary and en¬
vironmental conditions, the general effect of the legislation was unsatisfactory,
partly because it was permissive and not compulsory and partly because local
authorities wishing to exercise planning control were deterred by fears of
incurring heavy liabilities for compensation.
After studies of the major problems of planning had been conducted in the
years following 1937, the Government introduced in 1947 two comprehensive
Town and Country Planning Acts (one for England and Wales and one for
Scotland). These Acts provide the basis of the modern system of land planning
(the law in England and Wales has been consolidated in the Town and
Country Planning Act 1962). They impose compulsory planning duties on all
local planning authorities (the councils of counties and county boroughs, the
London authorities and, in some cases, joint planning boards) and establish a
centralised planning structure under the Secretary of State for the Environ¬
ment, the Secretary of State for Scotland and (since 1965) the Secretary of
State for Wales.
All local planning authorities are required to prepare plans setting out their
proposals and objectives for the development of their areas, and to submit
them for ministerial approval. A development plan system under legislation of
1968 (for England and Wales) and 1969 (for Scotland) is being introduced
gradually and is designed to reduce administrative delays, to emphasise
positive planning for the creation of a pleasant environment rather than the
negative control of undesirable development, and to enable the public to
play a greater part in the planning process. ‘Structure’ plans are drawn up by
local planning authorities, setting out broad policies for the future use and
development of land (including traffic management) and showing ‘action areas’
where comprehensive development or improvement is expected to start
Amenities
Societies
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING 171
within a specified period. Once the plans have been approved, local plans
containing more detailed proposals, including plans for the action areas, are
prepared (normally without the need for ministerial approval). All the plans
are under continuous review and may be amended periodically.
The local authorities have wide powers for undertaking development, in¬
cluding the compulsory purchase of land. With a few exceptions, all other
development (which includes most forms of construction, mineral extraction
and any material change made in the use of land or existing buildings) can be
carried out only after the local planning authority has given its consent: there
is a right of appeal if consent is refused.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity
to express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative
stages of the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must
ensure adequate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans;
representations may be made about them to the authorities. Where specific
proposals for development differ substantially from the intentions of a develop¬
ment plan, they must be publicised locally. Other schemes affecting a large
number of people are usually advertised by the local planning authority and
applications seeking permission for certain types of development must also
be advertised. There is a right of appeal to the appropriate Secretary of State
if planning permission is refused or granted subject to conditions; in England
and Wales some 60 per cent of appeals are transferred to inspectors for decision.
An appellant always has the right to put his case before an inspector appointed
by the Secretary of State. In the case of development schemes of national or
regional importance or of a very technical or scientific nature, the ministers
responsible may decide to set up planning inquiry commissions to carry out
investigations and hold enquiries locally. Where highway development is pro¬
posed, the Secretary of State for the Environment and the Secretary of State
for Scotland can hold such enquiries as they consider appropriate.
Voluntary organisations are particularly active in ensuring that proposed
changes in the use of land take full account of the interests of the public and
considerations of amenity. The National Trust for England, Wales and Nor¬
thern Ireland, founded in 1895, has nearly a quarter of a million members and
is the largest private landowner in Britain. For the benefit of the public it
owns and protects from harmful development 420,000 acres (169,964 hec¬
tares) of land, 200 historic buildings and 280 miles (451 km) of coastline (see
p. 175). About 100 properties in Scotland, covering some 80,000 acres (32,375
hectares) are protected by the National Trust for Scotland, an independent
body, founded in 1931, which now has about 33,000 members.
The Town and Country Planning Association, founded in 1899, seeks to
improve the qualities of land use and planning in Britain, and helped to pro¬
mote, for example, the New Towns Act 1946 (see p. 172). The Civic Trust
(and associate trusts) is financed through covenants from leading industrial
firms and was established in 1957 to encourage high quality in architecture and
planning, and to stimulate public interest in the appearance of town and coun¬
try. It has, for example, produced plans for the redevelopment of town cen¬
tres and for a recreational area in the Lee Valley to the north-east of London,
and was closely associated with the drafting of the Civic Amenities Act 1967
(see p. 174). The Civic Trust supports and advises over 750 local amenity
societies throughout Britain.
Other voluntary societies concerned with amenity in town and country
include: the Council for the Protection of Rural England, the Council for the
Regional
Planning
The Location
of Industry
New Towns
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Protection of Rural Wales, the Association for the Preservation of Rural
Scotland and the Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside;
the Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the
Ramblers’ Association; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings;
the Georgian Group and the Scottish Georgian Society; the Ulster Archi¬
tectural Heritage Society; the Victorian Society; the Pilgrim Trust; and the
Historic Churches Preservation Trust.
Advisory machinery for planning on a regional basis has been set up by the
Government. Local planning authorities and the regional economic planning
councils have consultations before structure plans are drawn up within the
framework of the economic planning and development of each region as a
whole (outside London many local planning authorities in England and Wales
are combining in the preparatory work for their plans and, in some cases, they
are to submit a joint plan for ministerial approval). Studies showing the
economic and social resources in all the regions have been made and certain
areas, where land, communications and facilities are favourable, have been
proposed as places where development should be concentrated.
Provisions relating to the location of industry and offices have been made in
the Town and Country Planning Acts, the Local Employment Acts 1960-70,
the Control of Office and Industrial Development Act 1965, and the Industrial
Development Act 1966. General problems of industrial development are
dealt with jointly by a number of government departments, but each develop¬
ment scheme, as a rule, requires the local planning authority’s consent (see
p. 171). Financial incentives to encourage the location of industry in particular
areas have been made available by the Government. There is special control
of office building in south-east England.
In Great Britain the New Towns Act 1946 and subsequent legislation (now
consolidated in Acts of 1965 and 1968) give the Secretary of State for the
Environment, the Secretary of State for Scotland and (since 1965) the Secre¬
tary of State for Wales power to designate as the site of a new town any area of
land (which may include an existing centre of population). In Northern Ire¬
land the Minister of Development has similar powers under the New Towns
Act (Northern Ireland) 1965.
The appropriate Minister must consult the local authorities concerned and
allow the public an opportunity to comment on the proposed designation. A
development corporation (development commission in Northern Ireland) is
appointed by the Government to create and plan the growth of the town. It is
responsible for the master plan, which is prepared in consultation with the
appropriate Minister, any interested government department, and the local
authorities in the area. Residents are given an opportunity to state their views
and, if necessary, a public inquiry is held. When the plan has been agreed,
the development corporation draws up detailed proposals for particular areas
and submits them to the responsible Minister for approval which (given
after consultation with the local planning authorities) constitutes planning
permission. A development corporation has general powers to acquire by
agreement or compulsory purchase any land or property within the designated
area necessary for its purposes, and is empowered to provide houses, offices,
factories and other essential buildings, estate roads and, in certain circum¬
stances, the main services essential to the development of the town.
The capital cost of developing the new towns is advanced from public
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
173
funds and is repayable over 60 years. Under the New Towns Act 1946
Parliament approved a fund of £50 million to provide for advances to the
development corporations for work on the new towns. This fund was increased
by subsequent Acts and now stands at ,£1,100 million; a total of some ,£800
million had been advanced to the corporations by March 1971. The corpora¬
tions submit annual reports (which include copies of their audited accounts)
to Parliament.
Of the 32 new towns designated in Britain since 1946, 23 are in England
and Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland. Eleven of the new
towns in England and Wales (Basildon, Bracknell, Crawley, Harlow, Hatfield,
Kernel Hempstead, Milton Keynes, Northampton, Peterborough, Stevenage
and Welwyn) are designed to help to relieve housing problems in the Greater
London area. Of the others, Aycliffe, Corby, Cwmbran, Peterlee and Washing¬
ton are serving the special needs of their areas; Newtown in mid-Wales is
being developed to promote economic growth in the area; Runcorn and Skel-
mersdale are helping to meet the overspill needs of Liverpool and north
Merseyside; Telford and Redditch are taking population from Birmingham;
and Warrington is being expanded to take people from Manchester. In central
Lancashire a new town has been designated to ease further the housing prob¬
lems of Liverpool and Manchester and to provide a growth point for the region’s
economy; and at Llantrisant in Glamorgan the Government is proposing the
establishment of a new town to accommodate an expected population growth
in South Wales, to attract new industry and employment, and to help to avoid
migration from the region.
The five Scottish new towns (Cumbernauld, East Kilbride, Glenrothes,
Irvine and Livingston) are helping to house people from Glasgow and are
major growth areas in the central belt of Scotland; in the Stonehouse area of
Lanarkshire a new community is to be established, making use of the develop¬
ment corporation of East Kilbride new town. In Northern Ireland, Craig-
avon is being developed as a new city and is rapidly becoming an area of major
industrial growth; Antrim and Ballymena are also becoming centres of econo¬
mic growth; and Londonderry and the surrounding district have been desig¬
nated as an area of special development.
Four new towns (Crawley, Hatfield, Hemel Hempstead and Welwyn) have
been substantially completed and their development corporations dissolved.
Their assets and liabilities have been handed over to the Commission for the
New Towns, a government-appointed agency set up in 1959.
The new towns represent a notable achievement in positive land use. They
are generally recognised as one of the most successful post-war experiments,
both socially and industrially, and as a profitable long-term investment. More
than half a million people have moved into the new towns during the past
20 years and by the beginning of 1971 the population of those in Great Britain
had reached an estimated total of some 1*7 million; young people form a
higher proportion of new town populations than of the country as a whole.
An extensive building and civil engineering programme has provided houses,
flats, factories, schools, shops, churches, health centres and libraries as well as
public buildings including town halls and law courts. Roads, water supplies,
sewerage, gas and electricity, police, fire and bus stations, postal, telegraph and
telephone facilities have also been provided; most of the towns are well-
equipped with parks and playing fields of various kinds. All the new towns
have become concerned with the increasingly high level of car ownership of
their inhabitants and are making more adequate provision for parking and the
segregation of pedestrians from motorists.
i?4
Town
Development
Schemes
Urban
Renewal
Historic
Buildings
and
Monuments
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A number of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and,
as the populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices,
hotels and department stores, as well as arts centres and full entertainment
and recreational facilities (skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, swimming
pools, sports stadia, golf courses and youth centres) are gradually being
provided. The proposed expansion of large existing towns such as Peter¬
borough—a further development in the evolution of new towns policy—has
the advantage, among others, that many of these facilities are already available.
The Town Development Act 1952 makes provision for the relief of congestion
in large industrial towns in England and Wales (such as London and Birming¬
ham) by encouraging the transfer of population to areas suitable for expansion
where employment is provided. Schemes have been approved, providing some
175,000 dwellings in this way, of which about half have been completed or are
under construction. Some of the expanding towns (for example, Aylesbury,
Basingstoke, Swindon and Thetford) are already well established, providing
new opportunities for people from large cities. In some places, like Cramlington
and Killingworth, the expansion is based on relatively undeveloped areas. The
Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act 1957 makes similar provision
for Scotland, where the only congested town so far involved is Glasgow.
Existing towns and cities are being renewed and re-shaped to meet the growth
in population and traffic. Glasgow, for example, has a programme to rebuild
29 areas accommodating nearly a third of its population and much of its in¬
dustry and commerce; eight areas have been approved by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The Government believes that greater integration of land
use and transport planning is of basic importance. Integration was the theme
of the Buchanan Report (see p. 296) which assessed the conflicting demands of
traffic and the environment and which has influenced many authorities re¬
development plans. Research into urban planning problems is undertaken by
a number of institutes and university departments and by the Centre for
Environmental Studies, established in 1966 and financed jointly by the
Government and other sources, including the Ford Foundation.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment
and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; 147,000 buildings are
already listed. It is an offence to demolish or alter any listed building without
special consent from the local planning authority or the appropriate Secre¬
tary of State; where consent is given to demolish a building, the Royal Com¬
mission on Historical Monuments has an opportunity to make a photographic
record of the building. Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be
served by the local authority to protect buildings not yet listed. The respective
Secretaries of State (on the recommendation of the appropriate Historic
Buildings Council) can make grants for the repair or maintenance of buildings
of outstanding interest, and local authorities can make grants and loans for any
building of architectural or historic interest even if it is not listed. Nearly 1,600
buildings in England have received grants and loans totalling about
million under the Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act 1953’
The Civic Amenities Act 1967 requires local planning authorities to designate
‘conservation areas’ of special architectural or historic interest. Special studies
have been made in Bath, Chester, Chichester and York of the difficulties of
preserving features of historic interest in ancient towns in the face of commer-
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
175
Green Belts
The Coast
cial development and increasing motor traffic. The Secretary of State for the
Environment and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales are respon¬
sible for the maintenance of royal parks and palaces and for the protection of
ancient monuments of which some 735 are in their care and are visited by some
12 million people annually. The Royal Commission on Historical Monuments
(for England), and similar bodies for Scotland and Wales, survey monuments
and specify those worthy of preservation. In Northern Ireland the Ministry
of Finance is responsible for the maintenance and protection of ancient monu¬
ments, some 80 of which are in state care.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
adjacent towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
special character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, ‘green belts’
(areas where it is intended that the land should be left permanently open and
free from new development and where townspeople can seek recreation) have
been established around all or part of certain urban areas and cover 1,891
square miles (4,898 sq. km.) in England and Wales. Over 80 per cent of
London’s green belt is agricultural land or woodland (much of which can be
used also for recreational purposes) and more than 6 per cent is used speci¬
fically for recreation (playing fields, golf and race courses and open spaces).
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use
at the coast. Since 1963 the authorities in England and Wales have made
special surveys of their areas, and their development plans include policies to
safeguard the coast’s natural attractions, to provide amenities for holiday¬
makers and for other developments, to create or improve amenities, and to
take into account coastal areas of scientific interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales was under¬
taken by the Countryside Commission in 1966-70. Its report, The Planning of
the Coastline (see Bibliography, p. 473), shows that although a quarter of the
coast was developed or committed for development, almost two-thirds were
covered by specific local planning authority policies restricting new develop¬
ment. Of the total, some 15 per cent was under the protective ownership of
local authorities, the National Trust, the Forestry Commission, national and
local nature reserves, and other bodies; over 40 per cent was covered by nation¬
ally defined areas—national parks and areas of outstanding natural beauty—
which imply some degree of protection; and nearly 5 per cent was held by
government departments for defence and other purposes. Special studies have
been made of coastal recreation and holidays and coastal nature conservation.
The National Trust (see p. 171) is engaged on a £2, million campaign,
Enterprise Neptune, to focus public attention on the dangers affecting the coast
and to protect some 280 miles (451 km.) of coastline of great beauty and
recreational value.
The protection of the coastline against erosion, for which the Department
of the Environment is centrally responsible, presents difficult engineering
problems and heavy costs for the maritime local authorities. All sizeable
coast protection schemes drawn up by the authorities under the Coast Pro¬
tection Act 1949 are investigated by government engineering staff. Sub¬
stantial grants from central funds (up to a maximum of 80 per cent) are made
to authorities with small resources. Protection against sea flooding where there
is no question of erosion is the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (see p. 276). To help to prevent the pollution of the coast-
176
Other
Measures to
Protect the
Environment
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
line by oil washed to shore by the sea, special regulations restrict the discharge
of oil into British territorial waters (see p. 292).
While specific measures have been adopted to ensure that the use of land in
towns and in the countryside is properly supervised, a growing concern for the
wider aspects of planning has meant that the restricted notion of protective
planning has evolved into a positive concept for the enhancement of the land
and of the enjoyment of the people who live and work on it.
In 1970 Britain became the first major country to establish a Department for
the Environment (see p. 51); all government departments in Great Britain
have a legal duty when exercising functions relating to land to keep in mind
the desirability of conserving the countryside’s natural beauty and amenity;
and major planning enquiry commissions (see p. 171) consider environmental
factors when discussing, for example, the siting of a new airport.
Many of the detailed aspects of planning for the environment are under¬
taken by local authorities. The local planning authorities have power to
preserve trees and woodlands in the interests of amenity by means of tree
preservation orders; when granting planning permission for development, a
local planning authority must impose conditions to secure the preservation or
planting of trees; and landowners are generally required to replace ‘preserved’
trees which die or are removed or destroyed. Outdoor display of advertise¬
ments is controlled by planning legislation; local planning authorities must
give their consent for most forms of outdoor advertising, and in rural and
other localities requiring special protection on grounds of amenity special
controls may be applied. In addition to the general town and country planning
controls over development, land may not generally be used as a caravan site
unless a site licence has been issued by the local authority. The Litter Act 1958
made it an offence to leave litter on land to which the public has free access;
under the Civic Amenities Act 1967 local authorities are empowered to
remove abandoned cars and other bulky rubbish; the Countryside Act 1968
allows the Secretary of State for the Environment to make grants to the
authorities for the removal of objects disfiguring the countryside; and the
Dangerous Litter Act 1971 improves provision for the abatement of dangerous
litter and empowers local authorities to promote litter prevention by means of
publicity.
Local authorities are responsible for reclaiming land so damaged by in¬
dustrial or other development that it is not capable of being used fully without
special treatment. Local planning authorities have powers for reclaiming land
in pursuit of the general well-being of their districts—for example, in the
course of providing open spaces and schools; they can acquire and develop
land and carry out restoration and improvement; and they can require an owner
of land which is damaging and offensive to the surrounding area to improve its
condition. Exchequer grants cover half the cost of local authority clearance
schemes, and higher grants are available for clearance in the less prosperous
areas and in the national parks and areas of outstanding natural beauty (see
p. 177). Planning controls to prevent the spread of dereliction require that,
when permission is granted for mineral working, conditions are attached en¬
suring various measures to minimise the disturbance caused by the work and
to secure whatever restoration is practicable when working ceases. The use of
land for tipping is also subject to conditions restricting height or requiring
treatment on completion. Specialist derelict land units within the Department
of the Environment, the Scottish Office and the Welsh Office provide central
information and advice and make a continuous assessment of the problem.
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
177
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks
Responsibility for clean air in towns and cities rests with local authorities,
who may declare ‘smoke control areas’ within which the emission of smoke
from chimneys constitutes an offence: nearly 3,500 smoke control orders
have been confirmed and 4-9 million dwellings and commercial premises are
subject to smoke control. Central government is responsible through the alkali
inspectorate for enforcing control of emissions to the air of noxious and offen¬
sive substances including smoke, grit and dust from certain industrial pro¬
cesses. The emission of smoke from motor vehicles is also controlled. The Clean
Air Council (set up in 1956) and a similar council for Scotland review the pro¬
gress made in abating air pollution in Great Britain. Partly as a result of air
pollution control, London no longer experiences dense (‘pea-souper’) fogs or
serious smogs and in central London winter sunshine has increased by 50 per
cent since 1956. Sheffield claims to be the cleanest industrial city in Europe.
Local authorities are also responsible for the enforcement of the Noise
Abatement Act i960 which requires them to inspect their areas for noise
nuisances and to take action (which can be enforced by the courts) to secure
abatement. More than 8,000 complaints about noise were received by local
authorities in 1969, and in over half of these cases the authorities considered
that nuisance existed and took appropriate action. The Advisory Council on
Noise is studying the working of the Act.
Other special measures have been introduced to help to combat water
pollution (see p. 233), to reduce the level of fumes from motor vehicles and to
ensure that the use of agricultural chemicals is properly supervised (see p. 278).
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution (see p. 321) gives
advice on matters concerning the pollution of the environment.
Under the Countryside Acts 1967 (for Scotland) and 1968 (for England and
Wales) Countryside Commissions (with an advisory committee for Wales)
encourage the provision and development of facilities for open-air recreation
in the countryside. These include the creation by local authorities (sometimes
in association with other bodies) of country parks within easy reach of towns;
the establishment of camping sites and picnic areas; and the increased use of
reservoirs, canals and other waterways for bathing, sailing and other activities.
By August 1971, 40 country parks and 50 picnic sites had been approved in
England and Wales by the Government. In Scotland a large number of local
authority schemes for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have
been approved for grant aid. By January 1971, the Countryside Commission
for Scotland had approved four country parks. The Commissions are also
responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to conserve and enhance
the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and may undertake research
projects and experimental schemes, working in consultation with local authori¬
ties and such bodies as the Nature Conservancy and the Sports Council (see
p. 446). Grants to local authorities are available from the Government for
certain approved schemes and the Commissions have powers to make grants
or loans to people carrying out similar projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) replaced and assumed
the functions of the National Parks Commission set up under the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 to select national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’ and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished: Northumberland, the Lake District, the Yorkshire Dales, the North
York Moors and the Peak District in northern England; Snowdonia, the
Forest Parks
Local
Footpaths and
Open Country
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pembrokeshire Coast and the Brecon Beacons in Wales; Exmoor and Dart¬
moor in south-west England. They cover a total area of 5,258 square miles
(13,618 sq. km.), or 9 per cent of the area of England and Wales. They have
various forms of administration, based on representation of the local planning
authorities of the areas concerned, as well as members appointed by the
Government. By August 1971, 27 areas of outstanding natural beauty had been
designated, covering some 4,464 square miles (11,562 sq. km.).
The land in the national parks and designated areas generally remains
privately owned, but agreements or orders to secure additional public access
may be made by local authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance
the landscape’s natural beauty by high standards of development control, and
by positive measures, for which government grants are available, such as tree
planting and preservation, and the removal of eyesores. In the national
parks, other measures for the benefit of the public include the provision of
car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All national
parks and some other designated areas have warden services. More than 1,414
miles (2,276 km.) of long-distance footpaths and bridleways had been
approved by August 1971. Large stretches of these paths are already public
rights of way; the 250 miles (402 km.) of the Pennine Way form Britain’s first
long-distance footpath and the South Downs Way, stretching for some 80
miles (129 km.) is the first long-distance bridleway. Further routes are being
established.
Under the Amenity Lands Act (Northern Ireland) 1965 the Ulster Country¬
side Committee advises on the establishment of national parks and the
designation of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Seven areas have been
designated. Four amenity areas, acquired by the Ministry of Development, are
being managed as country parks. Although there are no national parks as such
in Scotland, five large areas are subject to special planning control under
ministerial supervision. The areas are: Loch Lomond-Trossachs; Glen
Affric-Glen Cannich-Strath Farrar; Ben Nevis-Glen Coe-Black Mount; the
Cairngorms; and Loch Torridon—Loch Maree—Little Loch Broom. Over 98
per cent of the land in Scotland has been designated as countryside within the
jurisdiction of the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
The Forestry Commission (see p. 285) has formed, and opened to the public,
seven forest parks in some of the finest country in Great Britain: Argyll, Glen
Trool, Glen More and the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park in Scotland; the
Forest of Dean and the Wye valley woods on the borders of England and
Wales; Snowdonia in Wales; and the Border Forest Park on the borders of
England and Scotland. The total area of the parks approaches half a million
acres (202,340 hectares). Camping and other recreational facilities provided in
all the parks are used by several million holidaymakers each year. The historic
New Forest, in Hampshire, although not a forest park, is also open to the
public. In Northern Ireland, the Forestry Division of the Ministry of Agricul¬
ture has established five forest parks—Tollymore Park, Castlewellan, Gortin
Glen, Drum Manor and Gosford Castle—and there are also five forest scenic
drives; in some 40 forests recreational facilities have been provided.
Under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 county
councils in most areas of England and Wales have prepared maps showing all
public rights of way, which must be kept free of vehicles and obstructions and
must not be permanently disturbed. If a path is not shown on the map, a
private citizen can show that it is a public right of way if it has been used and
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
179
Nature
Conservation
regarded as such without interruption for at least 20 years. Public footpaths are
maintained by local highway authorities who must also provide signposts and
supervise the duty of landowners to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in
Great Britain can create paths and ways, close existing paths which are no
longer in public use, and divert paths to secure a more efficient use of the land
or simply a shorter route. Local planning authorities can convert minor roads
into footpaths or bridleways and provide recreational facilities.
The 1949 Act is also concerned with access to open country, which now
includes mountains, moors, heaths, downs, cliffs and foreshores, woodlands,
rivers and canals and their banks, but not farmland unless it is simply used for
grazing. There is no automatic right of public access to open country, but
local planning authorities can secure access by means of agreements with land-
owners; if agreements cannot be obtained, authorities may acquire land or
make orders for public access. These powers were extended in 1967 to cover
Scotland.
Common land totals an estimated 1^ million acres (607,030 hectares) in
England and Wales. (There is no common land in Scotland or Northern
Ireland.) This is usually privately owned land which must not be enclosed and
on or over which certain people have legal rights, for example, of access or of
pasture for their farm animals. Commons are protected by law and it is un¬
lawful to erect buildings or fences on them without the consent of the Depart¬
ment of the Environment or the Welsh Office. The Commons Registration Act
1965 provided for the registration of all commons and village greens, and by
the close of the registration period in 1970 over 16,000 areas had been regis¬
tered. Under the Countryside Act 1968 local authorities can provide facilities
for enjoyment on any common land to which the public has access.
The Nature Conservancy (on behalf of the Natural Environment Research
Council—see p. 332) is responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain.
The Conservancy has established 130 national nature reserves, covering
268,642 acres (108,718 hectares); in Northern Ireland 12 nature reserves have
been established by the Ministry of Development on the advice of the Nature
Reserves Committee. Local nature reserves in 26 areas, established by local
authorities in consultation with the Conservancy, are safeguarded against
development and play an important part in scientific education. In woodland
areas there are some 13 forest nature reserves, created by informal agreements
between the Nature Conservancy and landowners (including the Forestry
Commission) and managed by the owners for research and conservation.
There are also some 2,600 sites of special scientific interest in Great Britain,
designated because of their flora, fauna or geological or physiological features:
local planning authorities are informed of the importance of these areas by the
Conservancy, which they must consult about any development proposals
affecting them. In Northern Ireland 29 sites have been scheduled by the
Ministry of Development and are subject to special planning control.
Throughout Britain voluntary organisations co-operate in the conservation
of nature (and in many cases establish their own reserves or other specially
protected areas); these include: the National Trust, the Royal Society for
the Protection of Birds, the Society for the Promotion of Nature Reserves, the
County Naturalists Trusts and the Council for Nature (which consists of some
450 natural history and conservation societies).
8 HOUSING
Administration
There are some 19-2 million dwellings in Britain: over 16-9 million in England
and Wales, i*8 million in Scotland and 445,000 in Northern Ireland. Nation¬
ally the numbers of households and dwellings are about equal, but they are
unevenly distributed and local housing shortages persist in the more prosper¬
ous commercial and industrial centres, such as London and Birmingham.
The large majority of people in Great Britain—85 per cent in the 1966
sample census—live in houses or bungalows, mostly with gardens; the remain¬
der live in flats or maisonettes, normally in blocks of from two to 20 storeys.
High blocks of flats are built mainly in the central areas of large towns where
they replace old, congested housing and the land is expensive.
About a half of all dwellings in Britain are owned by their occupiers, some
30 per cent are rented from public housing authorities, and most of the
remainder are rented from private landlords (see diagram below). There are
variations, however, in the distribution of tenure between the different
countries of the United Kingdom—in Scotland more than half the dwellings
are rented from public authorities—and in different regions and areas of those
countries. Private rented accommodation is generally more common in the
central districts of large towns, while owner-occupation is more frequent in
their outer suburbs and in country areas.
New house construction in Britain is undertaken by both public and private
sectors. Of the 362,000 dwellings completed in i97°> rather more than half
were provided by public housing authorities, and the remainder by private
interests including voluntary housing associations and societies. Public housing
authorities provide dwellings mainly for renting, while private interests build
mainly for sale to owner-occupiers. The construction of private dwellings to
rent has dwindled to a very low level.
Over 7’5 million new dwellings have been built in Britain since 1945* anc^
more than one family in three now lives in a post-war dwelling (see diagram
below). There remain a large number of older dwellings, some of which have
been kept in good repair and modernised, while many others—particularly in
the centres of cities—are unsatisfactory by modern standards. A survey
carried out in 1967 established that out of a total stock of 15 ’7 million dwellings
in England and Wales, some i-8 million (12 per cent) were unfit, while a
further 4-5 million (29 per cent) lacked basic amenities or were in need of
repair. The demolition of slum dwellings and more advanced standards for
new house-building (particularly in the public sector) have, however, led to
significant improvements in the general quality of British housing. The average
size of houses has risen appreciably in the last 30 years and comparative Euro¬
pean statistics show that the degree of overcrowding in Britain (defined as more
than one and a half persons to a room) is lower than in most other countries.
Responsibility for formulating housing policy and supervising the housing
programme is borne by the Secretary of State for the Environment in England,
by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and by the Minister of
Development in Northern Ireland.
HOUSING
181
HOUSING STOCK
(Percentages of Totals)
BYTENURE-BRITAIN
Othertenures 5 0
BY DATE OF CONSTRUCTION-GREAT
BRITAIN
In Great Britain most of the public housing is provided by the 1,600 local
housing authorities, which are responsible for ensuring that the supply of
housing in their areas is adequate. These are: in England and Wales, the
councils of county boroughs, boroughs, urban and rural districts; in London,
the Greater London Council, the London borough councils and the Common
Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the town and county councils.
Other public housing authorities in Great Britain are the new town authorities
(see p.172) and the Scottish Special Housing Association (SSHA), which was
established in 1937 to supplement building by local authorities in Scotland
and builds mainly to support economic expansion in the development areas.
The central government departments specify certain standards for the
construction and equipment of new dwellings; these are enforced by the local
authorities. In the public sector, the government departments control the
numbers and costs of new dwellings through the exercise of loan approval for
local authority building schemes. Subsidies are made available to the authori¬
ties to assist them with housing costs, and guidance is given on design and
layout. The local housing authorities decide the details of expenditure
within the framework of controls, inducements, help and guidance provided by
the Government.
Besides providing public housing, local authorities are involved in many
other aspects of housing policy, including paying house improvement grants to
the private sector, and granting mortgages (see p. 183) to owner-occupiers.
Some carry out slum-clearance and redevelopment programmes. A growing
number are establishing housing advisory centres to provide the public with
information on local housing opportunities in both public and private sectors.
In Northern Ireland the housing responsibilities of local authorities are
being transferred to a new public body established in 1971—the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive (NIHE). The executive, which operates through
area boards and is assisted by an advisory council, will eventually have direct
responsibility for all public housing in Northern Ireland, including that owned
by the new town authorities and the Northern Ireland Housing Trust (a
public body responsible for about a quarter of the dwellings built annually).
During the period of transition, local authorities are continuing to provide
public housing as agents of the executive.
182
Policy
Research and
Development
Public Sector
Housing
Finance
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The main objectives of government housing policy are to secure a decent home
for every family at a price within its means, to offer families a fairer choice
between owning a home and renting one, and to ensure fairness between one
citizen and another in giving and receiving help towards housing costs. An
important part of this policy is to encourage, by subsidies, the provision of
adequate public sector housing at fair rents, in order to meet the needs of those
who, because of income or family circumstances, are unable to buy their own
homes.
Another major policy objective is to enable more people with moderate
means to become owner-occupiers, and this is encouraged by measures to
facilitate borrowing for house purchase (see p.183).
The Government is specially concerned to ensure that best use is made of
the existing housing stock. It offers financial assistance to local authorities and
(through them) to private owners to improve their houses (see p. 186).
In order to assist poorer tenants in paying rents, the Government is to
introduce a national scheme of rent rebates and allowances which will cover
tenants of all unfurnished accommodation in both public and private sectors.
Most local authorities already operate rebate schemes for their own tenants.
People without full-time work and with inadequate resources are assisted in
meeting housing costs by the Supplementary Benefits Commission of the
Department of Health and Social Security (see p. 132).
Research into building techniques and into new methods of house construc¬
tion, as well as into the needs of families, is carried out by the Research and
Development Groups of the Department of the Environment and the Scottish
Development Department, the Building Research Station, the architects
departments of major local authorities and the research groups in big con¬
structional firms. All government building research and development is co¬
ordinated by the Directorate-General of Research and Development within the
Department of the Environment. Advice on ways of increasing productivity in
housebuilding is given by the National Building Agency.
Public housing authorities in Britain own nearly 6 million houses and flats
and in 1970 completed about 188,000 new dwellings—rather more than half
the total house construction in the country. The number of houses owned
by each authority varies; some have less than 100, while, for example, the
Birmingham City Council has nearly 150,000. Authorities plan their own
building programmes within the framework of government policy.
Local authorities in Great Britain meet the capital costs of new house con¬
struction by raising loans on the open market or by borrowing from the Public
Works Loan Board (see p. 173). Current expenditure, including maintenance
costs and loan interest and repayments, is met from rents, supplemented by
subsidies from the Exchequer and sometimes (particularly in Scotland) from the
rates. Exchequer subsidies are designed to reduce to 4 per cent the interest
paid by all local authorities on loans raised to meet the approved capital cost
of dwellings. Plans to re-allocate subsidies in order to benefit those authorities
and tenants in greatest need have been outlined by the Government. #
Supplementary subsidies are paid for high building; to councils with in¬
sufficient resources to provide urgently needed houses; for houses required in
connection with a major transfer of industry; for expensive sites; for pre¬
cautions against subsidence; for building in certain materials; and for overspill.
Subsidies for the construction of public housing totalled some £120 million in
England and Wales in 1969-70, and over £30 in Scotland.
HOUSING
Tenants
Rents
Construction
and Design
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
183
In Northern Ireland, the NIHE receives grants towards its current expendi¬
ture through the Ministry of Development. Capital expenditure is financed by
loans raised on the open market or borrowed from the Government Loans
Fund.
A high proportion of local authority tenants have incomes below the national
average and they include many elderly people living on pensions.
In selecting tenants for new or vacant dwellings, local authorities are
required to give preference to large families and to those living in overcrowded
or unsatisfactory conditions. Otherwise they are free to allocate houses accord¬
ing to their own schemes. Authorities normally establish waiting lists and treat
applicants (outside priority categories) in order of application; some require
applicants to fulfil residence requirements within the area before they are
accepted on waiting lists.
Local authorities are responsible for deciding the rents of the houses which
they own. In many areas, particularly in Scotland, rents are low in relation to
the economic cost of providing the housing. The average weekly rent in a local
authority dwelling in 1970 was ^2-23 in England and Wales and ^1*42 in
Scotland. In order to free resources to assist those in greatest need, the
Government is proposing to require local authorities to base their rents on the
fair-rent principle (see p. 185) and to introduce a system of rent rebates to
assist poorer tenants. In 1970, 83 per cent of tenants in England and Wales
were covered by rebate schemes and some 92 per cent in Scotland.
Although a number of authorities employ direct labour to build houses, most
building is undertaken by private firms under contract. Some authorities work
in consortia to make the best use of industrialised systems in their house
building programmes.
Dwellings are constructed to meet the needs of different sizes of household.
More than a quarter are of the single bedroom type suitable for smaller house¬
holds including the elderly, but the majority are designed for families of from
four to six people and have three bedrooms, two living rooms and a kitchen,
bathroom and lavatory. The standard of new local authority housing has
improved considerably in recent years, particularly in the floor space provided
and heating systems installed. In England and Wales in 1970 almost 90 per
cent of new dwellings had central heating, and houses built for families of
four or five people had a superficial area of 960 square feet (89 square metres)
and cost an average of £3,384 to build.
In 1970 more than 174,000 private sector dwellings were completed, almost all
of which were intended for owner-occupation. The number of people owning
their own houses has more than doubled in the last 20 years, and the 9^- million
owner-occupied dwellings in Britain now account for almost half of the total
housing stock. Although most owner-occupied houses were built for that
purpose, in recent years many private rented dwellings have been sold for
owner-occupation. Local and new town authorities are encouraged by the
Government to offer houses for sale to sitting tenants (at up to 20 per cent
discount on market prices) in order to increase the resources available for
housing those in need. The Government also encourages voluntary housing
societies which provide co-ownership housing (a form of tenure similar to
owner-occupation).
Loans to enable people to buy their houses by a system of instalment purchase
are available from various sources, including building societies, insurance
184
Financial
Assistance
Building
Standards
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities.
Building societies (see also p. 358) are the most important of these agencies.
They do not build houses themselves but provide long-term loans on the
security of property bought for owner-occupation. They usually advance 80
to 90 per cent of the value of the houses. Loans are repayable over periods of
up to 30 or even 35 years by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and
interest. The average price of houses mortgaged to building societies in 1970
was £4,975; houses in London and the south-east of England cost a third more
on average than those in the north-east, where property is cheapest in Britain.
The societies usually work on the principle that a person’s monthly payments
on housing (including rates) should not exceed one week’s income. In 1970
they advanced nearly £2,000 million.
Local authorities are expected to concentrate their mortgage resources on
helping people with special housing needs who are unable to obtain loans
elsewhere. Their mortgage lending in 1970 amounted to £154 million.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on their mortgage interest payments,
and in 1970-71 this amounted to £302 million. Tax relief benefits most those
with larger taxable incomes, and in 1968 the Government introduced an
alternative form of assistance—the option mortgage scheme—designed to help
those with smaller incomes. Under the scheme, borrowers receive, through the
lending agency, a subsidy which reduces the rate of mortgage interest which
they pay by up to 3 per cent. Subsidy payments under the option mortgage
scheme amounted in 197^71 to £13 million. Associated with the scheme is the
option mortgage guarantee scheme, whereby mortgage loans of up to 100 per
cent of the valuation of a house (not exceeding £7,5°°) maY be made t0 those
participating.
In Northern Ireland, the Government pays lump sum subsidies to private
people who build dwellings for letting or owner-occupation.
For building in the private sector the National House Builders’ Registration
Council (NHBRC) sets standards and enforces them by inspection and
certification. Over 95 per cent of all new private houses carry a ten-year
guarantee against any major structural defect. A two-year guarantee is also
given against faulty workmanship. Most building societies do not grant
mortgages on a new house unless it is covered by a NHBRC certificate.
Privately During the last 20 years there has been a steady decline in the number of
Rented rented dwellings available from private landlords—from nearly 60 per cent in
Housing 1947 to about 15 per cent in 1970. Major factors in this decline have been the
increased demand for owner-occupation, the greater availability of public
rented housing, and the operation of rent restriction. Most privately rented
dwellings are let unfurnished, but an increasing proportion—about a sixth in
England and Wales—are now let furnished. While most landlords in Britain
are private individuals with limited holdings, a considerable proportion of all
privately rented housing is provided by the small number of larger property
owners, including property companies. .
Privately rented dwellings form a high proportion of Britain s older housing
and many have been demolished under slum clearance programmes. Of the
3 million dwellings remaining, three-quarters are 50 years old or more.
Rent Restrictions Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction under legislation
which provides separate machinery for dealing with furnished and unfurnished
accommodation. Tenants have a wide degree of security of tenure and eviction
Housing
Associations
and Societies
HOUSING 185
from any dwelling (without a court order) and harassment of occupiers are
criminal offences with severe penalties.
Rent restriction was originally introduced in 1915 as a temporary wartime
measure and successive Acts have varied its scope. In 1957, the Government
removed restrictions in Great Britain on all dwellings with a 1956 rateable
value of more than £30 (£40 in London and Scotland). Below these levels,
rent control continued to operate, and in England and Wales there remain
some 1 -3 million unfurnished dwellings whose rents are still controlled by
reference to 1956 rateable values, and in Scotland about 100,000 whose rents
are tied to historic rent levels. Controlled rents are very low by comparison
with other rents.
The Rent Act 1965 brought back into protection all unfurnished dwellings
with 1965 rateable values of less than ^200 (£400 in London). Tenancies pro¬
tected under the 1965 Act, which are not still ‘controlled’ under the earlier
legislation, are termed ‘regulated tenancies’. Under the Act a ‘fair rent’ may be
fixed for a regulated tenancy by independent rent officers at the request of the
landlord, the tenant, or both. Factors taken into account by rent officers in
determining rents include the age, character and locality of the house. To
eliminate any artificial value derived from scarcity, the assumption is made that
for similar dwellings to let in the area demand does not exceed supply. If the
landlord or tenant objects to the decision of the rent officer, the case is referred
to a rent assessment committee. Since 1965 some 200,000 applications to fix
fair rents have been made in Great Britain. Once determined, the rent is not
normally reviewed for at least three years.
Landlords of ‘controlled’ dwellings whose houses are of a satisfactory
standard, or who improve them to such a standard, are now able to convert
controlled tenancies into regulated ones, and the Government intends to
hasten transfer of the remaining tenancies into the rent regulation system.
For furnished dwellings under the 1965 rateable value limits, tenants or
landlords may refer tenancy agreements to a local rent tribunal for determina¬
tion of a reasonable rent. Tribunals may grant tenants security of tenure for up
to six months with a possibility of further periods if they so decide.
Most rent legislation for England and Wales has been consolidated in the
Rent Act 1968 and for Scotland in the Rent (Scotland) Act 1971.
Measures of control and de-control also apply in Northern Ireland. In 1951
and 1956 legislation was passed which permitted prescribed increases in the
rents of certain controlled houses. The 1956 Act also released from control
houses with a net annual value of over £50 (with certain safeguards) and houses
with a net annual value of over ^26 of which the landlord was in actual
possession when the Act came into force, or of which he subsequently obtained
possession.
Since the early 1960s the Government has done much to encourage the growth
of non-profit-making housing associations and societies.
Housing associations have long existed as voluntary bodies set up for the
purpose of providing low-rent housing for people in need. The Housing Act
1957 made money available to local authorities for the granting of up to 100
per cent loans to such associations. Further encouragement to housing associa¬
tions to purchase and convert old houses into new dwellings was offered by the
Housing Act 1969 which provided for a 20-year subsidy equivalent to three-
eighths of all charges (capital and interest) on loans raised for this purpose.
Housing societies build dwellings either for co-ownership by a group of
occupants or to let at unsubsidised rents. Following a pilot scheme introduced
i86
Improvement
of Houses
Slum Clearance
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by the Housing Act 1961, the Housing Corporation was set up under the
Housing Act 1964 to stimulate the formation of such societies. Half of the
money needed for approved housing society schemes is advanced by building
societies, with the Housing Corporation providing the remainder. In 1969-70
housing societies completed over 6,300 dwellings a record number.
Private owners in Great Britain can obtain grants from local authorities to
improve their houses by providing amenities such as baths and for carrying
out other works to modernise their properties. Grants are also available for
converting large houses or other buildings into flats. The grant normally
amounts to half the approved cost of the works up to a grant limit of £1,000
(£1,200 in Scotland). If a house of three or more storeys is converted into
flats the upper limit of grant is £1,200 for each flat provided. A Government
contribution amounting to three-quarters of each grant is paid to the local
authority. Aid on a similar basis is given by the Government to local authorities
and housing associations, but this includes the cost of buying properties for
conversion and improvement as well as that of carrying out works. Under the
Housing Act 1971 increased grants have been made available for a tvo-year
period to private owners and local authorities within the development and
intermediate areas. _ u 1
Since improvement grants were first introduced in i949> more than i4
million dwellings in England and Wales and some 120,000 in Scotland have
been improved with their aid. In 1970 grants were approved for some 180,000
dwellings—a 50 per cent increase over the previous year. Grants for house
improvement are also provided in Northern Ireland.
In order to tackle systematically the improvement of whole areas of older
housing, local authorities in Great Britain have been given powers to declare
‘general improvement areas’. The aim in these areas is to encourage house¬
holders to improve their dwellings with the aid of grants, while the local
authority uses its comprehensive powers to improve the environment. A
government contribution is available of half the local authority s expenditure
on environmental improvements on costs of up to £100 a house.
Over 2^ million people have been rehoused since the mid-1950s as a result of
slum clearance programmes. Some housing authorities have eliminated all their
slums and others expect to achieve this within a very few years, but in certain
of the older industrial towns, including Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool and
Manchester, clearance may take longer. Local authorities with major slum and
overcrowding problems are being given priority by the Government which
intends to provide special assistance towards the cost of slum clearance. Their
house-building programmes have increased sharply in recent years and in
many cases the designation of new towns (see p. 172) nearby has further eased
their housing problems.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists,, or
can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance. The Housing
Act 1969 changed the basis of compensation paid to the displaced owner-
occupiers of unfit houses. Those subject to compulsory purchase orders now
in effect receive compensation to the full market value, while those subject to
clearance orders, who retain their land, receive a payment amounting to the
difference (if any) between the site value and the market value.
9 THE CHURCHES
The Church of
England
Every person living in Britain has the right of religious freedom and may mani¬
fest his faith in teaching, worship and observance without interference from
the community or the State. Churches and religious societies of all kinds may
own property, conduct schools, and propagate their beliefs in speech and in
writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the holding of public
office, except in the case of the Lord Chancellor, where there is some doubt
whether existing statutory provisions would permit this office to be held by a
Roman Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the
national hospitals and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of
England or the Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and
are paid a salary by the State for this part of their work. Clergy of other de¬
nominations may also be appointed as required. Voluntary schools (see p. 150)
provided by churches of any religious denomination may be wholly or partly
maintained from public funds.
There is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number
of adherents to the various churches in Britain, since no enquiries are made
about religious beliefs in population censuses or other official returns, and each
church adopts its own criteria in counting its members. The membership
figures given in this chapter are therefore approximate.
The Church of England’s status as the established church of the land derives
from the Reformation in the sixteenth century; its form of worship is embodied
in the Book of Common Prayer, first compiled in 1549. The Church’s rela¬
tionship with the State1 is one of mutual obligation—privileges accorded to the
Church balanced by certain duties which it must fulfil. The Sovereign must
always be a member of the Church, and promises on his or her accession to up¬
hold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are appointed by
the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an oath of
allegiance to the Crown; the Church must obtain Parliament’s consent to
change its forms of worship (although it has temporary powers until 1980 to
use alternative forms without the need for parliamentary approval); and the
two archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham
and Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan
bishops) have permanent seats in the House of Lords (see p. 32). Clergy of the
Church of England (together with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church
of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are legally disqualified from sitting
in the House of Commons (see p. 34).
1 A church commission set up to consider the relationship between the Church of
England and the State has recommended in a report, Church and State (see Biblio¬
graphy p. 474), that, while the establishment of the Church should be maintained, the
Church should be given final authority over its forms of worship and doctrine; altera¬
tions should be made in the present procedure for the appointment of bishops; ministers
of all churches should be permitted to stand for election to the House of Commons and,
if elected, to take their seats; and leading members of other churches should be invited
to sit alongside Church of England bishops in the House of Lords.
i88
Church
Organisation
and Government
Church Finance
The Anglican
Communion
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Church is organised into 43 dioceses, grouped into two provinces:
Canterbury, comprising 29 dioceses, and York, 14 dioceses. The dioceses are
subdivided into ecclesiastical parishes, of which there are some 14,300. The
Archbishop of Canterbury is styled ‘Primate of All England’, and the Arch¬
bishop of York is ‘Primate of England’. Of the population born and resident in
the two provinces, about three-fifths (27-6 million) are baptised into the Church
and almost one-fifth (9-9 million) are confirmed members.
The central governing body of the Church, the General Synod, is invested
with both spiritual authority and legislative and administrative powers; and
bishops, clergy and lay members are equally involved in decisions affecting the
whole range of the Church’s concern. Deanery and diocesan synods give
advice on church affairs and involve the parishes in church life. Certain impor¬
tant issues must be referred for the approval of the dioceses before they are
finally decided by the General Synod. Lay members of the Church are
associated with church government in the parishes through parochial church
councils whose members are appointed by baptised members of the Church
over the age of 16 who are on the church electoral roll of their local parish:
the estimated number on the rolls is some 2-5 million.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with
various aspects of the Church’s work—such as education, recruitment and
training for the ministry, and church work at home and overseas. It is re¬
sponsible for the Church of England schools (more than one in nine of the 8
million pupils in the maintained schools of England and Wales in 1970 at¬
tended the Church’s maintained schools); about 40 direct grant and 45 inde¬
pendent Church of England schools; some 25 church colleges of education in
England and two in Wales, providing places for more than 18,500 students;
theological colleges; and establishments for the training of women in pastoral
work.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central General Synod Fund which the Central Board of
Finance administers for the maintenance of central services, including capital
expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for training can¬
didates for ordination. (Although the State pays for or contributes towards
services provided by the Church—see p. 187—it makes no direct financial contri¬
bution to church expenses as such.) The Church’s endowment income (from
its assets amounting to over £416 million in land and investments) is mainly
administered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for
the payment of clergy stipends and the provision of finance for pensions. The
total net income (^24-5 million in 1969-70) has greatly increased in recent
years—in broad terms this has meant a rise in the stipends of the poorer
clergy and the introduction of schemes for better parsonage houses, for church
buildings in new areas of population, and for better pensions for clergymen and
their widows.
The Anglican Communion comprises 21 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and two regional councils overseas with a total membership of over
47 million. In the British Isles, in addition to the established Church of
England, there are other, unestablished, Anglican churches: the Church in
Wales, the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years (most recently in 1968) the Lambeth Conference meets for
THE CHURCHES
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
189
unofficial consultation between all Anglican bishops; presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but enjoys great
moral prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other
communions, and attitudes to political and social questions are widely studied.
The Anglican Consultative Council—an assembly of laymen and clergy as well
as bishops which meets every two years—is designed to provide consultations
within the Anglican Communion and to serve as an instrument of common
action.
The Church of Scotland, established by law, has a presbyterian form of
government. It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church which
is established and yet is free’. It derives its status from the Treaty of Union
1707 and the Church of Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete
freedom in all spiritual matters. The Church appoints its own officers and its
decisions on questions of doctrine and discipline are not subject to parliamen¬
tary discussion or modification.
All ministers of the Church of Scotland are of equal status, each of some
2,000 churches being governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the
minister and the elected elders of the church; above the Kirk Session is the
Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General
Assembly, consisting of elected ministers and elders, which meets annually
under the presidency of an elected moderator who serves for one year. The
Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Com¬
missioner.
The training for the ministry (to which women may be admitted) has given
the Church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the
standard of education in Scotland. The membership of the Church of Scot¬
land is estimated at about 1 -2 million.
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe the ‘nonconformist’
churches of England (which dissent from certain practices of the established
church and, generally speaking, have distinctive convictions regarding organisa¬
tion and worship) and protestant churches in other parts of Britain (apart from
the established Church of Scotland). Certain other churches and religious
associations have links with the main Free Churches.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with some 651,000
adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the evan¬
gelical revival by John Wesley, and is nowadays based on a 1932 union of most
of the separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not
join the union include the Independent Methodists (over 6,500 members) and
the Wesleyan Reform Union (with some 4,800 members).
The Congregationalists with an adult membership of about 170,000 are the
oldest community of dissenters in Britain; their churches were formed into the
Congregational Union in 1831 (reconstituted in 1966 as the Congregational
Church in England and Wales).
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of
which belong to the Baptist Union (formed in 1813), within which some 2,200
churches have a total membership of about 207,000; in addition there are about
62,300 members of churches in the separate Baptist Unions of Scotland and
Ireland and other Baptist churches.
Among the other Free Churches are the unestablished Presbyterian Churches
which include the Presbyterian Church in Ireland (with some 143,000 regular
communicants in Northern Ireland); the Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Method-
[QO BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ist) Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist movement led in 1735
by Howell Harris and now numbers some 110,000; the Presbyterian Church of
England which has about 61,000 members; the Free Church of Scotland; the
United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland;
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian
Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Other protestant denominations in Britain include: the Unitarian and Free
Christian Churches; the Churches of Christ (known also in the United States
of America as Disciples of Christ), which have been an organised community
in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the British Province of the
Moravian Church, which is an international missionary church; and the Free
Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in
1844 as a direct result of the Oxford Movement. The Society of Friends
(Quakers)—with nearly 21,000 members in Britain—came into being in the
middle of the seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox and
works for peace and the relief of suffering in many parts of the world. The
Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 74 other
countries. Within Britain it has some 100,000 active members operating from
more than 1,000 centres of worship and a total community strength of about
350,000. Believing in a very practical expression of Christian concern, the
Salvation Army also has 191 centres providing daily help for some 10,000
people in need.
Also there are a number of other religious organisations with churches or
assemblies in Britain, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints (the Mormon Church) with about 85,000 members, and the Christian
Scientists with some 320 branch churches and societies.
The Roman The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became tem-
Catholic Church porarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish
hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in
1878. There are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each
under an archbishop, 20 episcopal dioceses, and nearly 2,400 parishes. In
Northern Ireland, there are six dioceses, some of which have territory partly in
the Irish Republic. It is estimated that there are some six million adherents
(including children) to the Roman Catholic faith in the whole of Britain.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
its children in their own faith, and requires that the children of marriages
between its own members and members of any other denomination should be
brought up as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children
in Britain are staffed by members of the religious orders for men and women,
who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and the con¬
duct of homes for old people.
Jewry Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were
expelled at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The
Anglo-Jewish community in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some 410,000
people, including both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal) and
Ashkenazi (from Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the lar¬
gest groups of Jews in Europe. The community is divided into two schools of
thought—the Orthodox, to which about 90 per cent of practising Jews belong;
and the Reform, which originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901 by the
Liberal Jewish movement. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group
(Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the Sephardi
Other Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
THE CHURCHES IQ1
group. Synagogues in Britain number about 300. There has been an increase
in the number of Jewish denominational schools, which are now attended by
about one in five Jewish children.
Immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth and foreign countries
have established centres for worship, especially in London, for their own com¬
munities. Among the Christian communities represented are Orthodox,
Lutheran and Reformed Churches of various European countries and the
Armenian Church.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews,
are the Muslims and the Buddhists. The Muslims are the more widely repre¬
sented, their number in Britain being estimated at several hundred thousand.
There are mosques or Islamic centres in London, Manchester, Liverpool,
Bradford, Cardiff and in many of the other larger cities in Britain.
Buddhism has several thousand adherents in Britain. The Buddhist Society
has its headquarters in London, with a Shrine Room and a Buddhist library
claimed to be one of the finest in Europe; there are also Shrine Rooms in the
three Viharas in London, one of which is run by Thai monks and supported
by the Thai Government. In Scotland there is a Shrine Room at the Tibetan
Centre.
The British Council of Churches, composed of representatives or consultant
observers from all the main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates
common action among the churches and seeks to further Christian unity.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches in England and
Wales and aims to promote unity and joint action among the Free Churches
and to provide a channel for communication with central and local govern¬
ment authorities.
The Anglican-Roman Catholic Permanent Joint Commission explores points
of possible unity between the two Churches. Proposals for union between the
Anglican and Methodist Churches, which have gained a large measure of
support, have not yet been finally accepted. A union between the Congrega¬
tional Church in England and Wales and the Presbyterian Church of England
has also been proposed.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches in the British Isles also partici¬
pate in the World Council of Churches, which links together nearly 240
churches in over 70 countries for co-operation and the study of common prob¬
lems. The Council of Christians and Jews works for better understanding
among members of the two religions and deals with problems in the social field.
The New English Bible, a translation into modern English completed in
1970, is the result of co-operation among many of the Christian churches in
Britain.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
lO THE NATIONAL
ECONOMY
Earlier
Development
of the Economy
BACKGROUND
Britain ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world, with
about 0-18 per cent of the world’s land area. In population, approaching
2 per cent of the world’s inhabitants, it ranks tenth. In density of population
it is fourth: of the major countries, only Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands
are more crowded; and there are nine times as many people to the square
mile in the United Kingdom as in the United States. In terms of national
income per head it ranks appreciably below the United States and also below
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland, and slightly
below France and the Federal Republic of Germany. In world trade, it
ranks third, accounting for over 11 per cent of the total. It takes over 20 per
cent of the world’s exports of primary products, and provides over 12 per
cent of the world’s exports of manufactured goods.
Britain, from its own soil, provides only about half of the food it needs,
an(l—apart from coal, low-grade iron ore and natural gas—it has been able to
exploit few natural resources; thus it is one of the world’s largest importers of
such products as wheat, meat, butter, fodder grains, fruit, tea, tobacco, wool,
and timber. In return, it is one of the world s largest exporters of aircraft,
motor vehicles, electrical equipment, chemicals, textiles and most types of
machinery. No other major country has such a small proportion of the working
population engaged in agriculture (about 3 per cent).
Britain is also a major financial centre and British banks, insurance under¬
writers and brokers and other financial institutions provide financial services
throughout the world. The City of London provides perhaps the most
comprehensive and advanced service for a capital market in the world.
The total external assets owned by the British Government and British
residents are estimated at about £20,000 million.
During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world
manufacturer, merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and supported a
rapidly increasing population at a rising standard of living. In the period from
1870 to 1890 British industry had a clear lead over that of other countries.
Between 1890 and 1914, industrial competition from Europe and North
America grew, but its effects on Britain’s export industries, particularly cotton
textiles and coal, were offset by the rise in world trade, by the demand for
British textiles from India and other eastern countries and by the earnings of
British shipping and financial services and the returns on Britain s large over¬
seas investments.
After the first world war Britain’s older industries met increasing competi¬
tion, for example, coal and iron and steel from other European countries and
textiles from some eastern countries where labour was cheaper. At the same
time Britain failed at first to gain a compensating share of world trade in the
newer types of engineering products. Some countries sought deliberately to
protect young and even established industries by tariffs and (later) quotas and
exchange restrictions. The result was heavy unemployment in Britain’s older
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
193
Effects of
the Second
World War
The Post-war
Period
industries, the national rate averaging 14 per cent in the years 1921-29, and
rising above this in the years following the collapse of the American stock
market in 1929, reaching a peak of 22 per cent in 1932, when the associated
slump in world trade was at its worst. In some districts relying mainly on the
most heavily affected industries the rate was much higher. Income from
invisible earnings (for example on overseas investments, shipping and
insurance) and relatively cheap imports, particularly food, however, cushioned
the effects of the fall in the volume of exports.
After 1932 levels of production and employment improved, stimulated by
an increase in home investment which was aided by the policy of cheap
money, by some revival in world trade and, after 1935, by the armament
programme. The decade saw a strong expansion in the vehicles, electrical,
chemicals and aircraft industries, while the construction of 3 million houses
brought about a large growth in the building and ancillary industries. By
1937 average real income per head was about 14 per cent higher than in
1929.
In spite of generous aid from the United States and Canada, the second
world war ran down British domestic capital by about £3,000 million,
through shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of industrial maintenance
and replacements. Some £1,000 million worth of overseas investments were
sold, nearly half in North America, and new external debts of £3,000 million
were accumulated. By 1944 exports had fallen to less than one-third of their
1938 volume.
After the second world war rationing and other war-time controls were
relaxed gradually as civil production expanded and trade recovered. The
abolition of quantitative restrictions on imports, other than from the dollar
area, was largely completed by 1955. Exchange controls on transactions
between the sterling area and the rest of the world were also progressively
lifted, and in 1958 convertibility of sterling on current account for all non¬
residents was introduced.
The period since 1945 has been one of rising production and living
standards and a relatively low level of unemployment. Economic growth, how¬
ever, has been rather slower and more intermittent than in most other western
Europe countries and there have been certain persistent economic problems,
especially repeated crises in the balance of payments particularly during
periods of relatively rapid economic growth. In spite of the contribution from
invisibles, there were in a number of years substantial deficits on current
account transactions with the rest of the world and a low level of reserves
meant there was little room for manoeuvre.
Successive governments sought to deal with these difficulties in three main
ways: by monetary and fiscal measures aimed at restraining the growth of
home demand; by advice and exhortation—and for a time the use of certain
limited powers—to try to restrain rises in incomes and prices; and by measures
having a direct effect on the balance of payments (see, for example, p. 197).
In the years leading up to 1967 a gradual and serious deterioration in the
balance of payments led to a loss of overseas confidence in sterling. To meet
the situation, the Government devalued sterling in November 1967 from
$2.80 to $2.40=£1. It then proceeded to take a number of fiscal, monetary
and administrative measures to restrain increases in expenditure, prices and
incomes. A major reorientation of the economy was in fact achieved. In the
three years following devaluation there was a massive switch of resources into
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the balance of payments. The volume of exports of goods and services
increased about four times as fast as the gross domestic product. In con¬
sequence the balance of payments improved rapidly during 1969 and in 1970
the surplus on current transactions was more than £600 million.
Economic growth, after a brief spurt in 1968, declined and the level of
unemployment rose. Wages and prices continued to increase in spite of
government exhortations and some statutory control, a high bank rate,
restraints on lending and a higher level of total taxation. Towards the end of
1969 the rise in incomes and in 1970 the rise in prices began to accelerate.
Current The combination of sluggish economic growth and under-employment of
Problems resources with a rapid rise in prices and incomes and a highly favourable
and Policies balance of payments was a new situation; and the Conservative government
which took office in June 1970 was pledged to tackle it with new policies aimed
at stimulating economic growth by a reduction both in taxation and in the
share of resources taken up by public expenditure. Since the autumn of 1970
tax reductions amounting to some £1,100 million in 1971-72 and £1,400
million in 1972-73 have been introduced.
At the same time new policies towards industry and agriculture have been
introduced. The changes include a move towards a different system of agri¬
cultural support through levies on imports rather than subsidies to farmers
(see p. 272); new priorities for regional assistance (see p. 213); the use of tax
allowances rather than outright grants as investment incentives (see p. 343);
and the abolition of some of the bodies through which government advice,
assistance and intervention have been channelled.
Following a major reorganisation the number of public bodies with broad
economic responsibilities on a national scale is now relatively small. The
government departments concerned are primarily five: the Treasury with its
responsibility for public and national finance; the Department of Trade and
Industry which is responsible for government policy on all aspects of industry
and trade; the Department of Employment; the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food; and the Department of the Environment with its specific
responsibilities for transport and building and its general responsibility for all
the relevant factors of environment and amenity.
An important advisory body on general economic policy is the National
Economic Development Council, which brings together representatives of
government, management and trade unions under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister. It has an independent but publicly financed secretariat and
has established a number of economic development committees dealing with
different industries and services and different aspects of industry. Other
bodies responsible for advice on specific aspects of policy include the National
Joint Advisory Council (on labour matters, see p. 406), the Monopolies Com¬
mission (on action to prevent the abuse of monopoly power, see p. 202) and
the Office of Manpower Economics (provides the secretariat for bodies advising
on certain wages and salaries in the public sector and undertakes research on
pay questions generally). .
Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests with the
Cabinet (see p. 45) which alone can take into account all the political, social
and economic considerations. There has for some time been a system of inter¬
departmental committees designed to help in co-ordinating departmental
policies in each of the main areas of government concern and to ensure that
final decisions command the agreement of the Cabinet as a whole. In 1970 a
Central Policy Review Staff, a small multi-disciplinary body, was established
Incomes and
Prices
OUTPUT AND
EMPLOYMENT
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 195
within the Cabinet Office itself to work under the supervision of the Prime
Minister on the formulation and review of overall government strategy.
The main factor pushing up prices in 1970 was the excessive rate of increase
in pay settlements, which had begun in the autumn of 1969. By the early
months of 1971 there were signs that the rate of increase had been checked.
During 1970 export prices of manufactures rose faster than those of Britain’s
main competitors, but the devaluation advantage was broadly maintained to
the end of the year.
The present Government declared itself opposed to the statutory control of
prices and incomes tried under the previous Government. It believed that, in
the longer term, reliance must be placed on the firmness of employers (in¬
cluding public authorities) in resisting unreasonable wage claims and in the
good sense of trade union leaders as they came to realise that such wage claims
were pushing up prices and contributing to unemployment among their
members. It expected that these factors together with its new industrial
relations legislation (see p. 407), would in time lead to a much greater price
stability. In the meantime monetary and fiscal policies were designed to
secure a rate of growth of output in line with production potential, so avoiding
the addition of demand pressures to the existing cost inflations.
THE FRAMEWORK OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of Britain’s national
economy in recent years.
In 1970 Britain’s gross national product at factor cost (the measure of the
value of total goods and services produced at home and net income from
abroad) is estimated to have totalled £42,819 million. In real terms, that is,
after allowing for price changes, the increase over the 10 years since i960 was
about 29 per cent.
About a third of this output can be attributed to manufacturing industry
and this proportion has remained more or less constant for the past 12 years.
The relatively rapidly expanding sectors are gas, electricity and water (from
2-7 per cent in 1959 to 3-1 per cent in 1970) and services (financial, health and
educational, professional and personal) from 17-5 per cent to 22-6 per cent.
Agriculture, forestry and fishing account for a small and very slowly declining
share (about 3 per cent), and mining for a small and rapidly declining share
(under 2 per cent compared with over 3 per cent in 1959). The relative con¬
tributions of the distribution sector and the transport and communications
sector have changed little in the past 12 years and are now about 11 per cent
and 8-3 per cent respectively.
Within the large manufacturing sector, some industries—especially those
producing new, technically advanced and rapidly developing products—have
been expanding (for example, office machinery, computers, instrumentation,
aircraft and aircraft engines, and glass), while others, including traditional
industries such as cotton textiles, have been in decline. In general the speeding
up of technical progress in industry has in Britain as in other industrially
advanced countries brought with it a number of human problems. There are
problems of labour supply and unemployment. In London, the south-east
and the midlands, where expansion and change have been most rapid, there
have been shortages of certain types of professional, technical and craft skills
and the general unemployment rate (the ratio of those unemployed and seeking
BRITAIN 19721 AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
employment to those in or seeking employment) has stayed at a very low
level compared with the rest of the country. These low unemployment rates
in the greatest concentrations of population helped to keep the average un¬
employment rate for Britain under 2 per cent in most years from 1948 to 1967.
Since 1967 the rate has been over 2 per cent and was over 3 per cent in the
early months of 1971. On the other hand, in areas which were formerly
largely dependent on a single traditional industry, such as coalmining or
cotton textiles, or on certain types of heavy engineering now less in demand,
there have been serious pockets of long-term unemployment, some of which
have tended to persist in spite of special measures to encourage additional
employment in the area. The general unemployment rates in Northern
Ireland, Scotland, Wales and the northern and certain other parts of England
have thus been considerably above the national average and it is in these less
fortunate areas that the recent increases in unemployment have been most
marked.
Use of
Resources
TABLE 10
Distribution of
Total Supplies
of Goods and
Services
Investment
Table 10 shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services in
i960, 1965 and 1970 at 1963 market prices, divided between personal con¬
sumption, public expenditure on goods and services, investment and exports.
£ million (at 1963 prices’1)
Consumers’ expenditure . .
Public authorities’ consumption . .
Gross domestic capital formation6
Export of goods and services
Total Final Expenditure
1960
18,445
4,775
5,046
5,327
33,593
1965
21,243
5,425
6,336
6,346
39,350
1970
23,396
5,883
7,215
8,575
45,069
“ Figures expressed in constant prices (in this case 1963 market prices) show change
in the actual volume of consumption over a period by eliminating the effects of changes
in the purchasing power of money. The table shows that public authority consumption
in i9?o"in real terms, accounted for a slightly smaller share of total final expenditure
^Mncluding value of physical increase in stocks and work in progress.
Main trends shown in Table 10 are a fall in the proportion of total available
resources devoted to personal consumption, and to public authorities current
expenditure and a significant rise since 1965 in the proportion devoted toexports.
As a proportion of gross national product at factor cost fixed capital formation is
now over 20 per cent as compared with 15 per cent in 1951. The total value of
fixed assets in Britain, valued at constant replacement cost, is estimated to have
more than doubled between 1948 and 1970 when their current replacement
value, net of depreciation, was estimated at £117$00 million, of which approxi¬
mately two-thirds was accounted for by buildings and one-third by vehicles,
plant, and machinery. , r , ,
Of total investment in 1970, 9° Per cent was accounted for by domestic
fixed capital formation, 4-6 per cent by physical increase of stocks and work in
progress and 5-8 per cent by investment overseas. Of net domestic fixed capital
formation, 33 per cent was in plant and machinery, 42-5 per cent in buildings
(including land and existing buildings but excluding dwellings) and works,
19*5 per cent in dwellings and 5 per cent in vehicles. By sector, about 52 per
cent was in the private sector and about 48 per cent in the public sector,
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
197
Public
Authorities
including central Government, local government and nationalised industries.
By industry group, about 21*4 per cent was in manufacturing industry, and
about 13-4 per cent in the public services. Within the manufacturing sector, the
largest investments were in the chemical and allied industries, the engineering
industries and the food, drink and tobacco. The most marked trends in
recent years have been the increases in investment in the chemicals and textile
industries (reflecting respectively the expansion of petrochemicals and the
growth of synthetics), the gas supply industry (mainly provisions for natural
gas).
The rising levels of investment have been financed by saving in all the
main sectors of the economy, though, despite increases in local rates and in
grants from the central Government, the current surpluses of local authorities
have been sufficient to provide for only a quarter of their capital needs so
that the rest has had to be met by short- and long-term borrowing from the
Government or elsewhere. The central Government has increased its current
surplus sufficiently to finance a considerable proportion of its own capital
expenditure, make capital grants to industry, lend large sums (mainly to public
corporations) and, since 1969, repay a substantial amount of debt. It has in¬
creased its current surplus (before providing for depreciation) from £496
million in 1964 to £3,738 million in 1970. The public corporations, largely
because of their big investment programmes, have, despite payment of
subsidies (particularly to the transport corporations), been heavily dependent
on borrowing from the central Government. The companies’ sector, though a
large gross saver, is also a large investor and though in most years it has
covered its investment from its savings, this was not so in 1969 or 1970. In the
latter year over a quarter of its investment within Britain was financed by
borrowing or the sale of financial assets. The personal sector has shown a large
if fluctuating excess of saving over acquisition of fixed assets (mainly dwellings).
Increasingly the main forms of financial assets acquired by the personal sector
are insurance policies, interests in pension funds, building society shares and
bank deposits, while the most important and rapidly increasing financial
liabilities of this sector are loans on house mortgages from building societies.
Current expenditure on goods and services by the central Government
(including the national insurance funds) and the local authorities rose by
50 per cent at current prices over the period 1965 to 1970 in spite of numerous
measures taken to restrain its growth and in the latter year amounted to about
21 per cent of the gross national product. The main cause of this increase was
the continuing growth of the social services, especially education. Defence has
recently accounted for a declining share of public expenditure on goods and
services—27 per cent in 1970 compared with 34 per cent in 1965 and a post¬
war peak of over 50 per cent in 1953*
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sectors, by way of
national insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
subsidies. The Government also makes grants to local authorities to finance
about 50 per cent of their current expenditure, but this is a transfer between
public authorities and does not affect the position of the public authorities as
a whole in relation to the rest of the country.
In the period following the 1967 devaluation the Government initiated a
programme of substantial increases in taxation and reductions in public
expenditure in order to curtail home demand and permit a switch of resources
into exports. By 1970 the total of Government taxes on income and expendi-
19S
TABLE 11
Saving and
Investment
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ture (excluding taxes on capital and local authority rates) amounted to
£14,065 million or over 37 per cent of the gross national product compared
with about £9,000 million or nearly 29 per cent in 1965. Largely because of
this, the current receipts of the public sector as a whole, including such receipts
as council house rents and the trading surpluses of nationalised industries,
have grown more strongly than the public sector’s total current spending.
The public sector thus became able in 1969 to finance all its capital investment
from its own resources and apply £473 million to the reduction of debt; in
£ million
1965
Personal sector:
Saving® . .
Capital transfers (net receipts) 
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation6 . .
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Companies:
Saving® . .
Capital transfers (net receipts) 
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation6 ..
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Public corporations:
Saving® . .
Capital transfers (net receipts)®
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Central Government:
Saving® . .
Capital transfers (net receipts)®
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Local authorities:
Saving® . .
Capital transfers (net receipts) . .
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Net acquisition of financial assets
Overseas sector:
Net acquisition of assets'*
2,076
-134
-915
-80
1967
947
3,283
15
-2,624
-614
60
2,203
-165
-1,009
-59
970
1970
2,890
-358
-1,089
-205
1,238
2,872
228
-2,633
-227
3,038
422
-3,793
-1,126
240
661
11
-1,293
-5
-626
883
52
-298
-23
614
293
56
-1,185
683
16
-1,659
-82
-1,042
1,042
-170
-392
-27
-1,459
752
66
-1,609
-56
-847
3,738
-262
-576
-43
453
-836
386
91
1,568
-1,091
2,857
533
132
-1,819
-1,154
52
298
-579
“ Before providing for depreciation, stock appreciation and additions to reserves.
6 The figures for the personal sector exclude, and those for companies include,
expenditure by life assurance and superannuation funds.
c Including financial transactions on writing-off debt m 1965 and 1970.
d Equals, apart from the change in sign, net investment abroad.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
199
Personal
Income and
Consumer
Expenditure
Sources of
Income
Consumer
Expenditure
1970 it had a net borrowing requirement of only fn million. Changes in
the 1971 budget were expected to reduce the public sector’s current surplus
from £5,101 million to £4,568 million in the 1971-72 financial year, increasing
the expected borrowing requirement from £666 million to £1,209 million.
Personal incomes before tax at current prices rose rapidly and fairly steadily
for 22 years from £9,955 million in 1948 to £42,833 million in 1970—a
compound rate of nearly 7 per cent a year. The increase in consumer expen¬
diture per head of population at constant prices has, however, been very much
lower—about 2 per cent per annum. The difference is accounted for mainly
by rising prices and to a lesser extent by the growth of population, a higher
incidence of direct taxation and increased personal savings.
Income from employment in 1970 totalled £30,487 million and accounted
for 71 per cent of total personal income (against 60 per cent in 1938). The
three other main sources of personal income were self employment (8 per
cent), income from property (11 per cent), and grants from public authorities
(10 per cent). The general pattern of income distribution is thus dominated
by the pattern for income from employment. The effects of property income,
which tends to add to the income of the already affluent, are relatively slight
and to some extent counterbalanced by the effect of grants from public
authorities to those in need.
British direct taxation falls heavily on the rich and the combined effect of
taxation and transfer payments and benefits in kind is a redistribution of
income on more egalitarian lines. According to studies by the Central Statis¬
tical Office, the effect in 1969 was to raise the average income of the poorest
fifth of families from 35 to 53 per cent of the average for all families. There are
a number of theoretical and practical limitations to these studies, but the
broad result is too marked to be in dispute.
PERSONAL INCOME AND EXPENDITURE, 1970
(In £ million at current prices)
National insurance benefits
The rise in the volume of consumer expenditure per head has been accom¬
panied, in Britain as in other advanced industrial countries, by changes in
the pattern of that expenditure. The proportion devoted to food has been
falling slightly each year and in 1970 accounted for about 20-5 per cent of
consumer expenditure at current prices compared with 26 per cent in 1958.
On the other hand the proportions spent on housing and fuel and light
together rose from 14 per cent to 17-5 per cent.
11 INDUSTRY
The Structure
of Industry
Manufacturing
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised, and today thirteen people work in mining, manufacturing and
building for every one engaged in agriculture. It is the world s third largest
exporter of manufactured goods, and the range of its industrial manufactures
reflects its position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal,
corporate, co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different
forms, and all are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary from
the many small workshops to vast organisations such as the National Coal
Board, a public corporation with about 530,000 employees ; Imperial Chemical
Industries Ltd., a limited liability company which, with its subsidiaries,
employs 197,000 persons in the United Kingdom; and the Co-operative
Wholesale Society Ltd., with about 35,000 employees.
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Exceptions include
fissile materials and radioactive isotopes made by two statutory companies,
iron, steel and a small range of chemicals from the plants of the British Steel
Corporation, locomotives and rolling-stock built in the workshops of British
Railways, and military equipment and supplies made in establishments of the
defence services. Staff of the Stationery Office do some printing and book¬
binding. Certain factories giving employment to the severely disabled are
operated by Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company financed on
the Vote of the Department of Employment, which appoints the directors
(see p. 394). The Government holds about 49 per cent of the equity of a major
oil company, British Petroleum Limited, and has a controlling interest in a
few other companies. _
The most recent analysis of the size distribution of establishments and
enterprises in manufacturing industry, and of the degree of concentration, is
contained in the Report of the Census of Production 1963. This shows that some
cy per cent (52,000) of the 90,000 or so establishments which submitted returns
had fewer than 25 employees each, and accounted for only 6 per cent of total
employment; some 30,000 establishments, one-third of the total, had between
25-500 employees, and accounted for over two-fifths of the total labour force;
2 400 establishments, each with between 500 and 2,000 employees, were
responsible for 28 per cent of employment; while 19 per cent was m the hands
of the 430 leading groups each with over 2,000 employees. A high proportion
of the biggest establishments were in the heavy industries; the average size
of establishments in industries making consumer goods was smaller than in
manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results obtained in
earlier years suggested a slow but significant trend towards increased average
size of establishments. ... r 1 • c
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of manu¬
facturing enterprises, as a single enterprise may own several establishments,
not all of them necessarily engaged in the same or similar activities.
INDUSTRY
201
Building and
Civil Engineering
Mining and
Quarrying
Monopolies and
Restrictive
Practices
An enterprise, as defined in the 1963 census, normally consists of either a
single firm or a parent company together with its subsidiaries. Just over 60 per
cent of all employment in British manufacturing industries in 1963 was
accounted for by about 975 large private enterprises employing 1,000 or more
people, the largest too or so accounting roughly for a third. A further indica¬
tion of company size is the value of capital employed (net assets). For a few of
the very largest, including the Imperial Chemical Industries group, British
Petroleum and Shell Transport and Trading, the figure exceeds ^1,500
million; about 65 companies registered in Britain have over £100 million net
assets.
With intensified competition in the economy and in many branches of
industry the growing dependence of profitable operation on concentration and
an increasing scale of production, the trend towards mergers and regroupings
gathered momentum throughout the 1960s. Larger units of control have been
established in almost all the leading industries and in some a small number of
big companies and their subsidiaries are responsible for most of total produc¬
tion. Examples are, oil refining, non-ferrous metal smelting, motor vehicles
and aircraft, electrical engineering, electronics, machine tools, brewing,
textiles, basic chemicals, tobacco and magazine publishing. Shares in these
companies are usually distributed among a great number of holders and it is
rare for a few large holders to have a controlling interest. For example, five of
the largest public companies each have more than 100,000 shareholders.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on
pp. 235-60.
In building and civil engineering, large-scale work is usually carried out by
private contractors, although the Department of the Environment (see p. 51)
is the largest single employer of building labour while some 45 per cent of the
industry’s output is for public authorities. Building firms may be divided into
those undertaking general building and civil engineering work and those con¬
cerned with highly specialised work, many of which operate outside as well as
inside the building industry. Building is an industry of small firms; almost
three-quarters of the firms employ fewer than 20 employees. For a fuller
account of the building and civil engineering industries, see p. 233.
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining.
The coalmining industry of Great Britain (see p. 216) is operated as a single
co-ordinated enterprise under National Coal Board direction (see p. 217).
Nearly all other mining and quarrying (sand, gravel, chalk, limestone, salt,
tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is undertaken by private enterprises, usually
owned and operated by limited liability companies; about 59,000 workers are
employed, excluding coalmining.
Legislation exists for scrutinising and, if desirable, for the investigation by an
independent administrative body of monopoly situations and for the judicial
examination of restrictive trading agreements.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Acts 1956 and 1968 govern the registration
and judicial examination of restrictive agreements. They require the entry in
a public register of the particulars of a wide range of restrictive agreements
(including those relating to common prices, approved lists of dealers and the
limitation of production) which affect the supply or processing of goods for
the United Kingdom market. Proposed agreements of national importance
which promote efficiency or provide for new productive capacity, can be
exempted from this requirement for a specified period by the Secretary of
202
Role of Public
Enterprise
BRITAIN AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
State for Trade and Industry (see p. 209). The Registrar of Restrictive Trading
Agreements is responsible for keeping the register and for bringing the agree¬
ments before the Restrictive Practices Court set up under the 1956 Act. The
Court, which includes laymen but is presided over by one of Her Majesty’s
judges, is, in effect, responsible for deciding whether an agreement is in the
public interest. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy the Court that
special circumstances set out in the legislation exist, and that the restriction is
not unreasonable, having regard to the balance between the benefit it confers
and any public detriment likely to result from its operation, that restriction
must be found contrary to the public interest. Agreements are void in respect
of restrictions so found. The Court can make orders preventing the parties
from operating their agreement, or from making new arrangements having the
same effect. Agreements relating exclusively to exports are not subject to this
procedure but have to be notified to the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry.
Under the 1956 Act collective enforcement of resale price maintenance was
prohibited, but individual suppliers remained free to enforce minimum resale
prices in the courts. The Resale Prices Act 1964 made minimum resale price
maintenance unlawful, except in respect of classes of registered goods for
which temporary exemption has been sought under the provisions of the Act.
Where resale price maintenance is prohibited, it is also unlawful to notify to
dealers prices stated or calculated to be understood as the minimum price
which may be charged on the resale of goods in the United Kingdom, or to
seek to maintain such prices by withholding supplies. Suppliers may continue
to practise resale price maintenance on registered goods, pending a decision
by the Restrictive Practices Court as to whether a case for exemption has
been made out against the criteria in the Act. Periodically, the Registrar of
Restrictive Trading Agreements issues lists of classes of goods in respect of
which the Court has refused to make an Order exempting them from the
terms of the Act. Only two classes of goods (books and maps and medicaments)
have so far gained exemption under an order from the court; nearly 500 classes
have been refused exemption. .
Monopolies and kindred arrangements (other than those within the scope
of the Restrictive Practices Court) may, in circumstances indicated m the
Monopolies and Mergers Act 1948 and 1965, be referred by the Secretary ol
State for Trade and Industry for investigation and report. The Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI) in co-operation with any production department
(see p. 209) concerned, take appropriate action on reports but no Order can be
made without parliamentary approval. The 1965 Act strengthened and
extended the legislation on monopolies. It reorganised and enlarged the
Monopolies Commission; provided for the investigation, at the reference o
the DTI, of services as well as goods and of proposed or recently completed
mergers; made special provision for newspaper mergers; and improved and
extended the Government’s powers—subject to parliamentary control—for
taking action on the basis of the Monopolies Commission reports including
new powers to prohibit mergers and break up undesirable monopolies and
mergers.
Direct State participation in productive and commercial activities is effected
mainly through special statutory bodies set up to deal with a particular
activity. Such bodies, though not part of a government department, are under
a considerable but varying degree of public control (see below). The most
important of these statutory bodies are the public corporations which operate
INDUSTRY
203
major industries and services in the public interest. Altogether about 12 per
cent of the labour force works for these bodies. Their managing boards and
staffs are chosen for their experience and competence in a particular field; they
are not civil servants, and, although accountable to Parliament for their actions
in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring depart¬
ments who are responsible for the management of the corporations. Certain of
the corporations are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer grants to help
them carry out duties with which they have been charged.
These corporations are described in their relevant sections.
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working
of the boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies
from industry to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them.
First, the minister appoints (and may dismiss) the chairman and members of
each board, and, secondly, he has power to give general directions as to how
the industry should be run, but does not interfere in day-to-day management.
It is usually also laid down that the board shall give to the minister any in¬
formation, statistics and financial accounts which he may require. In practice,
as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and major policy decisions
are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom occasion for him to
issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual
statutory requirement is that the board is required to conduct its business so
that receipts at least balance outgoings taking one year with another. The
responsible minister is usually empowered (subject to Treasury approval) to
say what shall be done with any surplus revenues which may accrue. As
regards finance of capital expenditure, the present system is that such finance
as cannot be met from internal sources is mainly provided, in the form of
interest-earning loans, by the minister from the Exchequer, bank advances
being used only for normal requirements of short-term capital.
It is usual for the minister responsible for each nationalised industry to be
required by statute to take steps to see that the interests of the industry’s
customers are protected. This is generally done by the establishment of
representative consumers’ councils to consider complaints and suggestions
made to them, and to advise the board or the minister on the changes they
think desirable.
Financial targets have been agreed by the Government with the different
industries (or are under discussion) ranging from 12*4 per cent gross return
on capital employed to ‘breaking even’ after interest and depreciation have
been allowed for. In addition the industries are expected to apply a test
discount rate for new investment of 10 per cent.
Government policy towards the nationalised industries is subject to the
approval of Parliament. Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are
afforded by debates, including debates on their annual reports and accounts,
and by answers to parliamentary questions, which, in principle, are admissible
only if concerned with policy rather than details of administration. A House of
Commons Select Committee on the Nationalised Industries, which examines
the reports and accounts of the nationalised industries and reports to Parlia¬
ment, has been in operation since 1957.
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings
have increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different
purposes. Some of the more important of these are classified as: (1) the pro¬
vision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison with the
204
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Government, and representation of their members’ point of view; (2) the
regulation of trading practices, sometimes including the regulation of prices
(see p. 202); (3) negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of
work. Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with varying
completeness, most of British industry, but there are wide sectors of industry
where there are no collective agreements to regulate trading practices. Em¬
ployers’ organisations which deal with labour matters usually consist of firms
engaged in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. Trade
associations mainly concerned with representations to the Government, pro¬
vision of common services or the regulation of trading practices are built up
round a product or an allied group of products. In an industrial sector con¬
cerned wholly with an allied group of products, a single association may
undertake all the required functions.
There are about 75 national federations and probably altogether about
1,500 employers’ organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or
branches of the national federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages
and conditions of work. The number of manufacturers associations concerned
with providing common services is not known precisely but is thought to total
some 1,300, varying greatly in importance, structure and activities.
The central body representing British industry nationally is the Confedera¬
tion of British Industry (CBI). It is recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representatives
of private employers as a whole. For its members it acts as an advisory and
consultative body providing them with information and statistics, ascertaining
their collective views and representing them nationally to the Government
and the public and also internationally, for example in the Council of European
Industrial Federations. CBI representatives sit on a number of government
advisory committees, on other statutory bodies and on voluntary bodies con¬
cerned with matters affecting industry.
The CBI membership consists of some 13,000 companies and about 220
trade associations and employers’ federations. Nationalised industries have
joined as industrial associates. The CBI has a regional organisation in t e
United Kingdom and is widely represented abroad.
In matters of common concern the CBI often acts jointly with the chambers
of commerce. These are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist
to promote the interests of local industry and commerce. The Association of
British Chambers of Commerce, founded in i860, is the central organisation
to which 91 local chambers of commerce (together with 17 British Chambers of
Commerce operating abroad) are affiliated. In Scotland there is an additiona
central organisation, the Scottish Chamber of Commerce, and in Northern
Ireland, the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry to which
local chambers are affiliated.
Location
Greater London
and the South-east
Region
The following is a summary of the geographical distribution of British industry
today, grouped by the areas covered by the regional economic planning
machinery.
London, lying at the head of ocean navigation on the Thames estuary is
Britain’s capital and main communication centre, probably still the world s
most important financial centre, and one of the world’s four largest cities
(with Tokyo, New York and Mexico City) and three largest ports (with New
York and Rotterdam). It is the main centre in Britain of printing, cinema film
production and the manufacture of clothing, food and drink, furniture, materia s
INDUSTRY
South-west
England
East Anglia
West Midlands
205
for the arts, precision instruments and many other specialised products. Small
firms predominate in many of these industries and the average size of manu¬
facturing firms (particularly in the central area) is well below the national
average. London is also important, especially in its outer ring, for light
engineering, chemicals and consumer goods and has some heavy engineering
plants and a number of leading research establishments.
Towards the periphery of Greater London (population 7,379,014) and in
the new urban development outside it, industry, particularly the electronics
and a variety of consumer goods industries, has expanded greatly; some of the
largest aircraft plants are in these areas, for example at Weybridge and Hatfield,
as well as factories, at Dagenham, Luton and Dunstable, of two of the four
main motor vehicle manufacturers. There are other major motor vehicle
manufacturing plants at Cowley, Oxford (109,000), some 50 miles north-west
of London. Along the lower Thames and Medway estuaries there are large oil
refineries as well as some smaller shipyards, engineering works and major
concentrations of the paper and pulp and cement industries.
A great part of the Channel coast eastwards from Poole (population 107,000)
and Bournemouth (153,000) consists of built-up areas, which from Brighton
(166,000) eastwards are partly dormitories for people working in London.
Holiday resorts fringe the coast. Portsmouth (197,000) is a naval port with
some shipbuilding and general manufactures. Southampton (215,000) is
Britain’s largest port for ocean-going liners; its industries include ship repair¬
ing, oil refining, cable-making, electronics and synthetic rubber. Dover,
Folkestone and Newhaven are packet ports.
Devon and Cornwall have a considerable tourist trade. Bristol (425,000) is a
leading port and commercial centre with aircraft, aero-engines, tobacco, food
processing, paper, printing and other industries and important non-ferrous
metals and basic chemicals plants at Avonmouth. Gloucester (90,000), origin¬
ally an inland port and commercial town, Cheltenham (70,000), originally a
resort town, and the area between and adjacent to them produce a variety of
manufactures, including machinery, instruments and accessories, and cloth.
Swindon (91,000), besides railway workshops, has important engineering
works. Bath (85,000), originally a resort town and centre of an agricultural
district, has become noted for engineering and other manufacturing.
Besides being one of the most productive agricultural regions, the eastern
counties possess some sizeable towns. Cambridge (99,000) is a leading centre
of research-based industry; Ipswich (123,000) and Peterborough (70,000) are
noted for diesel engines, agricultural machinery and engineering generally;
and Norwich (122,000) for footwear and food manufacture. Food canning and
freezing, based mainly on locally grown produce, have developed rapidly.
The fishing ports of Great Yarmouth (50,000) and Lowestoft (52,000) have
fish processing plants, and have also become important bases for companies
engaged in natural gas exploitation in the North Sea.
The West Midlands conurbation, which stretches from Birmingham (1,013,000)
to Wolverhampton (269,000) and includes parts of Staffordshire, Worcester¬
shire and Warwickshire, has an unusually wide variety of industry, including
the manufacture of metals, electrical and engineering products of all kinds and
also jewellery, rubber products, chemicals and domestic metalware. The
largest concentrations of motor vehicle manufacture (including components
and accessories) in Britain are in Birmingham and Coventry (335,000).
The smaller conurbation of North Staffordshire, centred on Stoke-on-Trent
206
East Midlands
North-west
England
Yorkshire and
Elumberside
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(265,000), is devoted chiefly to the manufacture of pottery and china and to
coalmining, although other industries are growing in importance, while
Stafford (55,000) has heavy electrical and other engineering works.
Other industrial centres are Rugby (59,000), electrical engineering,
Worcester (73,000), machinery; Burton upon Trent (50,000), brewing and
rubber; and Kidderminster (47,000), carpets.
The industrial cities and towns of the East Midlands include Leicester
(284,000), noted for hosiery and knitwear, boots and shoes and machinery for
making these products; Derby (219,000) for general engineering, aero-engines
and man-made fibres; Nottingham (303,000) for hosiery, cycles and a variety
of other engineering products, lace, pharmaceutical products and tobacco;
Northampton (127,000), footwear and engineering; Chesterfield (69,000),
engineering. Corby (48,000), a new town in Northamptonshire, has a large
integrated steel works. Part of Britain’s richest and most highly mechanised
coalfield lies under the north-east of the area. Some of the towns on the coal¬
field, such as Mansfield (58,000), have important manufacturing industries,
particularly textiles.
Manchester (541,000) is the commercial hub of the cotton and man-made
fibre textiles industries, a very important financial and commercial centre and
a major port. It is also one of the chief centres for electrical and heavy engineer¬
ing and the production of machine tools, petro-chemicals, dyestuffs, and
pharmaceutical goods, while it has a wide range of other manufactures. In
the traditional cotton-manufacturing towns man-made fibres are also pro¬
cessed alone or blended with cotton; the largest of these are Bolton (154,000),
Oldham (106,000), Rochdale (91,000), Stockport (140,000), Burnley (76,000),
Blackburn (102,000), Preston (97,000) and Bury (68,000). In the majority of
these towns engineering industries, notably the manufacture of printing, paper
making, textile and electrical machinery and heavy commercial vehicles
(especially in the Chorley-Leyland area), have been expanding while the
cotton industry has been declining. The Lancashire coalfield also lies in the
Manchester-Wigan area.
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of overseas
trade, links Manchester and Merseyside. It passes through Warrington
(68 000) with its metal industries (such as wire-drawing), Widnes (57,000) and
Runcorn (36,000) with their chemicals, and Ellesmere Port (62,000) with its
oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey estuary. St. Helens
(104,000), to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufacture. Liverpool
(607*000) is the second port of Britain, a great commercial and insurance
centre and, after London, the greatest centre for processing imported food¬
stuffs and raw materials, noted especially for flour milling, soap manufacture,
sugar refining and rubber products. Among its older industries is ship repair¬
ing; shipbuilding is a major industry across the river at Birkenhead (138,000).
Many new industries, including electrical engineering, manufacture of heavy
industrial equipment and, more recently, of motor vehicles, have been
established around Liverpool. Salt, extracted in Cheshire, is used mainly by
chemical works on Merseyside.
Barrow (64,000) in the north-west of Lancashire, is well known for ship¬
building and marine engineering. Blackpool (151,000) on the coast is Britain s
most popular holiday resort.
About three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s worsted and woollen industries
are found in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Bradford (294,000) is the com-
INDUSTRY
207
Northern England
Wales
mercial centre of the wool trade and important for worsted; Wakefield
(60,000) produces both worsted and woollens; Morley (44,000) and Leeds
(495,000) have specialised in cheaper cloths, and Batley (42,000), Dewsbury
(51,000) and Spenborough (41,000) in heavy cloth, but their production is
becoming more diversified. Huddersfield (131,000) has a reputation for fine
woollens and worsteds and Halifax (91,000) for carpets. In most of the larger
centres of the wool industry a variety of engineering products are manu¬
factured. Leeds, the commercial capital of the area, has a large ready-made
clothing industry and important engineering plants. Farther south is the heavy
engineering centre of Sheffield (520,000), famous for its high quality steels,
cutlery and tools. The area’s extensive coalfields provide nearly a quarter of
Britain’s coal; Doncaster (83,000), also with tractor and nylon manufacturing,
and Barnsley (75,000) are the largest towns on the coalfield.
York (104,000) is noted for chocolates and confectionery manufacture and
has important railway workshops, and Hull (285,000), one of the world’s
largest fishing ports and with many manufacturing industries, including
engineering, vegetable oil processing, paints and sawmilling, is the most
important industrial town in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
On the south (Lincolnshire) side of the Humber lie Scunthorpe (71,000),
an important and expanding steel-making centre, and the major fishing port of
Grimsby (96,000) which has a food processing industry and also growing
chemicals and textiles industries close by at Immingham.
The greater part of this region (Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Durham and the North Riding of Yorkshire) is an area of mountains, lakes and
moors and is relatively thinly populated. Most of its population is concentrated
in the coastal strip from the coalfields north of the Tyne to the Tees. Within
this area the main centres are Tyneside, including Newcastle upon Tyne
(222,000), Gateshead (94,000), Tynemouth (69,000), South Shields (101,000),
Wallsend (46,000) and Jarrow (29,000); and Teesside (395,000) and Hartlepool
(97,000). Other large towns are Sunderland (217,000), Darlington (86,000) and
in the west, Carlisle (71,000).
The whole region is more dependent than other parts of England on
traditional heavy industries, notably coalmining, iron and steel manufacture,
shipbuilding and repairing and chemicals (the complex of chemical plants on
both banks of the Tees is probably the most extensive in Europe), which
together employ nearly a third of the male workers. This proportion has been
falling steadily as the result of the region’s efforts, with government help, to
attract new types of enterprise. It is one of the most important areas for the
manufacture of electrical plant, and the many other industries include mining
machinery, rolling mill plant, earth-moving equipment, machine tools, ropes,
paint, glass, clothing and scientific instruments. An aluminium smelter is
under construction on the Northumberland coast. Atomic energy is important
in Cumberland, with two nuclear power stations and other installations.
Nearly two-thirds of the population of Wales and Monmouthshire live in the
two counties of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. In this area are the coal
mines which, though long worked and operating at increasing depths, still
produce nearly all Britain’s anthracite and much of its steam and other
specialised coals, and employ more workers than any branch of manufacturing
industry. Rhondda (89,000) and Merthyr Tydfil (55,000) are the largest
centres in the coalmining area. The steel industry, with some of the most
modern plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain’s output of tin plate and
much of its sheet steel. In the past 35 years many new industries have been
2o8
Scotland
Northern Ireland
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
established, often on government industrial estates; they include plastics,
synthetic fibres, clothing, electronics, motor vehicle components and light
engineering. j-rr/ o \
The main urban centres are also the three major ports—Cardiff (278,000),
Newport (112,000) and Swansea (173,000). Milford Haven (14,000), a magni¬
ficent deep-water harbour recently developed, has two major oil refineries.
In North Wales a number of light industries, notably man-made fibres, are
located in the seaside resorts and some other towns, particularly Wrexham
(39,000), and there is a large steelworks in Flintshire.
About three-quarters of Scotland’s population (5-2 million) is concentrated in
the central Lowlands between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth. The
principal cities in this area are Glasgow (897,000) and Edinburgh (453,000).
Clydeside, which includes Glasgow, is a major shipbuilding and marine
engineering centre; it also has a great variety of general engineering enter¬
prises and other industries. The steel industry, sited mainly in north Lanark¬
shire, produces a wide range of products. The widely dispersed electronics
equipment industry is represented by a growing number of firms in such
centres as Glasgow, north Lanarkshire, Dundee and central Fife, as well as in
Edinburgh, where this and other modern industries are expanding alongside
the long-established engineering, printing and brewing industries. Motor car
manufacture has been established in Renfrewshire and in West Lothian there
has been a major expansion of commercial vehicle building.
Outside the central Lowland belt there is considerable industrial concentra¬
tion in and around Dundee (182,000) and Aberdeen (182,000) and a number
of towns outside these areas have attracted light industries in recent years.
Dundee’s traditional manufacture, jute, has been supplemented by office
machinery, clocks and watches, refrigerators and electronic products. In
north-east Scotland is the largest concentration of whisky distilleries, while
the paper and metal industries are also important.
Most of northern Scotland is mountainous and much of southern Scotland
is hilly and rugged. These regions are sparsely populated, but the Scottish
Highlands possess significant resources of hydro-electric power (see p. 225).
There are high-quality tweed and knitwear industries both in the valley
towns of the Borders and in the Highlands and Islands. Small engineering and
electronics industries have recently been established in towns in the Borders
and the south-west. Small-scale manufacturing has also been introduced in the
Highlands, and larger enterprises include the experimental atomic reactor
establishment at Dounreay and the aluminium smelter recently commissioned
at Invergordon. (see p. 238).
Although the area of Northern Ireland is relatively small and lacking in
minerals, there is substantial and growing industrialisation, particularly in and
around Belfast, the capital city (359>000)- Britain’s largest single shipyard
incorporating the world’s biggest shipbuilding berth is m Be fast; other long-
established activities include the manufacture of textile machinery and other
engineering products; ropes, twine, tobacco and clothing. Northern Lelan
has also long been an important centre for textiles—it is particularly well
known for linen. The textile industry is now extensively diversified; Northern
Ireland is one of the most important areas in Europe for man-made fibre pro¬
duction and provides about one-fifth of Britain’s output. There has also been
extensive development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronic
instruments, telephone switchgear, toys, shoes, carpets and synthetic rubber.
INDUSTRY
Relations
between the
Government
and Industry
Statistical
Services
Production and
Productivity
Production Trends
209
The Government can influence industrial activity in a number of ways—
through fiscal and monetary policy, through the level of public expenditure,
through the placing of government contracts, through the policies of publicly
owned enterprises, by physical controls, by inducements, by exhortation and
by the provision of services, information and advice. Apart from labour
legislation (see Chapter 17) and certain export and import controls over a
small range of products (see Chapter 16), there are few physical controls over
industry—the main ones are the use of the legislation concerning monopolies
and restrictive practices already described (see p. 201) and the operation of
powers to control new industrial and office building and changes in land use.
There is close association between industry and the Government through
such channels as the National Economic Development Council, the main forum
for consultation between the Government, management and the trade unions,
and Economic Development Committees (EDCs) which cover particular sectors
of industry.
A major reorganisation of the machinery of central government was
announced in October 1970, involving important changes in relation to
industrial and commercial policy. A new Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI) was set up, combining the functions of the Board of Trade and the
Ministry of Technology (other than aerospace). The DTI is thus the first
single body with responsibility for all policies affecting production and trade
(both internal and export), and for the government’s relations with individual
industries. Following a review of the machinery for aerospace policy and defence
procurement, it was announced in May 1971 that the former, together with
civil aerospace research, would be transferred to the DTI, while the latter
would be handled by a new procurement executive at the Ministry of Defence.
The new organisation will be fully operational by April 1972.
Policies on labour matters, including industrial relations, industrial training
and manpower in general are the concern of the Department of Employment.
Other departments involved with industrial issues are the Treasury (fiscal and
monetary policy and medium- and long-term economic questions); and the
Department of Education and Science, which is responsible for the promotion
of education and for civil science, operating primarily through the research
councils; and the Department of the Environment (relations with the con¬
struction industry and some regional matters).
There are separate departments of the Northern Ireland Government for
matters within the competence of the Northern Ireland Parliament. The
Ministry of Commerce deals with industry and industrial development.
The Central Statistical Office (CSO), which is attached to the Cabinet Office,
is the central body for government statistics. Although departments them¬
selves compile statistics relating to their responsibilities and may publish them
in their own standard publications, the comprehensive statistical publications
are prepared by the CSO, which acts as co-ordinator. The Business Statistical
Office, which is responsible to the CSO for policy but is administratively part
of the DTI, will eventually take over the responsibility for compiling a wide
range of statistics relating to industry and commerce.
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction,
and gas, electricity and water) was in the first half of 1971 fractionally less
than a year previously, about one-third higher than in i960 and about double
the pre-war level. The course of production and employment from 1963 to
1970 is shown in Table 12.
210
TABLE 12
Production and
Employment in
Industry, 1963-70
(1963 = 100)
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Among manufacturing industries output rose fastest between 1963 and 1970
in the chemical and allied industries (58 per cent), in the engineering and a lied
industries (28 per cent), and in coal and petroleum products (51 per cent); m
the gas, electricity and water group there was an advance of 38 per cent and in
construction of 19 per cent.
Year
Industrial Production
All Industries
Manufacturing
Industries
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
100
108
112
113
114
120
123
124
100
109
112
114
114
121
126
127
Employment in
Industry
100
102
103
103
100
98
98
97
The size of the labour force has fallen slowly in the last five years and the
increases in production have been due mainly to a variety of factors influencing
productivity, including advances in products, machinery, processes an
methods of work; the rate of fixed capital formation; more intensive competi¬
tion and sales promotion; and improved management.
Although gross fixed capital formation at home has, as a whole, been well
maintained since 1966, the proportion devoted to manufacturing has tende
to fall. The total in 1970 amounted to 20 per cent of the gross domestic product
and was estimated (at current prices) to be more than double the 1959 level.
Part of this rising investment is associated with the introduction of new
techniques and equipment and in particular of machines and instruments
which lessen the demand for human skill and supervision though they may
require more skill from fewer people. This process of automation is giving rise
to far-reaching changes in the pattern of industry and m the internal organisa¬
tion and labour requirements of business enterprises and has already been
responsible for consequential increases in production and efficiency which, m
the long run, are likely to be very large. Much investment, however, sti 1 con¬
sists of replacements, additions and improvements of a more traditional kind.
INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION 1970 (1963=100)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Chemicals and
allied industries
Engineering and
allied industries
Paper, printing and
publishing
Food, drink and
tobacco
Textiles, leather
and clothing
Metal manufacture
Total manufacturing
industries
Gas, electricity
and water
Construction
Total, all industries
Mining and
quarrying
INDUSTRY
211
Productivity
Staiidards
Design
Both the long-term and the short-term growth of productivity thus depend
most directly on the decisions of individual undertakings. But though the
promotion of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter for industry,
government departments and educational and research establishments also
have an important contribution to make. Government budgeting and financial
policies also have a strong influence on the extent and direction of demand,
and government purchasing policies take account of national industrial
objectives.
Within industry employers’ organisations often provide technical assistance,
conduct market surveys, and support schemes of vocational education and
training, and many trade unions organise special training schemes and courses
to promote understanding of modern management techniques. Changes in
working methods to facilitate higher output feature in a number of produc¬
tivity agreements negotiated between management and workers. Private con¬
sultants specialising in management and work study are available to advise
firms on measures to increase their productive efficiency; there are also many
specialist institutions, both public and private, concerned with various aspects
of productivity. The local organisations arrange meetings, inter-factory visits,
courses, conferences, film shows and exhibitions.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) is a voluntary non-profit-making
body incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards
in respect of, inter alia, quality, performance, dimensions, testing methods and
codes of practice. Voluntary acceptance of such standards by manufacturers,
buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies the specification
of requirements. The BSI is governed by a council consisting of representa¬
tives of the main organisations of employers and workers, professional institu¬
tions and the larger government departments.
The Council of Industrial Design (CoID), set up in 1944 by the Government
to promote higher standards of design in British industry, is concerned with
all aspects of industrial design from durable consumer goods to capital goods.
The CoID, with its Scottish Committee, is a grant-aided body sponsored by
the Department of Trade and Industry; its members include industrialists,
engineers, retailers, architects, designers and educationists. At The Design
Centre in the Haymarket, London, a selective but changing display of modern
British consumer goods is maintained; exhibits are chosen from Design Index,
the CoID’s illustrated record of more than 10,000 well-designed products.
Special exhibitions on particular themes are also arranged regularly. An
annual awards scheme, Council of Industrial Design Awards, covering capital
goods and engineering equipment as well as consumer products, was intro¬
duced in 1967. The Duke of Edinburgh also presents his annual Design Prize.
The Scottish Committee runs the Scottish Design Centre in Glasgow, and
there are two independent regional design centres, each maintaining a duplicate
of the Index, at Liverpool and Manchester. The CoID organises temporary
exhibitions in regional centres and overseas; arranges regular conferences and
training courses; undertakes industrial study tours in Britain; and operates a
designer selection service which can make recommendations to any individual
or organisation from a list of over 3,000 British graphic and industrial
designers. It publishes a monthly magazine, Design, and maintains reference
and photographic libraries.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society of
Arts (see p. 323), the Society of Industrial Artists and Designers, which is the
representative professional body in Great Britain of designers engaged in
212
Co-ordination
Management
BRITAIN 1972*. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry and commerce, and the Design and Industries Association (DIA), a
voluntary association of industrial companies, designers, and others interested
in the promotion of good design in industry. The Crafts Council of Great
Britain the Crafts Centre of Great Britain and the Scottish Craft Centre are
all grant-aided by the Department of Trade and Industry. Their aims are to
improve craft design and to promote closer relations between craftsmen and
industry.
The Department of Trade and Industry is responsible for the co-ordination of
activities related to the improvement of industrial productivity. It is represented
on the EDCs (see p. 209)—which are concerned primarily with the removal o
obstacles to efficiency—by seconded industrial advisers. The DTI is also
charged with extending the introduction of automatic control systems and
advanced techniques into industry, sponsors the BSI, the British Calibration
Service1 and the National Computing Centre, supports the National Data
Processing Service, and provides technical advisory services. It is concerned
directly with research into such factors as productivity measurement techniques,
group technology, production engineering and fatigue among operators, ihe
Manpower and Productivity Service of the Department of Employment
advises firms on aspects of productivity connected with manpower utilisation
and industrial relations. A number of other departments have responsibilities
which bear on productivity.
In Britain, as elsewhere, management is recognised as a subject requiring
special skills and knowledge. This is reflected both in a change in the general
educational qualifications of recruits and in the spread of systematic education
and training for management. . . ,
The British Institute of Management (BIM) is the central national ma g -
ment body, independent, non-political and non-profit-making. Its purpose is
to study and promote scientific management, including management education
and training, throughout industry, commerce and public administration. T e
BIM receives an annual government grant of about £100,000 to help it expand
services to industry. The Industrial Society works to promote better use ot
human resources; it advises members and conducts conferences and courses.
Management studies and education for management are expanding rapidly
in Britain and have become a recognised feature of higher education (see
n. 162'). There are graduate business schools in London and Manchester.
Training courses for higher management are held at several universities an
colleges” including the Administrative Staff College, Henley-on-Thames, and
Ashrfdge College of Management, Berkhamsted. The larger firms, especially
those with wide responsibilities, often provide general management courses
for senior executives, and systems of informal training within an organisation
are numerous. There are also bodies concerned with specialised branches o
management, for example, the Institute of Personnel Management, the
Institution of Works Managers, the Institute of Office Management and the
Institute of Marketing. .  .
The growing number of professional personnel working as manageme
consultants—now about 4,000-and the use of the semces of mdependen
management selection firms in the appointment of senior staff are furthe
indications of interest in the science of management in Britain.
1 Set up in 1966 to provide reliable calibratioiTfacilities for industries producing
scientific instruments and industrial test gear.
INDUSTRY
Encouragement
of Investment
in Industry
Government
Help for
Industry in
Development
Areas
213
Under the Finance Act 1971, cash grants to encourage capital expenditure on
plant and machinery were replaced by a system of investment allowances. This
permits 60 per cent of such expenditure to be written off for tax purposes in
the year in which it is incurred, and provides a standard writing down allow¬
ance enabling 25 per cent of the reducing balance of the expenditure to be
written off successively in later years. The allowances administered by the
DTI also cover investment in computers, hovercraft and mining works. Ships
qualify for free depreciation. In order to maintain a greater incentive to invest¬
ment in development areas (see below) certain forms of expenditure—mainly
on plant and machinery used in the manufacturing, construction and extrac¬
tive industries—receive free depreciation. A separate system of grants and
loans to encourage hotel development operated until March 1971; limited
assistance is still available to tourism projects in the development areas.
Some parts of Britain have long been less prosperous than others. Their rate of
economic expansion has been below average and their level of unemployment
above average as a result of the decline of some traditional industries or the
lack of job opportunities. For many years unemployment has remained a
persistent problem in Scotland, Wales and the north-east and some other
parts of England. This regional imbalance has been aggravated by the tendency
for new industries to concentrate in the Midlands and the south-east where, as
a result, the demand for labour is high and there are increasing problems of
congestion. An important aim of the Government’s regional policy is to
achieve a better distribution of industrial development between the different
parts of the country. The Government has in recent years taken important
measures aimed at securing balanced economic development.
Government aid to areas of high unemployment began in the 1930s and has
been developed in various ways since the end of the second world war. Since
August 1966 large parts of Britain have been designated as ‘development areas’
where industrial development is to be encouraged. They cover northern
England, Merseyside and nearly the whole of Scotland, Wales, Cornwall and
north Devon and contain approximately a fifth of Britain’s working popula¬
tion. The Department of Trade and Industry provides businessmen with
detailed information on industrial location within the development areas and
offers a wide variety of inducements to new or expanding businesses in these
areas, the first priority being given to smaller ‘special development areas’.
Besides the free depreciation allowances on capital investment there is a
wide range of financial and other inducements available under the Local
Employment Acts 1960-70 to encourage industry to expand in the assisted
areas. The Department of Trade and Industry may build factories for leasing,
in some cases with an initial rent-free period, or sale on deferred terms; make
building grants of 35 per cent (and 45 per cent in special cases) of the cost of
building an industrialist’s own factory; make grants towards the removal costs
of firms moving into a development area; and make loans for the general
purposes of an undertaking (for example, working capital, plant and machinery,
etc.). In the special development areas, operational grants of 30 per cent of
eligible wage and salary costs may be paid to help new firms during the first
three years of their establishment.
Factory building and estate management are undertaken on the Department
of Trade and Industry’s behalf by the English, Scottish and Welsh Industrial
Estates Corporations; premises administered by the three Corporations total
over 60 million square feet and give employment to over 250,000 people.
Assistance from other government departments includes 85 per cent capital
214
Northern Ireland
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
grants to local authorities for clearing derelict or neglected sites and for im¬
proving basic services; and help from the Department of Employment with
the cost of training additional labour in development areas and of transferring
workers in connection with establishing new enterprises.
Employers in the manufacturing industry in development areas are entitled
not only to refund of selective employment tax (see p. 345) but also receive
regional employment premiums of ^1*50 a week for every full-time ma e
employee with lower rates for women, part-timers, boys and girls.
A committee set up in 1967 to investigate the needs of ‘Intermediate
Areas’—those areas with special economic problems but situated outside the
development areas-published its report in 1969. Under the Local Employ¬
ment Act 1970 a number of such areas have been designated as Intermediate
Areas and given special assistance, similar to but more limited than that
available in the development areas under earlier Local Employment Acts,
including factory building grants, additional provisions for industrial training
and help in a clearance programme of derelict land.
Since 1948 control of new industrial building has been exercised throug
the use of a system of Industrial Development Certificates. Any application
under the normal town and country planning machinery for planning per¬
mission for industrial development involving more than 10,000 square feet
of floor space (or 5,000 square feet in the Midlands and south-east) must e
accompanied by a certificate from the Department of Trade and Industry
certifying that the development in question can be carried out consistently
with the proper distribution of industry. In considering applications the
Secretary of State pays particular regard to the need for providing appropriate
employment in the assisted areas. In practice this obligation has led to the
refusal of certificates for most projects outside the assisted areas unless it can
be shown that the project could not reasonably be undertaken in such an area
or in Northern Ireland. Subject to this priority, the control is also used to
encourage dispersal of industry to new or expanded towns taking population
from .hi more congested areas. Under the Control of Office and Industnal
Development Act 1965 the Board of Trade was given power-transferred to
the Department of the Environment in October 1970-to control office
development in certain areas. Office development permits are needed only for
developments of over 10,000 square feet in the south-east of England.
Under its own legislation Northern Ireland provides for the payment of capital
grants at 20 per cent of the cost of new machinery and equipment and 35 per
cent of the cost of new buildings for the manufacturing, construction and
extractive industries in Northern Ireland. There is also provision for assisting
firms by means of loans to carry out major schemes of re-equipment to move
to another area in particular need of industrial development or to undertake a
rehousing of their business in association with a major scheme of modernisa¬
tion and reorganisation. Help under the investment grants legislation is made
without regard to how much employment is created as a resu t.
As an alternative means of assistance the Northern Ireland Governm
continues to use its comprehensive and flexible powers authorised ™der the
Industries Development Acts for projects which offer a reasonable amount o
employment. In such cases individual development grants of up to 40 per cent
of expenditure on new machinery and equipment and 55 per cent of the cost
of new buildings. For those projects which offer exceptionally attractive
returns in employment or location within Northern Ireland, the assistance
offered could include tenancy of a government-built factory at a very low ren ,
INDUSTRY
215
Councils to
Promote
Industry
Rural Industries
grants towards operating costs in the initial stages, and grants towards costs of
removing existing machinery and installing it in a factory in Northern Ireland.
The regional employment premium also applies to Northern Ireland.
Since 1945 almost 300 new firms have been established in Northern Ireland
with government assistance, giving employment to some 85,000 people. The
Ministry of Commerce is the Northern Ireland government department con¬
cerned with the administration of industrial development policies. The
Northern Ireland Economic Council was set up in 1965 to assist in furthering
economic growth. The chairman is the Minister of Commerce, and the
membership includes representatives of industry, commerce and the trade
unions.
Certain regions and areas in England have industrial development associations
concerned with promoting local industry. These are sponsored mainly by local
authorities, trade associations and individual firms.
Several voluntary associations are concerned with Welsh industry. The
Development Corporation for Wales, founded in 1959, is the most prominent.
In Scotland, the Highlands and Islands Development Board, set up by
statute in 1965, works to stimulate the economic and social development of
the seven ‘crofting’ counties (see p. 275). It provides grants and loans to
industrial, commercial and other enterprises; it may also acquire land, provide
management and other advisory services and set up and carry on businesses.
The Scottish Council (Development and Industry), a voluntary association,
promotes the general economic development of Scotland.
Encouragement is given to the development of rural industries. Much of this
work is done under the aegis of the Development Commission1 with finance
from the Development Fund, notably advice and guidance to small businesses
in rural areas and country towns and loans for assistance to tourism in the
rural parts of development areas. In England and Wales this service is pro¬
vided by the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas acting in consulta¬
tion with the Rural Community Councils through their Small Industries
Committees in the counties; by the Small Industries Council for Rural Areas
of Scotland; and in Northern Ireland by the newly formed Local Enterprise
Development Unit of the Ministry of Commerce, and the Rural Industries
Development Committee of the Northern Ireland Council of Social Services.
Another service provided by the Commission is the financing of small factories
to stimulate rural industries and to combat rural depopulation.
Under the Finance Act 1968 hotels in certain rural parts of the develop¬
ment areas qualify for a refund of selective employment tax (see p. 345).
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy currently used in Britain are coal,
petroleum and, to a lesser extent, nuclear energy, natural gas and water power;
secondary sources produced from these are electricity, town gas and coke.
Coal, mined within the country, still represents nearly half primary energy
consumption, although the amount of coal used and its share of the total energy
1 The Development Commission recommends, and the Treasury approves and
administers, advances by grants or loans from the Development Fund, established by
the Development and Road Improvement Funds Acts 1909 and 1910. At the present
time the Fund may be used to help and expand the rural economy (including accom¬
modation of tourists) and also to promote the development and improvement of
fisheries.
2l6
TABLE 13
Inland Fuel
and Power
Consumption
(in Terms of
Primary Sources)
COAL
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
market has been falling. Oil, on the other hand, virtually all imported, has
expanded rapidly, its share of total energy consumption having risen from one-
fifth in 1958 to over one-quarter in 1961, and to over two-fifths in 1970. With
the advent of nuclear power and North Sea natural gas Britain has moved over
from two fuels to four. A programme for nuclear power stations has been in
progress for 15 years and nuclear power now provides a significant share of
electricity supplies although it still represents under 3 per cent of total energy
Millions tons coal equivalent
Coal (net) . .
Oil . .
Nuclear energy
Natural gas . .
Hydro-power
Total ..
1950
201-1
22-2
0-9
1955
213-5
34-5
1-0
224-2
249-0
1960
195-5
65-5
0-9
0-1
1-7
263-7
1970
154-5
145-6
9-4
16-0
2-6
328-1
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
requirements. The share of natural gas, until recently only imported in
liquefied form, is expanding rapidly from supplies from the North Sea
discoveries. Water-power resources are very small and cannot be developed
much further. Trends in primary energy consumption are shown in Table 13
and in the diagram on p. 217. . ,
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of petroleum, are under
public ownership. General responsibility for the effective and co-ordinated
development of fuel and power resources lies with the Secretary of State tor
Trade and Industry. Research is undertaken by the fuel and fuel-using
industries. The Secretary of State also has an Advisory Council on Research
and Development. . _ . . . . . , .
The nationalised fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total about
780 000 people, or 3 per cent of the working population; their capital invest¬
ment in 1971-72 be in tbe region of j£8o° tbfir annual turnover is
about /3,00c million; and the value of their net output is about 5 per cent of
the national product. The nationalised industry boards’ investment is financed
through internal resources and borrowing from the Government (long term),
the clearing banks (short term), and from overseas (long term) sources.
The responsible ministers—the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry
in England and Wales and for Scottish electricity the Secretary of State for
Scotland—are required by statute to set up consultative councils for each of
the nationalised fuel industries to protect the interests of consumers. National
Industrial and Domestic Coal Consumers’ Councils were set up m 1947 and
Area Electricity and Gas Consultative Councils (supported by d 1stnct_ com¬
mittees) were set up in 1948 and 1949 respectively. Each consists of a chairman
and from 20 to 30 unpaid members appointed from nominations put forwar
by interested bodies, mainly local authorities.
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coal¬
mining industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years
longer than in any other country. British coal exports dominated the world
market until about 1910. By 1913—the peak production year—the industry
The National
Coal Board
INDUSTRY 217
was producing 287 million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons and employ¬
ing over a million workers.
In 1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal
Industry Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board as
a statutory corporation to manage the industry.
ENERGY TRENDS 1960-70 GAS
The National Coal Board (NCB) consists of a chairman and between eight
and eleven members appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry. The NCB has, with minor exceptions, exclusive rights over the
extraction of coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private
operators to work small pits and open-cast sites. It has no monopoly in
distribution, and retail sales remain largely in private hands, but it has, how¬
ever, some retail depots and makes bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
The NCB is responsible for the day-to-day running and the commercial
2i$ BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
management of the industry, but is answerable to the Secretary of State (and
through him, to Parliament) for its efficiency. The Secretary of State has power
to issue general directives on matters affecting the national interest, and to
authorise borrowings to finance capital investment. Under the Coal Industry
Act 1971 he also has power to give directions relating to the Board’s non¬
colliery activities. .
At the end of March 1971 there were 292 collieries in operation. Of these,
289 were grouped into 17 areas, each controlled by a director who is respon¬
sible to the NCB. The remaining three collieries (in Kent) are controlled by a
general manager who is also responsible to the NCB.
A typical area produces nearly 8 million tons of coal a year, employs up to
17,000 men and has a turnover of about £55 million.
Pattern and Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of nearly
Trends in 4 million tons between 1947 and 1956; sales fell sharply, however, between
Supply and 1956 and 1959 and large stocks of coal accumulated at pit heads Growing
Demand competition from oil, increasing efficiency in the use of coal and reduced
requirements of the gas, steel, railway transport, and other industries con¬
tributed to the fall in demand which is still continuing (see Table 14). Un¬
distributed stocks have recently been run down considerably and at the end
of March 1971 were 6 million tons.
About half of total consumption is by the electricity authorities and nearly
one-quarter by domestic and industrial users together. Coke ovens are other
large users while consumption by the gas industry is falling rapidly with the
switch to natural gas. Consumption by the electricity industry has increased
by 32 per cent since 1961 to 73 million tons in 1970 whereas the requirements
of all the other main classes of consumer have declined. For domestic users this
fall has been slightly offset by increased purchases of solid smokeless fuels.
Coal exports have declined for somewhat similar reasons and now average
about 3 million tons a year. The peak post-war figure was 19 million tons in
1949. The principal markets are in Western Europe and the Republic of
Ireland. Because of the low stock situation, restrictions on imports of coal,
coke and manufactured fuels were lifted in December 1970. In the first quarter
of 1971 imports amounted to 626,000 tons.
Production and
Manpower
The fact that the British industry was developed so early has meant that many
of the best seams of coal are now worked out. There are abundant reserves of
coal with which production can be maintained well into the next century,
there is also scope for opening new collieries should these be required.
The main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and
Nottinghamshire field, which produces about 51 per cent of the total output
(2) the Durham and Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and
(4) the Scottish field. Other important coal-bearing areas are those of
Lancashire and the west Midlands (Staffordshire and Warwickshire).
Table 14 shows the main trends in the industry since 195°*
Coal consumption has fallen steadily over the past 20 years as shown in
Table 14, and fell by 11-5 million tons in 1970-71. The fall in demand has
been accompanied by increases in productivity and has resulted in a rundown
of the labour force from some 700,000 to about 290,000. There were 3,254
fewer workers in March 1971 than in March 1970. Overall productivity has
risen by half since 1961 to 2-2 tons per manshift in 1970-71. Coal face output
has doubled over the last 20 years to 7*2 tons per manshift in 1970-71. e
increases have been obtained largely by concentration on the more productive
INDUSTRY
219
TABLE 14
Coal
Statistics
1950-70
Capital
Investment and
Financial
Structure
mines and faces, by increasing mechanisation at the face, and by the use of
multishift working. At mechanised faces, output now averages 8*i tons per
manshift compared with 4-3 tons at non-mechanised faces. Other important
measures which have contributed to increased productivity include new tech¬
niques for obtaining information about the reserves before they are worked,
intensive training of management and men to obtain the maximum utilisation
Unit
1950-54
(average)
1960-64
(average)
1965-69
(average)
1970-71
Total output
of which, open-cast
Total consumption
of which, export
Total labour force0
All underground workers0
Output per manshift0:
at coal face . .
overall
Output mechanically
loaded0
million
tons
’000
tons
per cent
222-1
11-4
223-0
15-2
688-4
546-1
3-3
1-2
5b
194-2
7-4
198-1
5-9
549-0
437-2
4-5
1-5
566
176- 0
7-0
177- 1
3-3
418-9
331-8
5-7
1-9
84-1
142-4
8-3
151-0
3-0
286-4
223-8
7-2
2-2
92-0
Source: National Coal Board
0 NCB mines only.
6 Estimate.
of equipment on highly mechanised faces, the increasing use of powered sup¬
ports, the use of higher horse-power machines and improvements in the
mechanised handling of coal below ground and on the surface.
The NCB raises capital, including working capital, by borrowing from the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. At present there is a statutory limit
of £900 million on such borrowing. Within certain limits the Board may also,
with the permission of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, borrow
temporarily (by way of overdraft or otherwise). The greater proportion of
investment, however, is financed from internal resources.
Capital expenditure by the industry totalled £462 million from 1947 to 1955
and about £790 million in the nine years 1956 to end-March 1964. At the end
of the 1964-65 financial year the total capital debt to the Exchequer amounted
to about ^960 million. In 1965 legislation was enacted to effect a capital re¬
construction involving the writing off of £415 million of the existing debt. As
a result, the total debt to the Secretary of State at the end of March 1971
amounted to £675 million.
Under the nationalisation statute, the NCB has been required to break even
on its current account (taking one year with another) after meeting all proper
charges including provision for reserves. It has made surpluses in some years
and deficits in others. In certain areas, such as Scotland, Lancashire and Wales,
deficits have been persistent, and profits from the areas of high productivity,
for instance, the Midlands, have been inadequate to cover the losses sustained.
By March 1966 the accumulated deficit on the current account had reached
^115-6 million; this was included in the £415 million written off. Interest
payments and depreciation provisions have been reduced as a result. In the
year ending March 1971 the NCB made an operating profit of ^34 million,
and after payment of interest there was a surplus of £500,000. The maximum
220
Research
PETROLEUM
Indigenous
Production
International
Trade
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
permitted level of accumulated deficit was raised by the Coal Industry Act
1971 to £75 million.
To assist the redeployment of manpower and the elimination of uneconomic
colliery capacity, the Coal Industry Act 1971 authorised the Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry to make grants on a tapering basis up to a maximum
aggregate amount of £24 million over the three years to 1974.
The NCB has two research organisations: a Coal Research Establishment,
at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, providing facilities for
fundamental research; and a Mining Research and Development Establish¬
ment, near Bretby, Derbyshire, for the investigation of underground problems,
developing new machines and testing equipment.
Research associations receiving grants from the NCB and the Department
of Trade and Industry include the British Coke Research Association and the
Coal Tar Research Association. Much of the work of other bodies, such as the
Safety in Mines Research Establishment (SMRE), is closely related to the
Board’s problems; the SMRE carries out research on explosions and fires,
pneumoconiosis, engineering and metallurgy.
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young,
a Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from
natural mineral oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish
shale deposits, yielding similar products, were first worked in 1858 and ceased
production in 1962.
Sources of crude oil within Britain meet only 1 ton in every 1,200 of total
United Kingdom requirements, the remainder being imported from overseas.
Annual production of crude oil from indigenous oilfields now totals about
82,000 tons. Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the establish¬
ment of several small oilfields, notably in Nottinghamshire (Egmanton and
Bothamsell), in Leicestershire (Plungar), in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough) and
in Dorset (Kimmeridge). Production of natural gas from an on-shore gas field
at Lockton, Yorkshire, began in May 1971.
Seismic prospecting in the North Sea has been going on since 1962 and full-
scale exploration activities since 1964) following the enactment of the Con¬
tinental Shelf Act 1964, and the subsequent award of a first round of licences.
Further licences were awarded in 1965 and 197° and applications for a fourth
round are under consideration. The total area now under licence is 25,000
square miles (64,700 square kilometres) out of a total area, over which Britain
has rights, of 168,000 square miles (435,000 square kilometres).
Drilling, which started in 1964, has proved the existence of five major fields
of natural gas in the British sector, and large quantities of gas are coming
ashore from three of these (West Sole, Hewett and Leman Bank). Develop¬
ment of the other two fields is in progress. Oil has also been found in encoura¬
ging quantities, but there is as yet no commercial production.
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the
Middle East, Far East, Africa and Caribbean areas.
Today production by these companies amounts to about 17 per cent of total
world production and they operate a tanker fleet (partly owned by them and
partly on charter) amounting to over a quarter of the world s tanker tonnage.
(British registered tanker tonnage is about 14 per cent of the world s total.)
INDUSTRY
221
Consumption
Refineries
Oil Pipelines
In 1970 the United Kingdom imported 102-5 million tons of crude oil
valued at £687 million, the largest single item among imported products.
Libya (23 per cent) regained from Kuwait its position as the largest supplier.
Other major suppliers were Saudi Arabia, Iran, Nigeria and Venezuela.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption in 1970 totalled
about 90 million tons, having doubled since i960. Fuel oil consumption in 1970
constituted 42-5 per cent of the total. Demand for gas and diesel oils (excluding
those used in road vehicles) rose by a further i-6 million tons to 12 million
tons in 1970. Sales of motor spirit have expanded by an annual average of 6-4
per cent since i960 and totalled some 14 million tons in 1970.
The most important uses of gas and diesel oils in 1970 were for non-
industrial central heating, agricultural tractors and the railways. Electricity
generation accounted for about 30-9 per cent of total fuel oil consumption,
excluding that used in oil refineries; the steel industry accounted for 13-2 per
cent; and non-industrial central heating for a further 10-9 per cent. Of the
remainder, the largest users were the cement, paper-making, general chemical,
glass, engineering, brickmaking and textile industries.
Before 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum
products was refined overseas, as it was considered more economical to refine
at the source of production. Since the second world war the industry has
favoured the siting of refineries in the consuming areas.
At the end of 1970 rated refinery capacity in Britain amounted to 113 million
tons a year. Of the 23 refineries in operation, seven have a capacity of under
0-5 million tons. The eleven largest are situated at Fawley, near Southampton
(16-5 million tons); Stanlow, in Cheshire (10-75 million tons); Isle of Grain
and Shell Haven (both 10 million tons), and Coryton (7 million tons), all three
on the Thames Estuary; Teesport, Yorkshire (6 million tons); Grangemouth
(7 million tons); Milford Haven and Pembroke in Pembrokeshire (6-3 million
tons and 5-9 million tons); Llandarcy near Swansea (8 million tons); and
Killingholme near Grimsby (7 million tons). Other important refineries are
located at Belfast, Billingham, Heysham (Lancs.) and second refineries at
Killingholme and at Milford Haven. Stanlow is to be expanded by "j\ million
tons and Shell Haven by 9 million tons. Grangemouth is scheduled to expand
to 18 million tons by 1974.
Output of refined products (excluding refineries’ own consumption) has
risen steadily; from 4 million tons in 1948 to 25^ million tons in 1954, 40
million tons in i960 and the peak total of 93 million tons in 1970. There is a
substantial external trade in refined products which tends to follow trading
and seasonal requirements and the commercial arrangements of the major oil
companies. Exports from Britain, mainly in the form of heavier products
to European countries, were valued at £167 million in 1970. Imports of refined
products (including liquefied gases) amounted to ^213 million.
Three main crude oil pipelines are in operation in Britain between harbours
capable of berthing very large tankers and refineries: in west Scotland, from
Finnart to Grangemouth; in South Wales, from Angle Bay, Milford Haven,
to Llandarcy; and in north-west England, from Tranmere to Heysham.
Pipelines carry refined products from refineries to major marketing areas; for
example, from Stanlow to the Manchester area, from Fawley to Staines and
Heathrow Airport, and from the Isle of Grain to Walton-on-Thames and
Heathrow Airport. A 245-mile (394-kilometre) pipeline, opened in 1969, feeds
222
Research
ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY
Present
Structure
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
refined products to north London and the Midlands from refineries and
installations on the Thames and Mersey; a similar line is planned from Milford
Haven to the Midlands and Manchester. Pipelines carrying petrochemical
feedstocks run from Stanlow to Carrington, near Manchester, from Fawley to
Severnside, near Bristol, and from Teesside to Fleetwood and Runcorn. The
Pipelines Act 1962 is designed to secure the orderly development of privately
owned industrial pipelines.
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities
on a substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames
(the British Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock,
in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon, in Berkshire (Esso). The first of these covers
the full range of petroleum research and development, from geology and
production to product utilisation and petroleum chemicals. In general, the
remainder are concerned with the evolution of new and improved fuels and
lubricants and the development of new uses for petroleum products and of
new products based on petroleum, especially chemicals.
A public supply of electricity was first provided in Britain in 1881, at
Godaiming, Surrey. From its earliest days a measure of public control has
been a feature of the industry. In 1919 the Electricity Commissioners were
created as a supervisory body and to promote reorganisation on a national
scale through voluntary agreement. In 1926 the Central Electricity Board
was set up to construct and operate a national grid inter-connecting individual
power stations, thus co-ordinating generation and transmission. In 1943 the
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB) was established as a public
corporation to develop the water-power resources of the Highlands. In 1948
all municipal and private undertakings (other than those in Northern Ireland)
were acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British
Electricity Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of Scotland
where they became the responsibility of the NSHEB. Two subsequent Acts
(1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation and gave the industry
its present structure. Electricity supply employs about 213,000 people, in¬
cluding 5,900 in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales, electricity is generated and transmitted by the Central
Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) and distributed by 12 separate Area
Electricity Boards; co-ordination is effected by the Electricity Councd. In
Scotland, two boards—the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB)—both generate and distribute electricity. In Northern Ireland,
the Belfast Corporation and the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland
generate and distribute electricity, and the Londonderry Development Com¬
mission distributes only.
The Electricity Council is the central body of the supply industry with a
general responsibility for promoting electricity supply and for advising the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry; it is also responsible for a number ol
common services, principally capital financing, research and industrial rela¬
tions. The Council consists of a chairman and two deputy chairmen, the chair¬
man and two designated members of the CEGB, the chairmen of the 12 Area
Electricity Boards and not more than three other members. The CEGB con¬
trols the operation and maintenance of power stations and the mam trans-
INDUSTRY
223
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Generation
mission system (the national grid) and supplies electricity in bulk to the 12
Area Boards. The CEGB consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman and
between six and eight members. Each of the 12 Area Electricity Boards acquires
bulk supplies of electricity from the CEGB and is responsible for distribution
networks and sales of electricity to its area consumers.
Area Consultative Councils were set up under the Electricity Act 1947 in
the area of each Board to represent the interests of consumers; their chairmen
are ex officio members of their respective Area Boards. The Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry appoints the chairmen, deputy chairmen and members
of the Electricity Council, the CEGB, the Area Boards and the Consultative
Councils; approves each Board’s capital development programmes and the
industry’s research programme; and approves, in consultation with the
Treasury, the industry’s borrowing requirements.
The boundary separating the areas covered by the two Scottish Boards runs
roughly from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of
Tay. Members of both Boards and of the respective consumer consultative
councils are appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland; each Board
comprises a chairman and between four and eight members, one of whom is the
chairman of the other Board. The Secretary of State’s responsibilities in rela¬
tion to the Boards are similar to those of the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry.
In Northern Ireland electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast and
at Ballylumford and Coolkeeragh. Those in Belfast are operated by the city
corporation and the remainder by the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland.
Generation is co-ordinated by the Northern Ireland Joint Electricity Authority,
set up by statute in 1967. The output of the stations has, since 1948, been
purchased in bulk and re-sold to distributors—the Belfast Corporation for
Belfast and district, the Londonderry Development Commission for the City
of Londonderry, and the Electricity Board for the rest of Northern Ireland.
As Britain has abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail and water
transport for moving it, most of its electricity is produced by coal-fired steam
generating stations. In some areas oil or natural gas would provide cheaper
fuel but the rate of conversion from coal to these fuels is controlled to cushion
its effects both on the balance of payments and on employment of coalminers.
Hydro-electric development on any scale is comparatively recent, water-power
resources being relatively small and in remote areas. Since 1965, nuclear energy
has become increasingly important.
The output capacity of the generating stations of the electricity boards in
Great Britain at the end of 1970 totalled 56,033 megawatts (MW), an increase
of over 50 per cent since 1963.
In the years 1965 to 1970 an annual average of 2,500 MW of generating
capacity was installed, including 2,700 MW in 1969 and 4,300 MW in 1970.
About 10,500 MW of capacity will come into operation in England and Wales
in the period 1971-73. The SSEB’s plans provide for its total capacity of
5,214 MW at the end of 1970 to be increased to some 7,400 MW by 1973. The
NSHEB capacity of 1,830 MW will be increased to 2,140 MW by 1974.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where, of the total installed
generating capacity of 1,204 MW, 720 MW is in oil-fired and the remainder in
coal-fired thermal stations) amounted to 3,696 million kilowatt-hours in 1970.
Generation by the public supply in Great Britain exceeded 224,000 million
kilowatt-hours (kWh) in 1970; conventional steam power stations provided
224
Conventional
Thermal
TABLE 15
Electricity
Generation for
Public Supply in
Great Britain,
1970
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
87 per cent of the total and hydro-electric and nuclear stations about 2 per
cent and 10 per cent respectively. The high rate of expansion of output,
which has been a feature of the industry since its earliest years, has not been
maintained during the past five years, although the total of electricity
generated in 1970 was still nearly 40 per cent higher than in 1964.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
 20,000 million kWh in 1970. The major sources outside the fuel industries
themselves are the chemical, iron and steel and paper industries and the nuclear
power plants of the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA).
An analysis of electricity generation in Great Britain is given in Table 15.
The electricity authorities take about half the British consumption of coal and
about 10 per cent of the consumption of oil. The authorities’ demand for
these fuels continues to expand. However, the growth of demand for these
fuels has been slower than was at one time expected, because of some tem¬
porary slowing down of the growth of demand for electricity and because of
the increasing thermal efficiency of the generating stations. This has led to
some rephasing of the capital programme.
An oil-fired station of 2,000 MW has been commissioned at Fawley, on
Southampton Water, and others are under construction at Pembroke, South
Wales, and at Inverkip, Renfrewshire. A dual-fired station of the same size to
burn either coal or oil is being built at Kingsnorth, Kent, the 336 MW Hams
Hall ‘C’ station near Birmingham has been converted to dual coal/natural gas
firing and the 1,300 1MW West Thurrock station in Essex is being converted.
By the end of 1972 nine further stations totalling 3,000 MW capacity will have
been converted from coal to oil-firing. An oil-fired station of 3>300 MW is to
be built at the Isle of Grain. Average thermal efficiency (that is, the ratio of the
electrical energy output to the heat energy input of the fuel consumed) of con¬
ventional steam stations in England and Wales rose from 2075 per cent in
1947 to 28-20 per cent in 1970 as new plant was brought into use. The 20 most
efficient stations, containing much of the newest plant, had an average thermal
efficiency of 33-41 per cent in 1969-70.
Central Electricity Generating Board
South of Scotland Electricity Board
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board
Steam and oil engines
Hydro plant
Pumped storage
Nuclear plant . .
Total
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
Striking advances have been made in the design of steam-generating plant.
A cross-compound generating unit with an output capacity of 550 MW came
into operation in 1963 at Thorpe Marsh, near Doncaster. Forty-seven single-
Output capacity
(end year)
Electricity
sent out
MW
million kWh
49,335
4,894
1,804
51,097
1,286
760
2,890
56,033
185,499
16,285
5,088
183,506
2,995
1,124
19,247
56,033
206,872
206,872
INDUSTRY
225
Hydro-electric
Nuclear Power
Stations
shafts units of 500 MW are being installed in 13 stations. The first came into
operation at the Ferrybridge ‘C station, Yorks, in 1966. In 1968 Ferrybridge
‘C’ became the first of the 2,000 MW stations to supply electricity from all four
of its generating sets. By the end of 1970 34 sets had been installed, of which
27 had been commissioned at nine stations. Station capacities are also increas¬
ing. By 1972, ten stations, each with capacities of 2,000 MW, with four 500
MW single-shaft generating units, will be in service. Six larger generating
units, of 660 MW, will be installed at Drax (Yorks) and five at the Isle of
Grain. (For locations see map, inside back cover.) In Scotland, a 1,200 MW
station at Cockenzie was commissioned in 1968 and one of 2,400 MW (four
generating units of 600 MW) at Longannet in 1970. A 1,980 MW station at
Inverkip (three units of 660 MW) is expected to be commissioned in 1975.
Large gas turbine units of 55 MW and 70 MW, based on aero jet engines,
have been introduced since 1965 for peak load operation. The CEGB and
SSEB have installed 919 MW of such units and a further 900 MW are planned.
Smaller gas turbines have been introduced at new stations to safeguard the
auxiliary supplies to the large new steam units, and also to provide capacity for
peak operation. Auxiliary units of this kind in service at the end of 1970 totalled
985 MW, and by 1973 will exceed 1,300 MW.
Hydro-electric generation is at present confined to Scotland and Wales al¬
though a hydro-electric station is planned for Northern Ireland. Most of the
water-power so utilised is drawn from high-level reservoirs with their own
natural catchment areas. The setting up of the NSHEB in 1943 marked the
beginning of an era of intensive water-power development in the Highlands.
In 1970-71, 3,435 million units were sent out by the NSHEB from water¬
power, compared with 322 million in 1949. At the end of March 1971 there
were 54 main hydro-electric conventional stations in operation in the north
of Scotland with a total installed capacity of 1,052 MW and the largest—the
Loch Sloy station—has a capacity of 130 MW. The Cruachan pumped
storage section of the Awe scheme, with an installed capacity of 400 MW from
four reversible-pump-turbines, came into full operation at the end of 1967.
Construction of a 300 MW pumped-storage project at Foyers, Loch Ness,
began in November 1969. It will have two 150 MW reversible-pump-turbines
and is planned for completion in 1974. In addition, there are stations generat¬
ing electricity by water-power in the south of Scotland (122 MW) and in
Wales (469 MW). The latter includes the 360 MW pumped-storage station
at Ffestiniog, which was completed in 1963. (In pumped-storage schemes
electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump water to higher levels
from which it descends at peak periods to operate turbo-generators.)
Some 10 per cent of Britain’s public supply generation was in nuclear power
stations in 1970 and the proportion is expected to rise to about one-sixth by
the mid-1970s. Britain accounts for some 25 per cent of world nuclear
generation.
The AEA itself has three main stations which produce electricity for the
national grid: the Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor (AGR) at Windscale,
Cumberland (14 MW electrical output); the experimental fast breeder station
at Dounreay, Caithness (14 MW); and the Steam Generating Heavy Water
Moderated Reactor (SGHWR) at Winfrith, Dorset (100 MW).
The former AEA stations Calder Hall, in Cumberland (198 MW) and
Chapelcross, Dumfriesshire (198 MW) are now owned and operated by British
Nuclear Fuels Ltd.
Others are owned and operated by the electricity authorities. Under the
226
Transmission
and
Distribution
BRITAIN 1972*. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
first commercial programme, originally announced in 1955 since twice
modified, nine stations with a total design capacity of 4,500 MW were in
operation in 1971: Berkeley, in Gloucestershire (276 MW design capacity),
and Bradwell, in Essex (300 MW), were both commissioned in 1962; Hunter-
ston ‘A’, in Scotland (300 MW), in 1964; and in the following year Hinkley
Point ‘A’, in Somerset, Trawsfynydd, in Wales (both 500 MW), and Dungeness
‘A’, in Kent (550 MW); Sizewell, in Suffolk (580 MW), was commissioned in
1966; and Oldbury, in Gloucestershire (600 MW), in 1968. A ninth station,
Wylfa, in Anglesey (1,180 MW), was commissioned early in 1971. These
stations, like Calder Hall and Chapelcross, are all magnox stations—graphite¬
moderated, carbon-dioxide cooled, using natural uranium metal fuel elements
canned in magnesium.
Under a second programme announced in 1964 and extended in 1965, a
further 8,000 MW of nuclear capacity is planned by about 1976. The reactor
design chosen for the programme is based on the AGR at Windscale, which uses
slightly enriched uranium dioxide fuel canned in stainless steel, a logical
development of the magnox system. The first five AGR stations under con¬
struction are Dungeness ‘B’ (1,200 MW), Hinkley Point B , Hunterston B ,
Hartlepool and Heysham (each of 1,320 MW capacity). Further stations of
about 2,500 MW total capacity are to be built at Sizewell. They will produce
electricity more cheaply on base load than the best contemporary coal stations.
A large prototype fast reactor (PER) of 250 MW capacity is being built
at Dounreay where in October 1962 the experimental fast reactor became the
first of such type to produce electricity for public use and to operate at a high
power level. It is due for completion in 1972.
British Nuclear Fuels Ltd. was set up under the Atomic Energy Authority
Act 1970 to take over from the Atomic Energy Authority the manufacture and
reprocessing of nuclear fuels for nuclear reactors in Britain and overseas at
Springfield in Lancashire, Capenhurst in Cheshire and Windscale in Cumber¬
land. In 1969-70 completed export orders for new and reprocessed fuel
amounted to £4-4 million, outstanding orders to £20 million and new con¬
tracts to £7-1 million. Income from fuel services in Britain amounted to £23'9
million.
Main electricity transmission lines—the national grid supply most of the
country. By 31st March 1970 those of the CEGB totalled over 8,500 circuit
miles (13,680 kilometres), of which 6,115 miles (9,841 kilometres) were 400,000
volt, and 2,339 miles (3,764 kilometres) 275,000 volt. Primary distribution in
England and Wales is at 132,000 volts, comprising 11,000 circuit miles (17,700
kilometres) of lines, with secondary distribution at 33,000 volts, tertiary at
11,000 volts and general low voltage distribution at 415/240 volts. In Scotland
there were some 4,500 circuit miles (7,200 kilometres) of main transmission
lines at the end of March 1971, of which 1,500 circuit miles (2,400 kilometres)
operated at 275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000 volts. Energy move¬
ments on the grid in England and Wales are controlled through the seven
operational areas, set up for that purpose and distinct from the regions in
which the generating side of the industry is organised; each area has a separate
control, and the operations are co-ordinated by a National Control in London.
The grid in Scotland is operated from the control centres at Pitlochry
(NSHEB) and at Kirkintilloch (SSEB). _
The development of the grid system has made the British system the largest
fully interconnected power network under unified control in the world.
Twin cross-Channel cables laid between Dungeness and Boulogne, capable of
INDUSTRY
227
Capital
Investment
Research
GAS SUPPLY
transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000 volts (direct current), have been in
operation since 1961; by this means advantage is taken of the differences
between France and Britain in the timing of peak loads.
A direct current transmission link to reinforce supplies in the London area
is being installed; due for completion in 1971, the scheme—the first of its
kind in the world—will have a capacity of 640 MW.
In England and Wales the Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers
electricity acquired mainly from the CEGB, supplemented from other sources,
such as industrial plants, and the nuclear power stations of the AEA. There
are 18-5 million consumers. Industrial concerns are the biggest users of
electricity. The principal domestic uses of electricity are for lighting, cooking
and for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous other domestic
purposes is rising steadily.
The NSHEB has about 474,000 consumers, many in remote areas. The
SSEB supplies more than 1 -5 million consumers.
About 5 per cent of the annual gross fixed capital formation of the United
Kingdom in 1970 was attributable to the electricity supply industry. The
industry’s plans for new capital investment are based on a growth in demand
estimated at an annual average rate of 5 -7 per cent up to 1976-77.
Capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry has been expanding
very rapidly: from ^249 million in 1956 it rose to £720 million in 1966 but has
since fallen to £461 million in 1970-71. In recent years about two-thirds of the
industry’s capital requirements have been financed from internal resources.
The statutory limit to borrowings by the industry in Great Britain is £5,200
million. The Gas and Electricity Act 1968 empowered the industry to borrow
(long term) from overseas sources.
The Electricity Council, in consultation with the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry, is responsible for drawing up a general programme of research,
comprising: direct research carried out by the Electricity Boards themselves,
supported by co-operative research with selected industrial research associa¬
tions and by research contracts placed with universities and other organisations.
The Council itself is empowered to conduct research. It is advised by the
Electricity Supply Research Council. Collaboration on research between the
supply industry and the plant manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power
Engineering Research Steering Committee set up in 1966.
The main research establishments of the industry are run by the CEGB and
comprise the Central Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead,
Surrey, the Berkeley Laboratories in Gloucestershire, concerned with nuclear
problems, and the Engineering Laboratories at Marchwood, on Southampton
Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity utilisation is under¬
taken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst, Cheshire and
by the area boards.
Both Scottish electricity boards carry out research and experimental work
either on their own or in co-operation with other electricity authorities. The
SSEB undertakes a wide range of research and development work, both
independently and in conjunction with the universities and manufacturers
and, with the NSHEB, is associated with the activities of the Electricity
Council and CEGB.
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London,
was first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light
228
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
Production
Consumption
Domestic Use
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and Coke Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London.
In the early years of the industry gas was used almost exclusively for lighting,
provided by a growing number of company and municipal undertakings.
The gas industry in its present form developed in the main during the
period between the two world wars when increasing competition from
electricity had to be met, and by 1939 the industry had become mainly a
supplier of heating rather than lighting.
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain, in which about
120,000 persons are at present employed, under public ownership and control
on 1 st May 1949. The assets of 991 undertakings, of which 269 belonged to
local authorities, were vested in 12 Area Gas Boards.1 The central body is
the Gas Council,1 appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
It is both a co-ordinating council and, since the enactment of the Gas Act 1965,
a trading body. It consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman, the 12
chairmen of the area boards and up to five other members. Its general duties are
to advise the Secretary of State on questions affecting the industry and pro¬
mote the efficient performance of their duties by the area boards. It also has
specific duties relating to finance, labour relations and research.
The Area Gas Boards, which have a large measure of financial and opera¬
tional responsibility and are similar in most respects to the central bodies of
the other publicly owned corporations, are responsible for the local manu¬
facture of gas and its distribution to consumers. Each of the Area Gas Boards,
appointed by the Secretary of State, consists of a full-time chairman and deputy
chairman, in some cases one or more full-time members, and usually five or six
part-time members, including the chairman of the Area Consultative Council.
There is no common pattern of organisation; each board is fully independent
and has devised its own subordinate structure. Each is required to pay its way,
taking one year with another. The operations of the area boards have resulted,
in the 22 years up to 31st March 1971, in an aggregate disposable surplus of
approximately £95 million before taxation.
In Northern Ireland the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a
number of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
The main single source of gas in Britain in 1970 was natural gas which
accounted for some 62 per cent of all gas available, compared with 36 per cent
in 1969. Gas manufactured from oil accounted for 21 per cent of total gas
available in 1970 and gas from coal 5 per cent.
In 1970 the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was about
35 million therms, most of it for household use.
Three-fifths of all gas sold by gas boards is for household use and the remainder
for industrial and commercial purposes. Total consumption has been rising
steadily since 1961, after a period when growth was almost negligible. For
the last three years consumption has risen by over 10 per cent each year.
Sales reached a level of nearly 5,773 million therms2 in 1970. There are about
13 million consumers, an increase of about half a million in the past seven
years.
About 40 per cent of the domestic load is used for central heating, with gas
fires and cookers each accounting for about 25 per cent.  
1 It is intended to replace the Gas Council and the area boards by a British Gas Corpora¬
tion, probably in 1973. _ , .
2 1 therm = 100,000 British thermal units = 25,200 kilocalories.
INDUSTRY
229
Industrial and
Commercial Use
Coke and
By-products
Capital
Investment
Lines of
Development
Natural Gas
Gas has traditionally been used extensively in industries which require the
control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, for example, in the pottery
industry and in certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products.
Natural gas is being used as a chemical feedstock and in bulk fuel markets.
In 1970 sales of gas to industry totalled 1,462 million therms.
Production of coke at gas works in 1970 was 2 million tons (8 million tons
in 1965) and at coke ovens 16-3 million tons, reflecting the use of oil and the
increasing use of natural gas.
Under the Gas Act 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the Area Gas
Boards was limited to £250 million. In 1954 the industry’s borrowing powers
were increased to ^45° million, in i960 to ^525 million, in 1963 t° £^5°
million, in 1965 to £1,200 million and in 1968 to an interim limit of £1,600
million with provision for a further increase to £2,400 million. The present
limit is £2,100 million. The Gas and Electricity Act 1968 empowered the
industry to borrow (long term) from overseas sources.
The industry had been spending about £50 million a year on capital
investment in the period 1955 since 1961—62 expenditure has
increased sharply; in 1970-71 it reached £197 million and £202 million is
planned for 1971-72. Between vesting day (1st May 1949) and the end of
March 1971 about £1,650 million had been invested in fixed assets.
Much of the gas industry’s current research and development effort is
concentrated on transforming the industry from one based on manufactured
gas to one based on indigenous natural gas. In 1970 the Gas Council estimated
that the switch over to natural gas in Great Britain would be completed in
seven to eight years.
A phased programme of converting the 30 million gas appliances is in
progress. Investigations are being made into projects involving various
methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions. Further
storage facilities for natural gas are under construction near Coatbridge,
Scotland, and other facilities are planned.
Since 1964 deliveries of natural gas from the Sahara have been made in liquid
form to Britain. A pipeline system distributed the gas from a terminal on
Canvey Island to 8 of the 12 Area Gas Boards. This pipeline has been
expanded to form a national high pressure pipeline system. By March
1971, some 1,600 miles (2,560 kilometres) of the required 2,500 miles (4,000
kilometres) had been constructed. The central distribution system is fed
from the two shore terminals by five feeder mains. A third terminal is under
construction.
The first productive well in the North Sea was discovered in 1965. Five
major gasfields have now been located as well as a number of smaller struc¬
tures. The former Minister of Technology estimated that production could
exceed 3,000 million cubic feet (85 million cubic metres) per day by 1975. In
1970 the abstraction rate was estimated at 1,100 million cubic feet (30 million
cubic metres) per day.
The first pipeline to pump natural gas to the shore, at Easington in York¬
shire, was put on flow early in 1967. The second pipeline, which comes
ashore at Bacton in Norfolk, came on flow in August 1968, and the third, also
to Bacton, in July 1969. Supplies of gas from an on-shore field at Lockton,
Yorkshire, are expected to rise to an average 75 million cubic feet (2*1 million
cubic metres) a day.
230
Research
FUEL
EFFICIENCY
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Gas Council expects gas consumption to increase by some 20 per
cent a year up to 1975 and therefore substantial expansion is required. The
need to provide additional storage capacity and the strengthening of the
distribution system will also give rise to substantial investment.
The Gas Council has a research committee which advises on research policy
at four research centres. The engineering research station at Killingworth,
Northumberland, has concentrated on large-scale distribution problems.
Research is also carried out on behalf of the Gas Council at a number of
universities and colleges.
Efficiency in the use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, has
been assisted by various bodies representing producers and consumers and
by the technical advisory services of the fuel and power industries.
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National
Coal Board, solid fuel distributors and appliance manufacturers and distri¬
butors. Originally formed in 1932, it informs and advises domestic users
on the best use of solid fuel, including the choice of installation and the
operation of solid fuel appliances.
A non-profit-making company, the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency
Service, was formed in 1954 and sponsored by the fuel and power industries
to promote fuel saving in industry. In addition to consultancy work, it provides
advice and services to all non-domestic fuel users in a variety of forms, from
‘spot’ inspection to full-scale surveys and regular visits on a contract basis.
Sponsoring by the fuel and power industries ceased on 1st April 1969 but the
Government is providing a measure of financial support until April 1972,
when it is hoped that the service will have become fully self-supporting.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, with progressive development, sufficient for
domestic and industrial requirements. The sources of water are often distant
from the areas where supplies are needed, however, and water undertakings
are therefore mainly concerned with abstraction, storage, treatment and
distribution. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and
boreholes. Unlike other public services in Great Britain, such as electricity and
gas, water supply remains in the hands of a large number of undertakings.
Ministerial responsibility in England and Wales is shared by the Secretary of
State for the Environment and the Secretary of State for Wales; in Scotland it
lies with the Secretary of State for Scotland; and in Northern Ireland with
the Minister of Development.
England and It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies
Wales became a general public service, largely due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick
and his colleagues who demonstrated the dangers arising from inadequate
Organisation water supply and sanitation. The Public Health Act 1848 laid the basis for
a long series of statutes dealing with public health. From the middle of the
nineteenth century onwards a number of water undertakings were set up
to provide water to the expanding urban population, and the water supply
system developed rapidly, although in piecemeal fashion and with some over¬
lapping and waste.
STEEL
Basic oxygen furnace at Port 'Talbot produces 300 tons of steel every 40 minutes
STEEL
APPLICATION
A vacuum
distillation column
for a Brazil oil
refinery.
Right:
A 57-ton forged
steel roll being
withdrawn from
furnace.
Far right:
Precision-
engineered steel
tubes.
Domestic use of
stainless steel.
Right:
Razor blades in
production.
Far right:
Jewellery.
.X
INDUSTRY
231
Present Supplies
Local authorities have a duty as sanitary authorities to ensure that water
supplies are adequate for the needs of their areas, and they may do this
either by operating water undertakings themselves or by ensuring that other
bodies are providing adequate supplies. Over one-fifth of the water consumed
is supplied by statutory water companies. The householder receives his
domestic water supply at a comparatively small charge, varying in different
areas, which he usually pays by way of a water rate levied, like other rates,
on the value of his house. Industrial users are charged in most cases according
to actual metered consumption.
The Secretary of State for the Environment and the Secretary of State for
Wales have a duty to promote the conservation and proper use of water supplies
in England and Wales and are advised by the Central Advisory Water
Committee on general questions relating to water and organisation of supplies.
Since the passing of the Water Act 1945, over 800 smaller water authorities
in England and Wales have been absorbed by larger authorities or by the
creation of joint boards in order to improve the efficiency of the water supply
industry. There are now some 190 statutory water undertakings of which
about a third are local authorities, a half joint boards of local authorities and the
remainder statutory companies.
The largest undertaking in Britain is the Metropolitan Water Board, which
supplies over 385 million gallons daily to 6 million people in the London
area. It consists of 39 part-time members who are the elected representatives
of the various local authorities within the Board’s area of operations, together
with one representative each from the Thames and Lee Conservancies.
Public water supplies in England and Wales—reaching over 99 per cent of
the total population—now total some 2,900 million gallons a day, out of a total
estimated abstraction of nearly 6,000 million gallons a day (excluding water
used for cooling in connection with electricity generation). Capital expenditure
by water undertakings, which averaged about ^58 million a year in the period
1961-65, has risen to over ^80 million a year. Interest and running costs are
largely met from annual income.
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by
grants under the Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Acts 1944 to 1971. By
March 1971 schemes costing over ^114 million had been completed or were
in progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The Water Resources Acts 1963 (which came into full operation in April
1965) and 1968 created a new administrative structure consisting of 29 river
authorities and a central Water Resources Board to meet growing domestic,
industrial and farm irrigation needs. The river authorities, the Thames
Conservancy and the Lee Conservancy Catchment Board have a majority of
members appointed by the county and county borough councils in their areas.
The remainder are appointed by ministers mainly for their knowledge of land
drainage, fisheries, the public water supply and water in use in industry and in
agriculture. The authorities manage the water resources of river basins
and carry out other functions in respect of land drainage, flood control,
administration of fisheries and prevention of pollution. They are responsible
for assessing water resources and requirements, controlling and developing
resources and securing regulation by a system of licensing. Special arrange¬
ments exist for the Greater London area, where the full range of river authority
control is not necessary. The work of the river authorities is co-ordinated by
the Water Resources Board, an expert advisory body which reports to the
Department of the Environment and the Welsh Office. It reviews national
232
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Measurement
of Resources
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
water resources and requirements, encourages the transfer of water between
areas according to need, and initiates research. Since April 1969 water con¬
servation has been financed from charges levied by river authorities on the
licensed abstractors and users of water.
The administrative arrangements for water supply and distribution in Scotland
were reorganised by the Water (Scotland) Act 1967 under which the functions
of 200 local water authorities were transferred to 13 regional water boards in
May 1968. The Act also established the Central Scotland Water Development
Board which supplies water in bulk to its seven constituent regional water
boards; it does not supply direct to individual consumers. All the members of
these boards are members of town or county councils.
The water problem in Scotland is broadly similar to that in England and
Wales except that there is not the same need to allocate water between
competing interests and less reliance needs to be placed on underground
sources. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for general over¬
sight and co-ordination and has a general duty to promote the conservation of
water resources in Scotland; and to require regional water boards to provide
supplies of wholesome water everywhere in their districts, where this can be
done at reasonable cost; at present, they supply over 99 per cent of the total
population. The Scottish Water Advisory Committee advises the Secretary of
State on general questions relating to resources and supplies and the organisa¬
tion of the water service. The Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Act 1944,
as amended, makes available to Scottish regional water boards and to local
authorities grant assistance up to a maximum of £60 million towards the cost
of water supplies and sewerage schemes in rural areas.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water for both domestic and
industrial consumption. Distribution is the responsibility of local authorities,
some of which have combined to form joint boards. About 90 pet cent of the
population has a piped supply and over 100 million gallons are supplied daily.
Under the Water Supplies and Sewerage Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 the
Ministry of Development may pay grants towards the cost of water schemes.
Since 1945 over ^48 million have been invested, of which almost £25 million
were government grants. It is proposed that the Ministry of Development will
become responsible for water conservation, pollution control and the provision
of water supply and sewerage services.
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation s surface
water resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain,
published annually by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. This publication
contains particulars of the run-off and related rainfall from a large number of
rivers, streams and reservoired areas. The Water Resources Board is respon¬
sible for the collation and publication of hydrological information: the field¬
work of surface water measurement is done by river authorities, water under¬
takings and other bodies. Detailed studies of the resources and use of water in
specified areas have been published in the series of hydrological surveys which
cover approximately half of England and Wales. General information on rain¬
fall, published annually in British Rainfall, is the responsibility of the Meteoro¬
logical Office, while advice on ground water is the responsibility of the Water
Resources Board. The Hydraulics Research Station of the Department of
the Environment at Wallingford and the Water Research Association s station
at Medmenham carry out research into problems of the design and calibration
INDUSTRY
233
Barrages
Pollution
Structure
of gauging weirs and flumes for the measurement of surface water, and into
other hydraulic problems.
Barrage projects involve dams across or within tidal estuaries to form a lake
of fresh water. Full-scale feasibility studies are being made of barrages across
Morecambe Bay and the Dee estuary. Preliminary ‘desk studies’ have been
carried out at Solway Firth, and for the Wash.
A full feasibility study of the use of pumped storage artificial reservoirs in
the Wash has been authorised. The largest desalination plant of its kind in the
world is to be built at Ipswich.
Each river authority is responsible for the control of pollution of rivers and
certain tidal waters in its area and its approval must be sought before polluting
effluents are discharged. Control of pollution in the tidal Thames is exercised
by the Port of London Authority. In Scotland nine river purification boards
have been set up. The Secretary of State for Scotland is advised by the
Scottish River Purification Advisory Committee on questions affecting the
cleanliness of Scottish rivers. In several ports the petroleum companies
co-operate in the prevention of oil pollution from tankers and refineries.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory at Stevenage investigates
problems connected with the treatment of polluted water, the treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention
of pollution of surface water and underground water.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industry includes firms engaged on the construction, altera¬
tion, repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage and
sewerage systems, waterworks, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works,
electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, open-cast coal prospect¬
ing and mining, and structural work connected with thermal and hydro¬
electric power stations and telecommunications. About 1-5 million people are
engaged on construction in both the public and private sectors. They repre¬
sent nearly 6-5 per cent of the total civilian labour force and their net output
provides about 7 per cent of the gross national product.
The construction industry is due to complete the change to metric from
Imperial weights and measures in 1972. Design offices did so during 1971;
contractors started working in metric terms on some projects in January 1970.
Constructional work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. Over five-sixths of the work is
done by private firms. Although there are over 75,000 firms in the industry,
about a quarter of them are one-man businesses. At the other end of the scale
are about 220 firms each with more than 600 employees.
Public authorities as a whole employ about 350,000 operatives but a very
large proportion of these are engaged on repair and maintenance work which
local authorities, for example, carry out with their own labour.
Over 40 per cent of operatives are occupied on building maintenance, valued
at over £1,100 million annually. The total labour force includes about 800,000
skilled craftsmen, who have been trained for four or five years under the
industry’s apprenticeship schemes. A further 100,000 are employed as
apprentices.
234
Output
Housing
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL|HANDBOOK
Some firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake respon¬
sibility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the
smallest projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either
by architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects,
by consulting engineers. The functions of the latter, acting on behalf of a
client, embrace advice on the feasibility of projects, the drawing up of plans
and the supervision of the constructional work by the contractor.
The Department of the Environment (see p. 51) is responsible for the
construction programmes undertaken directly by the Government (except for
health and education projects), including work for the armed services, both at
home and overseas. It is also responsible for co-ordinating research and
development throughout the government service and seeks to influence
methods and techniques in the building industry as a whole.
The output of the industry has been rising steadily over many years. The
value of work done in 1970 amounted to ,£4,971 million, of which £783
million represented work carried out by the labour employed directly by
public authorities. Private contractors carried out the remaining £4,188
million (£3,325 million on new work and £863 million on repair work).
About 319,000 houses were started in 1970 and some 352,000 were completed,
of which 170,000 were for private owners. Of the £1,135 million of new
housing carried out by private contractors, £549 million, or less than half, was
for private owners and the remainder for public authorities. Industrialised
building methods employing prefabricated components are used in much of
the work.
The National Building Agency is an independent advisory body, managed
by a board of directors appointed by the Department of the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and financed by a government
grant and the fees which it earns. Its main function is to encourage the adoption
of advanced methods of housebuilding, especially industrialised building
methods, as well as to provide technical advice and services, in particular to
local authorities.
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale
modern industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment
to carry out major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent
figures in the early development of civil engineering included John McAdam,
pioneer in road construction; Thomas Telford, builder of roads, bridges,
canals, docks and railways; George and Robert Stephenson and Isambard
Kingdom Brunei, pioneers of railway building.
Among important construction projects in hand in the United Kingdom in
1971 were several major conventional power stations and nuclear power
stations (see p. 225), dams and reservoirs, hospitals, large-scale housing
developments, such as the Thamesmead (London) project to house 60,000
people, the new town being built at Craigavon, Northern Ireland, and a £15
million scheme to extend the London underground railway system to London
Airport (Heathrow). Projects for road construction, bridges and tunnels
included about 260 miles (416 kilometres) of motorways under construction
(see p. 301), and the £28 million second Mersey Tunnel scheme. The £6
million Erskine Bridge over the Clyde was completed in 1971.
INDUSTRY
235
Overseas
Constructional
Work
Research
British constructional firms have been as active overseas as in the United
Kingdom. British consulting engineers, in particular, have built up a tradition
of knowledge and integrity which has caused their standards to become
international practice and their services to be in world-wide demand.
A British firm acts as consultant to the World Bank on the Indus Basin
irrigation scheme, the largest in the world, and several firms were involved in
the design of the Mangla Dam, Pakistan, which forms part of it. Other design
projects included a new port at Dammam, to cost between £10 million and
£12, million, for the Saudi Arabian Government, and a £75 million new town
in Abu Dhabi.
Among important construction projects by British contractors in hand in
overseas countries during 1971 were: a £24 million deep-water harbour to pro¬
vide 15 deep-water berths at Dubai in the Persian Gulf; an ^8’5 million road
bridge at Rio de Janeiro; a £4-1 million extension to a cement plant in Uganda;
and a ^9-6 million gas separation plant in Algeria. A British company is
helping to build the £12-5 million Bosphorus bridge.
It has been estimated that the total value of work carried out during the
year ending in March 1971 by some 91 British contractors, operating in 103
countries, was £274 million, compared with £220 million in the previous year,
and that the value of new contracts obtained was ^311 million, compared
with £341 million in the previous year. Members of the Association of
Consulting Engineers had projects worth about £2,032 million in hand on
1 st January 1971.
The Directorate-General of Research and Development in the Department of
the Environment (Construction Industries) is responsible for co-ordinating
research and information services to increase efficiency in the building
industry. The Building Research Station which forms part of the Department
was originally set up in 1921, thus making Britain the pioneer of organised
building research, and is concerned with research into all aspects of building.
It provides a technical advisory service for construction firms. An Agrement
Board, set up by the Government, tests and certifies new products and
methods.
The Construction Industry Research Association carries on research affect¬
ing all sections of the industry.
The Heating and Ventilating Research Association, an industrial research
organisation, deals with problems of heating and ventilation of large buildings.
The major construction firms have research departments working on plant,
materials and methods. Other bodies concerned with research include the
universities and colleges of technology. Most of the producers of primary
building materials have trade associations which maintain research institutions
chiefly devoted to seeking new and more efficient use for their materials.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Britain’s manufacturing industries supply a wide range of products, many of
which are of major importance in world trade. Output has increased by over
one quarter since 1963, and in 1970 was 1 -2 per cent higher than the previous
year; output per head showed an advance of 1 -6 per cent in 1970 bringing the
rise since 1963 to 27 per cent. In 1970 this sector spent £1,583 million on
fixed capital equipment (at 1963 prices), 74 per cent of which was spent on
plant and machinery. The number of employees in manufacturing industry
(including the unemployed and those absent from work through sickness and
236
METAL
MANUFACTURE
TABLE 16
Industry Groups:
Sales of Goods
Produced and
Work Done,
Production,
Employment
and Capital
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other causes, but excluding employers and the self-employed) was 8-7 million
in June 1970, 38 per cent of the total number of employees.
The employment and production figures listed in Table 16 give an indica¬
tion of the relative importance of broad sectors of manufacturing industry.
Expansion has been particularly marked in those industries utilising advanced
technologies such as electronics, the newer branches of mechanical engineering,
most branches of the chemical industry and man-made fibres. The diagram
on page 210 shows the changes in production between 1963 and 1970 in the
major groups of industry.
In the subsequent sections, statistics of employees refer to numbers at June
1970 and export statistics are taken mainly from the Overseas Trade Statistics
of the United Kingdom.
The metal manufacturing industries employ 591,800 persons. Of these, 281,000
are in the iron and steel industry, 112,500 in the manufacture of iron castings,
55,500 in the manufacture of aluminium and aluminium alloys, and 90,000 in
the copper, brass and other base metal industries. Exports of iron and steel
products and non-ferrous metals in 1970 had an aggregate value of £698
million.
Industry Group
Food, drink and tobacco
Coal and petroleum
products
Chemical and allied
industries
Metal manufacture . .
Mechanical engineering
Instrument engineering
Electrical engineering
Shipbuilding and
marine engineering
Metal goods (not else¬
where specified)
Vehicles
Textiles, leather and
clothing
Paper, printing and
publishing . .
Other manufacturing
industries
Total6 : all manufac¬
turing industry
Goods Produced and
Work done in 1968“
£
million
Percentage
of total
6,754-3
1,143-0
2,913-3
3,434-3
3,676-2
427-3
2,582-9
465-1
2,141-8
3,768-8
3,900-6
2,352-6
3,332-7
36,892-9
18-3
3-1
7-9
9-3
9-9
1-2
7-0
1-3
5- 9
10-3
10-6
6- 4
9-0
Index of
Industrial
Produc¬
tion
1970
1963
= 100
100-0
121-4
151-1
158-5
114- 2
134-6
154-0
148-1
86-1
115- 8
115- 7
116- 7
120-5
127-1
Number
of
Employees
(thou¬
sands)
June
1970
848-0
58-8
473-9
584-9
1,192-4)
149-4
901-2
185-3
636-5J
817-2
1,195-4
640-4
966-0
Fixed
Capital
Expendi¬
ture in
1970 at
1963 prices
£
million
8,650-0
206-7
63-4
277-2
202-8
334-1
140-1
117-5
96-8
144-5
1,583-1
“ Census of Production 1968, the most recent year for which figures are available.
6 Discrepancies in totals are due to rounding,
n.a. = not available.
INDUSTRY
237
Iron and Steel
Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the
seventeenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the
discovery of the processes which led to the great expansion of steelmaking in
the second half of the nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world’s fifth
largest steel producing nation. Output of crude steel in 1970 totalled a record
27-9 million ingot tons, 3 -5 per cent more than in 1969 (adjusted for comparison
to a 52-week basis. Pig iron production in 1970 amounted to 17-4 million
tons.
Net deliveries of finished steel amounted to 21 million tons in 1970. The
4-3 million tons of iron and steel products which were exported were worth
£348 million; the United States (£50-5 million), Sweden (^22-0 million) and
Spain (j£i6-9 million) were the main overseas buyers.
The main producing districts are: Wales (30 per cent of total crude steel
output); Yorkshire and Humberside (26 per cent); Northern (17 per cent);
and Scotland (12 per cent). Wales concentrates mainly on the manufacture
of flat products, especially sheet steel and tinplate; the output of the north-east
coast and Scotland is predominantly of heavy steel products (plates, sections
and rails), but a wide strip mill for sheet production is also in operation in
Scotland. Production of special alloy and stainless steels is centred on Sheffield.
During the last decade, fixed capital expenditure totalled some ^1,250
million, reaching a peak in 1961 of ^230 million, due mainly to the strip mill
expansion programme. Expenditure in 1970 amounted to £153 million, of
which some £20 million was accounted for by a major new development by the
British Steel Corporation at Scunthorpe, which will cost £155 million by 1973.
Between i960 and 1970, steel production by the converter processes increased
from 8 per cent of output to over 33 per cent; by electric furnaces from 7 per
cent to 19 per cent; while the share from older open hearth processes fell from
84 per cent to 47 per cent. The emphasis in recent years has been on improving
efficiency rather than raising total capacity and Britain has some of the most
modern plant in Europe.
Output per blast furnace has risen markedly in recent years, due both to an
increase in average size and to improvements in efficiency, such as improved
preparation of raw materials, the injection of fuel and oxygen, and the use of
higher blast temperatures. Industry-wide research and development is carried
out by the Corporate Laboratories of the British Steel Corporation. Total
annual expenditure by the industry is about -£12 million.
Outstanding development projects completed in the last few years include
wide strip mills at new integrated works in Newport (Monmouthshire) and
at an existing works in Scotland; a new plant at Stoke-on-Trent, based entirely
on continuous casting for supplies of semi-finished steel; an advanced unit for
the mass production of alloy and special carbon steels at Sheffield; the world’s
largest electric melting shop and a steelworks in which a linked three-computer
system controls production planning throughout, both at Rotherham; and a
new large-scale steel-making plant at Port Talbot with two oxygen converters,
linked with a deep-water harbour.
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public super¬
vision since 1932. The Iron and Steel Act 1967 brought into public ownership
13 major steel companies together producing well over 90 per cent of Britain’s
crude steel and employing some 70 per cent of the manpower in the industry.
Their shares and securities were vested in July 1967 in the British Steel
Corporation, whose specific duties include promoting the efficient and eco¬
nomic supply of iron and steel products, exports and research development; it is
also statutorily responsible for the finances of the nationalised industry. The
238
Iron Castings
Non-ferrous
Metals
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Corporation’s Third Report on Organisation, published in December 1969,
recommended the formation of six product divisions, four covering iron and
steelmaking and two covering constructional engineering and chemicals, and
this structure came into effect in March 1970. The remaining private sector
includes some 200 companies accounting for about one-third of the value of the
industry’s sales.
About 900 foundries are engaged in the production of iron castings. Output
of castings in 1970—3-78 million tons—was 1*3 per cent less than in 1969.
The main users of iron castings are the general engineering industry, account¬
ing for nearly one-third of the total tonnage sold and about one-half of the
industry’s turnover, the motor vehicle industry, the manufacturers of pressure
pipes and fittings, the building and associated industries and the steel industry.
Exports are included in the total for iron and steel in the previous section.
The non-ferrous metals industry is the largest in Europe and as a consumer
of aluminium, copper and lead Britain is second only to the United States
among western countries. Output in 1970 included: aluminium, 39,600 metric
tons of virgin metal and 201,600 metric tons of unwrought alloys; refined cop¬
per, 42,200 tons of virgin copper and 157,200 tons of secondary metal; lead,
146,600 tons of secondary metal refined from scrap and 153,600 tons of virgin
lead refined from imported lead bullion; zinc, 146,600 tons of slab metal; and
tin, 22,100 tons. Mining in Britain is confined to the small-scale working of tin,
although plans are in hand to re-open several mines, notably in Cornwall.
In 1970 exports of non-ferrous base metals were valued at ^351 million.
The main products exported, including semi-finished products, were copper
and copper alloys (£126-6 million), nickel and its alloys (£59-5 million),
aluminium and its alloys (£26-4 million) and tin and its alloys (£24-2 million).
The Federal Republic of Germany (£57-6 million), the United States (£31-1
million), and Italy (£25-2 million) were the largest purchasing countries.
Indirect exports are also substantial.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands; other centres in¬
clude South Wales, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where one of the
world’s largest zinc smelters (capacity 120,000 tons a year) was formally opened
in May 1968. Firms are engaged in smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling,
extrusion and drawing and the techniques of powder metallurgy and pressure
diecasting are also employed.
Two of the three major aluminium smelters whose construction was
approved by the Government in 1968 are now operational. When the three
smelters are in full production they will provide over half of Britain’s require¬
ments for aluminium by 1974.
Britain is also a major producer of the newer specialised metals including
uranium, zirconium and beryllium for the nuclear energy industry; niobium
for aircraft production; and selenium, silicon, germanium and tantalum for
electronic apparatus. Scientific and technological research for the industry as a
whole is conducted by the British Non-Ferrous Metals Research Association.
Mechanical engineering, employing some i-2 million people, comprises a
family of industries including all types of machinery, machine tools, engineers’
small tools, mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment, in¬
dustrial plant, ordnance and small arms, watches and clocks, and scientific
instruments. Vehicle engines are included in the section on vehicles (p. 245).
The volume of production from these industries rose by almost 35 per cent
INDUSTRY
239
between 1963 and 1970. The aggregate value of the main products of all sec¬
tions other than small arms was about £3,500 million in 1970. Exports of
non-electric machinery were valued at £1,642 million in 1970, 12-5 per cent
up on the previous year.
Agricultural
Machinery
and Tractors
Tractors
Metal-working
Machine Tools
There are many hundreds of firms, employing 33,500 people, in the agricultural
machinery industry, including three large firms employing well over 1,000
workers. In 1970 deliveries, excluding tractors, were valued at £72 million
and exports were worth £41 million; the main overseas markets were the
Republic of Ireland, France, South Africa and the Netherlands.
The number of self-propelled combine harvesters, forage harvesters, pick¬
up balers and grain driers in use has increased in Britain in recent years.
Deliveries in 1970 included 2,132 combine harvesters, 3,761 milking machines,
14,260 pick-up balers and 999 grain and grass driers.
The bulk of British tractor output and exports consists of agricultural tractors.
Some 160,000 agricultural and industrial wheeled tractors were delivered in
1970,114,700 (72 per cent) for export. In addition, 21,700 small market garden
tractors were delivered. Exports of new agricultural and track-laying tractors
were valued at £119-8 million in 1970; South Africa (£11 million), the United
States (£7-1 million) and Denmark (£6-i million) were the main buyers.
Production is dominated by two large organisations. Britain has one of the
heaviest tractor densities in the world (see p. 270).
Britain was the birthplace of the modern machine tool industry. The industry’s
output today ranges from watchmakers’ lathes weighing a few pounds to
machines weighing hundreds of tons, and to electronically controlled machine
tools giving accuracies of one-ten-thousandth part of an inch. Almost 3,000
numerically controlled machine tools have been installed in Britain. The
Government, through the Department of Trade and Industry, is assisting the
industry in various ways, including pre-production purchase schemes, nu¬
merical control advisory services and the placing of research and development
contracts.
Deliveries of machine tools were valued at £199 million in 1970, compared
with £172 million in 1969. Recorded exports in 1970 had a value of £87-7
million, 19 per cent up on 1969, and of the orders on hand at the end of
December 1970 (£149 million), 50 per cent were for export; the Soviet Union
(£8-9 million), the Federal Republic of Germany (£8-9 million), the United
States (£8-8 million) and Australia (£6 million) were the main overseas
markets in 1970. N ine major groups account for over two-thirds of the industry’s
output although the high degree of specialisation makes it possible for smaller
firms to flourish. The industry, centred mainly in the Midlands, Yorkshire and
Lancashire, and to a lesser extent near London and Glasgow, employs about
70,000 people.
The Machine Tool Trades Association of Great Britain is the representative
body of most manufacturers and importers, and is responsible for the Inter¬
national Machine Tool Exhibitions held in Britain every four years, the next
being due in 1972. The industry is served by its own research body, the
Machine Tool Industry Research Association.
Industrial
Engines
Britain manufactures a wide range of industrial engines. Deliveries of engines
(including parts) had a value of £143 million in 1970 and exports (including
marine engines) were worth £64-1 million; in addition, parts exported were
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
valued at £21-8 million. The total brake horse-power of the 336,600 internal
combustion engines delivered was 15-9 million, ranging in size from under
3 b.h.p. to over 4,000 b.h.p. Production is concentrated among the large firms
in the industry, and a total of 31,500 people are employed.
Textile
Machinery and
Accessories
The textile machinery industry, one of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical
engineering trades, produces machines and accessories for the manufacture
and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural and man-made
fibres. In 1970, the industry’s exports (£ 123-1 million) accounted for roughly
70 per cent of total deliveries. Principal markets were the United States (£12-4
million), the Federal Republic of Germany (£13-3 million) and Pakistan
(£8-2 million). Comprising about 400 predominantly small-scale firms, the
industry has some 46,000 employees and is situated mainly in Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Northern Ireland, Dundee, Leicester and Nottingham.
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Contractors’
Plant
Office
Machinery
Almost every industry makes use of mechanical handling equipment, which
extends from individual units and accessories to complete operating systems.
The value of deliveries in 1970 was £202-1 million, the main products being
cranes and bridge transporters, lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators and hoists.
In addition, British firms produced 35,000 powered industrial trucks, includ¬
ing 26,900 fork-lift trucks. Exports of mechanical handling equipment (in¬
cluding industrial and works trucks) in 1970 were valued at £84-2 million,
23 per cent more than in 1969. There are many small firms in the industry; in
all, 69,000 people are employed.
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including crawler tractors, motor graders, scrapers, trenchers, dozer
equipment, dumpers, excavators and loading shovels, and crushing, pulverising
and screening plant. The labour force numbers 43,000.
The value of deliveries from the industry was £256 million in 1970 of
which £138 million was for export; earth-moving machinery accounted for
82 per cent of total deliveries. France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
Irish Republic and South Africa are important markets.
The office machinery industry has been expanding rapidly, with deliveries
(excluding computers and copiers) valued at £127 million in 197° an^ exports
at £66 million (52 per cent). Deliveries in 1970 included 132,700 standard and
273,600 portable typewriters. Deliveries of accounting and similar machinery
were valued at £67 million, of which £3I-6 million was for export, and other
office machinery at £28 million, including £14-6 million for export. Exports of
all office machinery (including electronic computers and data processing
equipment) were valued at £152 million. The most important overseas pur¬
chasers were the Federal Republic of Germany (£19'1 million), the United
States (£18-5 million), France (£18 million) and Australia (£8-i million).
British subsidiaries or associates of United States firms are prominent in the
industry. There are 56,000 persons employed.
Industrial Plant British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial plant and
and Steelwork steelwork, and 188,000 are employed in this branch. Of particular importance
are chemical and oil refining (process) plant, steam-raising boilers, sintering
plant, metallurgical furnaces and plant, lime and cement kilns, nuclear reactors,
water and sewage treatment plant, and fabricated steelwork for bridges, build¬
ings, etc. The industry, comprising both equipment manufacturers and plant
INDUSTRY
24I
Boilers and
Boilerhouse Plant
Iron, Steel and
Non-ferrous Metal
Works Plant
Chemical Plant
and Mineral Oil
Refining Plant
Nuclear Power
Station
Construction
Miscellaneous
Non-electrical
Machinery
Refrigeration,
Space Heating and
Ventilation
Equipment
Pumps,
Compressors and
Industrial Valves
contractors, has many large-scale enterprises. In 1970 the aggregate value of
equipment deliveries totalled £629 million.
British companies delivered shell boilers and other boilerhouse plant to the
value of 37-5 million in 1970. Water tube boilers of advanced design and of large
steam-raising capacity are produced for power stations, whereas shell boilers
are used for steam-raising and heating in factories and buildings. Exports of
steam generating boilers in 1970 amounted to £7-4 million, and of boilerhouse
plant to ^6-9 million.
The steelworks plant industry provides, in association with firms producing
rolling mills, almost all Britain’s requirements as well as plant for export.
The value of deliveries in 1970 was £25-2 million; rolling mills and ancillary
equipment accounted for a further £20-4 million. This industry consists of a
small number of firms, most of which are business associates or members of a
consortium. India, Pakistan, Algeria and South Africa are a few of the coun¬
tries in which British firms have undertaken major plant projects.
The manufacture and erection of specialised equipment for the chemical and
oil-refining industries has expanded rapidly in recent years. In 1970, expendi¬
ture on plant in Britain by the process industries totalled an estimated £880
million. Exports by the process plant industry (including contractors’ overseas
business) were worth some £340 million. The range of chemical plant produced
includes distillation columns, heat exchangers, high-vacuum drying equip¬
ment, and plant for the manufacture of chemicals from all feedstocks including
petroleum.
Two major consortia, consisting of leading firms in the heavy electrical
engineering, civil engineering, boiler, instrument, and associated industries,
were formed in 1968 to build nuclear power stations for the United Kingdom
electricity authorities (see p. 225). These replaced the three groups formed
in 1959. The Atomic Energy Authority grants them non-exclusive manu¬
facturing licences and is working in close collaboration with them in research
and development.
In addition to the mechanical engineering firms described in preceding sec¬
tions, there are about 1,800 enterprises whose principal product is a type
of machinery not so far mentioned. The main products include: mining
machinery, printing and bookbinding machinery, refrigeration appliances,
space heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, pumps and pump¬
ing machinery, industrial valves and cocks, compressors, scales and weighing
machinery, portable power tools, food processing machinery and many other
types of equipment. The total value of deliveries in 1970 was some .£1,100
million. There are 284,000 workers employed in these industries.
This industry makes a wide range of equipment and appliances, extending
from domestic and commercial refrigerators of varying sizes to industrial
refrigeration equipment for cold stores, manufacture of chemicals and other
products, ice-making plant and refrigeration plant for ships. Total deliveries
of refrigerating machinery were valued at £40-4 million and of space-heating,
air conditioning and ventilation equipment at £92-1 million.
Industrial valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are a vital
component in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. The value of deliveries of pumps and valves in 1970
was £186 million and that of air and gas compressors and exhausters £53-2
242
Other Machinery
Scientific and
Industrial
Instruments
and Apparatus
Radioisotopes
Photographic
Equipment
Clocks and
Watches
General
Mechanical
Engineering
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million. Exports of pumps and centrifuges totalled £85-8 million and exports
of industrial valves £44 million.
The value of deliveries of other major products in 1970 was: mining machinery,
£72-6 million; food and drink machinery, j£6o-6 million; and packaging
machinery, £32-4 million. Important export products in 1970 included: print¬
ing and bookbinding and paper goods machinery (^5°'3 million); paper¬
making machinery j£i6-7 million); mineral crushing, sorting and moulding
machinery (£28-6 million); food and drink processing machinery (£25-6
million); and cigarette making machinery (£ 13• 1 million). Production of
industrial process measuring and control instruments—essential for the
automation of industry—is expanding rapidly, with deliveries totalling £87-9
million in 1970 (£41 -3 million in i960).
The industry manufactures scientific, surgical and industrial instruments; it
has a labour force of 132,000 persons. Deliveries in 1970—some £210 million
—comprised: optical instruments, £12-3 million; electric, electronic, and
nucleonic instruments, ^29‘9 million; and nautical and aeronautical instru¬
ments, ^25-1 million.
Exports of scientific instruments have risen from £27-9 million in i960 to
£64-8 million in 1970. The Scientific Instrument Research Association con¬
ducts research on behalf of the industry.
Radioisotopes are processed and marketed by the Radiochemical Centre at
Amersham, now part of the Atomic Energy Authority (see p. 329)- year
ended March 1971 sales of radioisotopes totalled £4-5 million, of which over a
half was exported.
Deliveries of photographic equipment in 1970 totalled £66 million, including
£53-3 million for export, while those of sensitized paper and cloth were worth
£100-8 million including ^38*7 million for export.
The present industry is largely a post-war development. It employs 15,000
people, the majority skilled craftsmen, and many of its factories are located on
new industrial estates in the older industrial areas, particularly in Scotland.
Output in 1970 included clocks (^7-3 million), watches (£4-4 million) and
time switches (^9'4 million) and time recorders and parking meters (^i’2
million); export sales were valued at ^5'^ million.
Behind the firms manufacturing the major products outlined in this section
are about 3,600 enterprises, employing 247,000 people, whose main functions
are to supply parts and components, to conduct research and development
work, and to undertake general sub-contracting, fabricating and repair work.
(Some enterprises are included because the mixed character of their work pre¬
cludes their classification under any single industry.) The sector includes
several large undertakings with more than 5,000 employees. Ball and roller
bearings, and chains, are important products; exports of the former were
valued at £22-i million in 1970 an<^ exports of chains at £^)'2 million.
The electrical engineering industry, with a labour force of 901,000, is engaged
in the manufacture and installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment,
including all types of generating, transmission and distribution equipment;
motors; telecommunications and broadcasting apparatus; and specialised
INDUSTRY
243
Electrical
Machinery
Electronic
and Radio
Equipment
Capital Equipment
laboratory and electronic equipment and domestic appliances. The volume of
output rose by over 49 per cent between 1963 and 1970, and the total value of
production in 1970 was estimated at over £2,100 million.
Exports of electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances in 1970 were
valued at £579 million, 20 per cent more than in 1969. Products are exported
to all parts of the world; in 1970 the United States (£45’i million), South
Africa (£37 million), the Federal Republic of Germany (£35-3 million),
Australia (£30-4 million) and the Netherlands (29-5 million) were the main
markets.
The industry’s leading representative organisation is the British Electrical
and Allied Manufacturers’ Association; industry-wide scientific and techno¬
logical research is carried out by the Electrical Research Association.
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic
advances in the generation and transmission of electric power. The experi¬
ments of Michael Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity
as a source of cheap and abundant power. Sir Charles Parsons produced and
patented the first turbo-dynamo, the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating
sets of today.
In 1970 deliveries of electrical machinery were valued at £439 million,
comprising £83-5 million worth of generating equipment, £52-3 million worth
of transformers, £185-4 million worth of switchgear and control gear and
£117-8 million worth of other electrical machinery, including electric motors.
Exports of electric power machinery (generators, motors, converters, trans¬
formers and rectifiers) amounted to £74 million in 1970, the main purchasers
being the United States (£8 million), South Africa (£7-1 million) and Canada
(£6-9 million). Switchgear, starting and control gear exports were valued at
£55 •! million.
About 600 firms manufacture electrical machinery, but two important
mergers in 1967 and 1968 led to the creation of one of the leading electrical
engineering groups in Europe, while a number of smaller firms have been re¬
organised into larger units. The total labour force numbers 189,000. Manu¬
facture takes place in many areas, including Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside,
Stafford and Larne (Northern Ireland).
Production of electronic equipment is one of the most rapidly expanding of
British industries. United Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many
basic contributions to electronics—the thermionic valve, which made amplifica¬
tion possible, the development of radar, the first public transmission television
service, and the ‘printed circuit’, which has led to far-reaching changes in the
radio industry. Gross output in 1970, valued at £1,403 million, was 22 per cent
up on 1969; export deliveries totalled £384 million. The industry employs
355,ooo people.
Deliveries of electronic capital equipment in 1970 were valued at £617 million
(41 per cent of total output), including 249 million for export. (Indirect exports
incorporated in ships, aircraft and machinery are considerable.) Computers
are the most important item of capital equipment; Britain has the largest
indigenous computer industry outside the United States and has supplied
over one-half of domestic computer installations. The merger in 1968 of the
two major British computer concerns created a single group, responsible for
almost all home output. Total deliveries, which have more than doubled
in the last three years, were valued at £209 million in 1970 and exports at
£90-8 million.
244 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deliveries of radar and navigational aids were valuedat^i 137 million in 1970,
over six times the i960 level, and almost a half of total output was exported.
Three-quarters of the world’s radar-fitted merchant ships use British equip¬
ment, as do most of the world’s civil airports outside the American continent.
All-weather landing systems and inertial (automatic) navigation systems are
amongst recent developments. Other important items of capital equipment
include electronic control equipment (£79 million), radio communications
equipment (£67 million) and electronic measuring and testing equipment
(^44 million).
Components Deliveries of components (^337* 1 million in 1970) included active components
at ^140-6 million and passive components at ^196-5 million. A recent feature
of the industry has been the growing use of transistors instead of conventional
valves, and the increasing emphasis on miniaturisation. The evolution of micro-
circuit technology has been especially important.
Consumer Goods The consumer goods sector of the industry manufactures radio and television
sets and radiograms. The industry is dominated by several large firms. Output
of television sets in 1970 rose to 2-2 million (including 380,000 colour television
sets); the total sales value of ^136'4 million was almost all in the home market.
Production of radios and radiograms numbered 1-3 million in 1970 and total
sales were worth £20-1 million.
Telecommunications Only a part of the telecommunications industry is concerned with electronics
goods, but it is normally considered as a sector of the electronics industry.
Britain is one of the largest exporters of telegraph and telephone equipment.
Shipments overseas had a value of ^45'^ million in 197°* Research and
development work is done by firms in the industry in co-operation with the
Post Office. The industry employs 88,000 persons, and three firms are
responsible for almost all the output.
Insulated Wires The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power,
and Cables for telegraph and telephone networks and for many other purposes; its products
include submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of materials.
It is supplying the high voltage cable to carry the expanding output of electric
power in Britain (see p. 223). The value of deliveries in 1970 was ^3317 million.
Exports of electric cables, wires, etc., were worth £55 million; the main
purchasers were Hong Kong and the United States. Most of the industry s
labour force of 52,000 are employed in four major groups.
Electrical Goods
and Domestic
Electrical
Appliances
Deliveries of other electrical goods in 197® included domestic electrical
appliances, £215 million; electrical equipment for motor vehicles and air¬
craft, £118 million; batteries and accumulators, £77 million; electric lamps,
£52 million; and miscellaneous electrical goods, ^146 million. In terms of
volume, deliveries included: 17 million electric blankets, 2,i million vacuum
cleaners, 1 million domestic washing machines and 2 million electric irons.
In 1970 exports of domestic electrical equipment were valued at £397 million,
including washing machines and parts (^10 million), refrigerators (£6-i
million) and vacuum cleaners (^7‘5 million); the main markets were the
United States and the Federal Republic of Germany. Exports of batteries and
accumulators in 1970 were valued at £18-9 million. The industry has a labour
force of 217,000.
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT
AND SHIPS
The industries which manufacture vehicles and aircraft are an important
source of overseas earnings; exports of transport equipment in 1970, valued
INDUSTRY
245
Motor Vehicles
Cars
Commercial
Vehicles
Accessories,
Parts, etc.
Cycles and
Motor Cycles
Cycles
Motor Cycles
Railway
Vehicles
at ^1,080 million, formed over 13 per cent of total exports. The labour force
numbers 1,002,000 and includes: 495,000 in motor vehicle manufacture,
228,000 in aircraft construction and repairing, 185,000 in shipbuilding and
marine engineering, 51,000 in the manufacture of locomotives and railway
wagons and carriages, 22,000 in wheeled tractor manufacturing and 20,000 in
the making of cycles and motor cycles.
In both size and value the largest section of the vehicle industry comprises the
manufacture of cars and commercial vehicles.
At one time located mainly in the Midlands and the London area, the in¬
dustry, during the last decade, has built manufacturing and assembly plants on
Merseyside, in Wales and in Scotland.
Car and commercial vehicle output is dominated by the four largest firms—
British Leyland Motor Corporation, Ford, Chrysler United Kingdom and
Vauxhall—which account for over 95 per cent of complete vehicle production;
the balance is in the hands of smaller, specialist producers of heavy commercial
vehicles, omnibuses, coaches, limousines and sports cars. The principal trade
association is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT),
which holds a motor show annually in London and a Commercial Motor
Exhibition every two years. The Motor Industry Research Association carries
out collective research on vehicles and components.
Output of passenger cars in 1970 totalled 1-64 million units, compared with
1-72 million units in 1969. Exports in 1970 amounted to 693,400 cars valued
at £330 million. The United States (£62-3 million) was again the largest single
purchaser, followed by South Africa (£i9-B million), Australia and Belgium.
About one-fifth (by value) of all exports went to EFTA member countries
and one-seventh to the EEC.
Production of commercial vehicles, including chassis (146,000 in 1946), totalled
458,000 in 1970, slightly less than in 1969. Exports in 1970 of new commercial
vehicles numbered 148,300 worth £152-4 million. South Africa (£21-7
million), Australia (£16-8 million) and EFTA countries (£24-2 million) were
the main markets. Since 1961 Britain has been one of the world’s largest
exporters of commercial vehicles. The prototype of a gas-turbine-powered
commercial vehicle was demonstrated in 1968.
Exports of parts and accessories for cars and commercial vehicles, including
bodies, chassis and engines, had a value of £290-4 million in 1970; caravan and
trailer exports totalled £22-5 million.
Deliveries of bicycles have declined in recent years, amounting in 1970 to 1-6
million. Most of British manufacturing capacity is in the hands of a single
group of companies concentrated in the Nottingham area. About 900,000
cycles worth £io-6 million were sent overseas in 1970; the United States
(£3-6 million) was the largest single market. A small-wheel bicycle, developed
in Britain, is the first major technical change in the bicycle for 60 years.
Deliveries of motor cycles and three-wheeled vehicles in 1970 amounted to
69,800 and 12,700 respectively. Manufacture is dominated by one large group.
Exports of motor cycles and parts totalled £19 million in 1970, with the United
States much the biggest market.
The British Railways Board has its own workshops which supply British
Railways and certain other users in Britain; private firms build locomotives,
246
Aircraft and
Aero-Engines
Aircraft
Aero-engines
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
carriages and wagons for British Railways, for industrial users and for export.
The total value of exports of railway vehicles and parts in 1970 was fiyz
million; South Africa, Ghana and Canada were the largest purchasers.
Almost all the aircraft produced by the British industry today are based on
civil and military applications of the gas-turbine aero-engine, first developed
by Sir Frank Whittle. The most notable turbo-prop aircraft in current pro¬
duction and operation is the Hawker Siddeley 748, of which over 250 have
been sold or are on order. A second generation of jet airliners, the medium-
haul Trident, the longer-haul Vickers VC10, and the BAG One-Eleven, the
world’s first jet transport designed to operate economically on short-haul
routes, have been in service for over seven years. Other civil aircraft in produc¬
tion include the HS125 executive jet, the Skyvan and the Islander, an
economical feeder-line aircraft. Flight trials of the Concorde, the world’s first
supersonic airliner, developed jointly by Britain and France, are in progress.
The industry produces a wide range of military aircraft, including the
Jaguar, in collaboration with France, and the Harrier vertical take-off strike
aircraft, the second major overseas order for which was placed by the United
States Government in 1970- Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and
Italy are jointly developing a supersonic multi-rate combat aircraft (MRCA)
to meet the needs of their air forces during the late 1970s and 1980s. It is also
engaged on work on rockets, earth satellites and other aerospace requirements,
including the Blue Streak and Black Arrow satellite launchers.
Hovercraft, a new type of transport vehicle invented in Britain, are being
increasingly used throughout the world. Almost 350 have been built in Britain
up to 1970 and a number of types, including a 170-ton version, the SRN 4, are
in production or under development.
In 1970 exports of the aerospace industry totalled £260 million, 15 per cent
lower than in 1969. Exports of new aircraft and parts in 197° (excluding
electrical equipment) had a value of £133-2 million. Leading buyers included
the Federal Republic of Germany (£21 -2 million) and the United States (£16-4
million). In addition, exports of instruments were worth £6 million, and tyres
£1-3 million. .
The construction of aircraft is dominated by two large airframe manufac¬
turers and one helicopter concern; outside these groups are a few important
smaller companies. Besides extensive research work by the industry, research
on a substantial scale on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out
by the Government, chiefly at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the
National Gas Turbine Establishment, both at Farnborough, and the Royal
Aircraft Establishment at Bedford. The British aerospace industry has over
50 collaboration and licence agreements with overseas governments and
companies.
Exports of aero-engines and parts have provided well over £1,000 million in
overseas earnings since 1946, and in 1970 were valued at £114-2 million: major
customers were the United States (£32-9 million), France (£18-5 million) and
the Federal Republic of Germany (£10-9 million). Thirteen different types of
British jet engines power over 30 types of aircraft currently in production
overseas. Famous engines include the economical Dart turbo-prop, the Spey
turbo-jet, the revolutionary Pegasus lift-thrust engine for vertical take-off and
landing (VTOL) aircraft, and the Olympus, the power plant for the Concorde.
In February 1971, Rolls-Royce Limited, the company responsible for al¬
most all of Britain’s aero-engine production, was taken into public ownership,
INDUSTRY
247
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Merchant
Shipbuilding
Ship Repairing
Marine
Engineering
MISCELLANEOUS
METAL
PRODUCTS
following its appointment of a receiver. The firm had encountered severe
financial difficulties in its contract to supply RB211 advanced technology
engines to the United States Lockheed Lion airbus. Development and pro¬
duction of the engines is proceeding under a revised contract negotiated be¬
tween the nationalised concern—Rolls-Royce (1971) Limited—and Lockheed.
The building of large ocean-going vessels is concentrated in four main areas:
the river Clyde in Scotland, the north-east and north-west coasts of England
and Belfast in Northern Ireland. Numerous yards around the coast build
smaller vessels such as fishing vessels, yachts and harbour craft.
Co-operative research into shipbuilding and marine engineering is under¬
taken by the British Ship Research Association with its headquarters and a
research station on the river Tyne.
A gradual fall in tonnage launched from the 1955 peak of 1 -5 million tons was
halted in 1964, and launchings in 1970 totalled 1 -24 million gross tons, 198,000
tons above the 1969 level. British launchings were the fourth largest in the
world in 1970 accounting for 57 per cent of the world total (5-4 per cent in
1969). Fifteen oil tankers, totalling 373,400 gross tons, were launched in 1970.
Launchings also included 22 bulk carriers totalling 482,300 gross tons and 25
cargo ships amounting to 301,800 gross tons. At the end of 1970 orders on
hand for merchant vessels of over 100 gross tons were 336 (285 in 1969)
totalling 4-9 million gross tons with a record value of £737 million, 25 per cent
up on 1969. Of these vessels, 80 (1 -2 million gross tons) were for export.
Since the publication in 1966 of the report of the Shipbuilding Enquiry
Committee, many British shipyards have embarked on programmes of
modernisation and reorganisation. In many cases this has been facilitated by
assistance from the Shipbuilding Industry Board, set up in 1967, whose life
was extended to the end of 1971. In recent years, modernisation in British
shipyards has been paralleled by major structural changes resulting from the
proposals of the Shipbuilding Industry Board. A series of mergers has led to
the creation of two major groups on Clydeside, one of which is to be reorganised
following its liquidation, one in north-east England, one in eastern Scotland and
one in southern England. Together with one group in Belfast—where the
world’s largest building dock is now operational—they accounted in 1970 for
almost nine-tenths of the industry’s new orders.
There are many specialist ship-repairing establishments and most of the larger
shipbuilding firms also carry out repair work; about one-quarter of ship¬
repairing activity is concentrated on the north-east coast of England. Repair
yards and dry docks are situated in all the large ports.
Many of the larger shipbuilding yards maintain or have closely associated
engine building works, constructing various types of marine slow-speed diesel
engines, usually under licence. One firm designs large low-speed diesel engines
and there are two independent builders of these engines. Steam turbines of the
highest powers are also built.
The group of industries manufacturing metal products not already described
consists of a large number of companies with a total labour force of 637,000
in 1970; the main groups were engineers’ small tools and gauges (72,000
persons), bolts, nuts and screws (45,000), wire and wire manufactures
(44,000), cans and metal boxes (35,000), jewellery, plate, and refining of
precious metals (22,000), tools and implements (22,000), cutlery (18,000), and
248
Engineers’
Small Tools
and Gauges
Cutlery and
Flatware
Domestic
Hollow-ware
Hand Tools and
Implements
Jewellery, Gold
and Silver Ware
CHEMICALS
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other metal industries (378,000). The total value of exports in 1970 was about
£260 million.
The manufacture of engineers’ small tools and gauges is an expanding
industry, deliveries having doubled in value since i960. Totalling ^135-9
million in 1970, they included jigs and fixtures (£25-9 million), press tools,
moulds, etc. (£23*8 million), hard metal-tipped tools (£18 *6 million) and other
metal cutting tools (£13-3 million). Export deliveries in 1970 totalled £25-4
million. The industry has a labour force of some 74,000 persons.
The production of cutlery and flatware is centred mainly in the city of
Sheffield and the industry’s reputation has been built up on the skill of its
craftsmen. Mass-production methods are, however, extensively used except
in the case of some of the highest quality wares, although firms remain mainly
small. The value of sales of cutlery and flatware in 1970 was £16-3 million,
including export sales of ^4-6 million.
This industry, located mainly in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, South
Wales and London, produces a wide range of domestic utensils, such as
saucepans, buckets and dustbins, mainly from aluminium and wrought steel.
The value of sales in 1970 was ^28-1 million, of which £9 million were sales for
export.
The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest British industries, covering
the manufacture of such tools as files, saws, hammers, axes and spades;
Sheffield, Birmingham and other Midland towns are the most important
centres. The value of sales of implements and tools, other than machine tools
and portable power tools, was £47-8 million in 1970, of which £15-2 million
worth were exported; the totals included sales of hand tools, at home and for
export, valued at £44 million and j£i4'8 million respectively.
The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware and the refining of precious
metals is an industry in which British craftsmen are heirs to a long tradition.
Most of the firms in the industry are small. The law requires that gold and
silver plate shall not be sold until it has been hall-marked at one of the Assay
Offices situated in London, Birmingham, Sheffield and Edinburgh. The
Birmingham office, located in the main centre of the jewellery industry, is by
far the most important. The total value of sales of jewellery, goldsmiths and
silversmiths’ wares and electro-plated nickel silver wares in 1970 was £29
million, of which ^6-3 million was for export.
The chemicals industry, with a labour force of 471,000, comprises the manu¬
facture of: general chemicals (140,000 employees), pharmaceutical chemicals
and preparations (74,000 employees), toilet preparations (26,000 employees),
paint (33,000 employees), soap and detergents (24,000 employees), synthetic
resins, plastics materials and synthetic rubber (59,000 employees), dyestuffs
and pigments (27,000 employees), fertilisers (14,000 employees) and other
chemical industries (74,000 employees). The industry is capital intensive, its
fixed capital expenditure, excluding mineral oil refining, amounting to over
/i,495 million during the seven years 1963-69, and totalling £376 million in
1970. In January 1970, a leading British company announced plans to double
its chemicals production over the next five years with a £225 million invest¬
ment programme—the largest ever undertaken in the British chemical
INDUSTRY
249
Inorganic and
Organic
Chemicals and
Dyestuffs
Plastics
Synthetic
Rubber
industry. The value of exports in 1970 was ^846 million, or 10-5 per cent of
total British exports. Production in the general chemicals industries rose by
58 per cent between 1963 and 1970.
Over half the output of the inorganic chemicals industry consists of a limited
number of relatively simple chemicals, such as sulphuric acid, caustic soda,
chlorine and ammonia, produced in very large quantities and serving as basic
materials for industry. Sulphuric acid has the largest production of any
chemical and 33 million tons were produced in 1970. The remaining output of
this sector consists of a very wide range of chemicals of varying complexity.
Substantial quantities of inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture
of such products as fertilisers, detergents, paint, glass and metals. About one-
sixth of output is estimated to be exported directly.
Production of organic chemicals (which include coal-tar chemicals) rose
by 68 per cent between 1963 and 1970. To an increasing extent petroleum is
the raw material used and it is estimated that in 1970 petroleum-based
chemicals accounted for over four-fifths of the total output of organic chemicals;
deliveries of feedstock for the petroleum chemical plants totalled 6-2 million
tons in 1970 compared with 0-3 million tons in 1959. The most important
products (by weight) in 1970 were ethylene (982,000 tons) and propylene
(448,000 tons). The main outlets for organic chemicals are plastics materials,
solvents, synthetic rubber, man-made fibres and detergents. Consumption of
dyestuffs is geared primarily to demand by the textile industry; about 34,000
tons of synthetic dyestuffs were produced in 1970.
Exports of chemical elements and compounds amounted to ,£210-3 million in
1970, major purchasers in 1970 were: the Netherlands (£29-9 million), the
United States (£20-4 million), France (^ii'i million) and Australia (,£8-6
million).
The first plastic, Parkesine (later called Celluloid), was produced and patented
in Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes; other British discoveries include
polyethylene. Plastics manufacture is one of the fastest growing sections of the
economy. Output of synthetic resins has increased by 79 per cent since 1963
and total production in 1970 was 1-3 million tons (an increase of 18 per cent
over 1969), of which 1 million tons consisted of thermoplastic resins.
Expansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of
which the most important are polyethylene (used in coverings and packaging—
notably for foodstuffs), polyvinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a wide
range of industrial purposes and consumer goods) and polystyrene (a cheap
non-inflammable material used for toys, light mouldings and many consumer
goods). One of the newer thermoplastic materials is polypropylene, which can
be fabricated as mouldings, films and fibres. A new family of plastic materials
reinforced with carbon fibres is now in commercial production in Britain; they
are up to three times the strength but only half the weight of steel. Rapid
expansion of capacity for all the main types of plastics materials is planned.
Exports in 1970 amounted to about 549,000 tons, valued at £143-7 million.
The main purchasers were Australia (£14-9 million), South Africa (£12-3
million), Sweden (£10-7 million) and the United States (£8-2 million).
The first general purpose synthetic rubber to be manufactured on a com¬
mercial scale in the United Kingdom was marketed in 1958. High styrene
rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use where oil
resistance is required, are in large-scale production, and neoprene rubber is
250
Fertilisers
Paints
Pharma¬
ceuticals
Crop
Protection
Products
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
manufactured in Northern Ireland. Production in 1970 amounted to 301,000
tons, most of which came from the styrene-butadiene plant at Hythe, near
Southampton. Exports of synthetic rubber and latex were worth £19-8
million.
The development of artificial fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
the British scientists Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert. Production is
dominated by three firms and there are a number of firms marketing compound
fertilisers from the principal constituents—nitrogen, phosphorus and potas¬
sium. To encourage use, home sales are assisted by government subsidies to
farmers (see p. 273). Output of nitrogenous fertilisers (in terms of nitrogen
content) has been increasing and in 1969-70 totalled 700,000 tons, while
438,000 tons (in terms of phosphate content) of phosphatic fertilisers were
produced; production of compound fertilisers amounted to 27 million tons
in 1969-70. The use of ammonium nitrate (35 per cent nitrogen), ammonium
phosphate, and, to a limited extent, urea (mostly 45 per cent nitrogen) is
resulting in more concentrated fertilisers. The value of exports of manufactured
fertilisers, mainly nitrogenous, was ^4'8 million in 1970.
Manufacturers’ sales of paint and varnish during 1970 amounted to oyer 106
million gallons (including 22 million gallons of emulsion paint) valued at
/158 million. Britain is one of the largest exporters of paints in the world;
exports of pigments, paints, varnishes and related materials in 1970 amounted
to £44-4 million. Indirect exports in the form of surface coatings for finished
goods are considerable. , ,.
In recent years many improved techniques have been introduced, including
new ranges of synthetic resins and pigments, quick-drying paints and paints
needing only one application.
The whole range of drugs is produced in the United Kingdom, including
antibiotics, sulphonamides, anti-malarial drugs, anti-histamme products,
anaesthetics, vaccines, sera and naturally occurring drugs. Research expendi¬
ture totalled £22 million in 1970.
Notable British contributions to the development of new products include:
the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming and its evaluation by Sir
Howard Florey and E. B. Chain; the evaluation of sulphapyridme (M & B 693)
by Sir Lionel Whitby; the discovery of griseofulvin; and, more, recently, the
isolation of the penicillin nucleus and the development of several semi¬
synthetic penicillins and the cephalosporin antibiotics. Several of the larger
pharmaceutical companies in Britain are subsidiaries of overseas firms.
In 1970 exports of medicinal and pharmaceutical products and goods rose
by 19 per cent to the record level of ^139-8 million, of which £12-2 mi ion
worth were antibiotics. The largest purchasers were Japan (£9 f1'1 lon'’
Belgium (£8-5 million), France (£77 million), and the Republic of Ireland
{£7 million).
Notable discoveries by the British crop protection industry include the
insecticidal activity of BHC (benzene hexachloride), the first selective weed¬
killer, MCPA, and more recently Gramoxone, a non-residual general herbicide
based on paraquat. Sales of pesticides and allied products were valued at
rtf-l million in 1970, 10 per cent higher than in 1969; herbicides (^b-q
million) were the largest single category. Exports of insecticides, fungicides
and weedkillers in 1970 totalled £26-5 million, one-tenth more than in 1969.
INDUSTRY
Toilet
Preparations,
Soap and
Cleaning
Preparations
TEXTILES
Cotton
Wool
251
Sales of toilet preparations were valued at £134-5 million in 1970, including
export sales of £19-6 million; home market sales of hair preparations totalled
about £33 million. Petroleum is the source of the principal raw materials
used in the manufacture of organic surface-active agents in detergents; the
other main constituent, polyphosphates, is derived from inorganic sources.
Sales of synthetic detergents amounted to 498,000 tons in 1970, including
81,000 tons for export. Deliveries of soap totalled some 262,000 tons. Sales
of polishes in 1970 were valued at £17 million, including floor and furniture
polishes worth £9 million. Exports of perfumery and toilet preparations, soap
and associated products were valued at £67 million.
The textile industries in June 1970 had a labour force of 663,000 persons, half
of whom are women; 45,000 employees are engaged in the production of man¬
made fibres, 81,000 in the spinning and doubling of cotton, flax and man-made
fibres, 64,000 in the weaving of cotton, linen and man-made fibres, 143,000 in
the woollen and worsted trades, 128,000 in hosiery and knitted goods, 57,000
in textile finishing and 44,000 in carpets. The total value of textile exports in
I97° at £397 million was 10 per cent more than in 1969. Production of textiles
rose by 1-i per cent in 1970 and was 25 per cent higher than in 1963. Con¬
siderable vertical integration has taken place connected with the increasing use
of man-made fibres. Four multi-fibre, multi-process groups, founded under
the leadership of man-made fibres manufacturers, control the bulk of Britain’s
spinning and warp knitting activities. Scientific and technical research for the
industry is carried out principally by the Cotton, Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association.
Cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods industry and cotton piece-goods
its largest export during the nineteenth century. Increasing low-cost competi¬
tion has cut progressively into British markets and a global limit was placed
on imports of cotton goods from most countries during 1966-70.
Output in 1970 consisted of: 350 million lb. of single cotton yarn, 171
million lb. of spun man-made fibre and mixture single yarn, 222 million lb. of
doubled yarn, 182 million lb. of textured yarn, 686 million linear yards of
woven cotton cloth, and 530 million linear yards of man-made fibre and
mixture cloth. In 1970 exports of cotton yarn (excluding man-made fibres)
were worth £11 million, exports of woven cotton fabrics were valued at £26-7
million, with the Republic of Ireland and Congo (Kinshasa) the most important
markets.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county
being mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning.
Manchester is the commercial centre and Liverpool is the chief port of entry
for raw cotton. Under legislation to assist the reorganisation of the industry,
Exchequer funds have paid for two-thirds of the cost of removing surplus
capacity, and have also provided grants of one-quarter towards the cost of
approved re-equipment and modernisation schemes.
The wool textile industry, one of the largest in the world, is the most ancient of
Britain’s staple industries and has been important since medieval times. There
are two main branches—woollen and worsted. The small or medium-sized
business predominates, with only a few large firms. While the West Riding of
Yorkshire is by far the most important producing area, Scotland and the West
of England remain famous as specialised producers of high-quality woollen
252
Man-made
Fibres
Hosiery and
Knitwear
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
cloth. In recent years an increasing amount of man-made fibre has been
blended with wool.
In 1970 output included 176 million lb. of wool and hair tops and 285
million lb. of woollen yarn. Deliveries of worsted and semi-worsted yarn
amounted to 215 million lb. and of woven fabrics to 257 million square yards.
In addition, large, but declining, quantities of raw wool are scoured and
cleaned in Britain. Consumption of raw wool in 1970 was 346 million lb.
Exports in 1970 included wool yarns (£23-4 million), woollen fabrics (£43-4
million) and wool worsted fabrics (£26-7 million). The main buyers of woollen
and worsted fabrics were Japan (£11’6 million), the United States and the
Federal Republic of Germany. Raw wool (cleaned or scoured in Britain) and
other animal hair and tops exported had a value of £41 -4 million. Research is
carried on mainly by the Wool Industries Research Association.
Much of the early development of viscose rayon and acetate took place in
Britain. Production is spread throughout the country with Northern Ireland
of growing importance. Large firms predominate in the industry. There has
been a rapid expansion of output in recent years, the 1970 record total of 1,322
million lb. being 60 per cent more than in 1964. Output consisted of 754
million lb. of staple fibre and 568 million lb. of filament yarn in 1970. Of the
staple fibre, 375 million lb., and of the continuous filament, 367 million lb.,
were of fully synthetic materials.
Two main types of man-made fibres are manufactured: those made from
cellulose (such as rayon) and those produced by fully synthetic processes from
chemical substances (such as nylon). Viscose rayon is still the most widely
used of all man-made fibres and output in 1970 totalled 480 million lb. The
world’s largest rayon staple factory is at Greenfield (North Wales), with an
annual output of over 200 million lb., while other large rayon plants are at
Grimsby and Preston. Almost all the rayon produced in Britain is made by a
single company and its subsidiaries. _ ..
Production of nylon, the first fully synthetic fibre, in the form of nylon 66,
started in Britain in 1941; another type of nylon (nylon 6) has been manu¬
factured since 1963. Total productive capacity for nylon has increased from
160 million lb. a year in 1964, to almost 350 million lb. at the end of ^T0-
Terylene, a polyester fibre, was invented in Britain during the second world
war. It is resistant to fading and is particularly suited to blending with wool
Annual manufacturing capacity totals over 120 million lb. A group of fibres
of growing importance are the acrylic fibres: Courtelle (a British discovery)
and Acrilan are examples. Synthetic elastomerics or spandex fibres, which are
man-made textile fibres having inherent properties of stretch and recovery,
are now produced commercially. .
Exports of man-made fibre yarns had a value of ^63-1 million in 1970, and
woven fabrics £21 -5 million. Switzerland, the United States, the Republic of
Ireland and the Federal Republic of Germany were the most important pur¬
chasers of yarns.
The hosiery and knitwear industry is predominantly one of small-scale
enterprises. Although widely distributed, the industry is centred in the east
Midlands, the north-west of England and in Scotland. Sales of knitted goods
were valued at £308-5 million in 1970 including ^iSU2 million worth of outer¬
wear and fio2‘i million worth of socks and stockings. Sales of knitted fabrics
were worth £152-6 million in 1970. Exports of knitted clothing and accessories
were valued at £45 million in 1970; the largest buyers were the United States,
INDUSTRY
Other Textiles
Linen
Jute
Lace
Miscellaneous
Textile
Manufacturers
Carpets
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FOOTWEAR
253
Switzerland and the Soviet Union. Exports of knitted and crocheted fabrics
amounted to £38-9 million. The British Hosiery and Knitwear Export Group
co-ordinates the export activities of the industry and organises overseas
missions. The Hosiery and Allied Trades Research Association, with labora¬
tories at Nottingham, undertakes collective research.
The linen industry is concentrated in Northern Ireland (the greatest linen¬
manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder in Scotland.
Broadly, the Northern Ireland industry concentrates on yarns and the lighter
types of fabrics, while in Scotland production is largely of coarse linens and
canvas, although household types are also produced. Northern Ireland manu¬
facturers produced 30 million linear yards of cloth in 1970, while weavers in
Great Britain delivered 24 million square yards, including 15 million square
yards of sailcloth and canvas. Exports in 1970 included ^6-9 million worth of
linen fabrics and ^4-3 million worth of flax yarns and linen thread.
Jute is manufactured on a large scale in the Dundee area—the centre of the
world’s oldest jute industry—and some 12,000 people are employed in all. Jute
is used in the manufacture of carpets, cordage, ropes and woven into fabrics for
a wide range of applications in the packaging, carpet, upholstery, building and
motor car industries. New uses for jute, as a plastic reinforcement for example,
have been developed. In 1970, 80,000 tons of raw jute were used, and exports of
jute fabric and yarn totalled £1-9 million.
Sales of finished lace goods amounted to ^147 million in 1970. The most
important lace product is from the warp knitting machines, with sales valued
at ^8-3 million. Exports were worth ^3’6 million in 1970.
In addition to the products mentioned above, British textile firms manufacture
a wide range of other goods, including many special yarns and fabrics, net,
household textiles such as blankets, tablecloths and curtains, and floor cover¬
ings other than carpets. Sales of narrow fabrics (including elastic machinery
belting and ribbon) totalled £48-8 million in 1970, including export sales of
^77 million. Sales of floor coverings of linoleum, vinyl and other synthetic
materials were valued at £31-3 million in 1970; just under one-sixth were for
export. The cordage industry is the largest in Europe. Exports of ropes, cord¬
age, nets and netting in 1970 were valued at ^4-5 million.
Over 150 enterprises are engaged in the manufacture of carpets and rugs,
including several large groups. Total sales in 1970 amounted to 155 million
square yards worth £214-1 million. Almost half of the volume of sales is
accounted for by tufted carpets, in the production of which the pile, usually
with a high man-made fibre content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing;
woven carpets, such as Axminster and Wilton make up most of the remainder
of sales, and form about one-third of the value of exports—£39-4 million in
1970. The principal manufacturing centres include Kidderminster (in
Worcestershire), Halifax and Dewsbury (in the West Riding of Yorkshire),
Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland) and several towns in Northern Ireland.
About one-quarter of the carpets produced (by quantity) are made pre¬
dominantly of wool and a growing proportion of traditional woven carpets
contain some man-made fibre.
There are 533,000 employees in the clothing, leather and footwear industries.
Some 383,000 are in the clothing industry, 96,000 in the footwear trade and
254
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
54,000 in leather, leather goods and fur manufacture. The aggregate value of
their exports in 1970 was £189-4 million.
Clothing The British clothing industry is the largest in Europe and total deliveries
of made-up clothing have increased by 11 per cent since 1963. Exports in 1970,
excluding knitted goods, were valued at ^617 million; Switzerland (£7-3
million) was the main purchaser. Substantial quantities of clothing are also
sent by parcel post.
Although there are some large firms employing mass-production methods
on an increasing scale, the typical firm is small. The principal manufacturing
centres are London, Leeds and Manchester, but several firms are also situated
on industrial trading estates throughout the country. Fashion is important in
the production of haute couture models and throughout the ready-to-wear
industry. The Clothing Export Council, representing over 300 companies,
organises promotions for various sectors of the industry.
Leather Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. In 1970 some 11,300 tons
of sole and other heavy leather and about 403 million square feet of upper,
lining and other light leathers were produced. Britain is one of the world’s
leading exporters with exports in 1970 valued at £367 million. The United
States (£7-2 million) is the largest single market, followed by Canada (£3-9
million) and the Federal Republic of Germany.
Tanneries are situated in most parts of Britain, but there are important
concentrations in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, the north Midlands and
the London area. Many different types of leather are produced, ranging from
the heavy types for industrial uses, such as machinery belting, to high quality
leather for footwear, leather goods, gloves and clothing. The British Leather
Manufacturers’ Research Association is the foremost of its type in the world.
Footwear The British footwear industry is among the largest in the world. In 1970
manufacturers’ sales of footwear totalled 191 million pairs. Exports of all
types had a value of £35-5 million; the United States (^8-i million), Canada
and the Soviet Union were the largest markets.
Factories are located throughout Britain. Some areas concentrate on pro¬
duction of particular types; for example, the Rossendale Valley region of
Lancashire on slippers, and Leicester and Norwich on women’s and girls
shoes. The Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world-wide
reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
FOOD, DRINK The food, drink and tobacco industries employ 848,000 persons in the pro-
AND TOBACCO duction of a great variety of goods. The value of their combined exports in
1970 was £514 million. Exports of alcoholic and other beverages accounted
for C225 million; sugar, sugar preparations and honey for £307 million; cereal
and cereal preparations for £33 7 million; fruit and vegetables for £22 -2 million,
and coffee, cocoa, tea and spices for £41 -6 million.
Many of the industry’s leading firms have been involved in mergers in
recent years.
Bread and Flour The household consumption of bread, which has been falling, averaged about
Confectionery 2 lb. 6 oz. (1 -07 kilos) per head per week in 1970. The trend is heavily towards
and Biscuits concentrating production in large mechanical bakeries; well over two-thirds
of the bread is made in these bakeries, which specialise in sliced and wrapped
loaves; four groups have a dominant position. In the smaller bakeries produc-
INDUSTRY
255
Cocoa,
Chocolate and
Sugar
Confectionery
Fruit and
Vegetable
Products
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Beverages
tion of cake and other flour confectionery is usually allied to bread production.
There are 156,000 employees in the bread and flour confectionery industry
and a further 34,000 in grain-milling.
There are 51,000 employees producing biscuits, and annual output has been
over 580,000 tons in recent years. Weekly consumption of cakes and biscuits
per head in Britain was 117 oz. (0-32 kilos) in 1970. British biscuits have
gained a world-wide reputation, and, despite the problem of import restric¬
tions in several overseas markets, exports in 1970 were valued at £13-5 million.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which has 85,000
employees, is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and
many medium-sized and small firms. The main ingredients used by the
industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose, milk, nuts and fats. Production of
chocolate and sugar confectionery was 668,000 tons in 1970. Consumption of
chocolate and sugar confectionery in the United Kingdom is among the
highest in the world, being equivalent to 7-6 oz. (0-20 kilos) per head per week.
The value of exports in 1970 of cocoa preparations (including chocolate)
was j£i6-7 million and of sugar confectionery, £19 million. The United States
and Canada were the main markets for sugar preparations. An estimated 30
per cent of total world exports of chocolate and sugar confectionery come from
Britain, the world’s largest exporter of these products.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen and dried fruit and vege¬
tables, jam, marmalade and pickles. The labour force numbers 75,000. Output
of jams and marmalade, which fell from 329,000 tons in 1949 to about 215,000
tons in 1956, has since remained little changed, totalling 187,000 tons in 1970.
Strawberry, raspberry, apricot and blackcurrant jams are the most popular.
Exports of jams and marmalade in 1970 were valued at £2-6 million.
In 1970, 804,000 tons of canned vegetables were produced. The British
Navy was using canned foods in 1813, but rapid development in the industry
did not take place until after 1935. Processed and fresh peas (287,000 tons) and
beans in tomato sauce (258,000 tons) are the vegetables most in demand as
canned products. In addition, output in 1970 included 93,000 tons of canned
and bottled fruit. Strawberries, plums and rhubarb are the most important
fruits used for canning, followed by fruit salad, prunes and gooseberries. Sales
of prepared fruit pie fillings are increasing.
Sales of frozen foods are rising in Britain, and nearly 212,000 tons of vege¬
tables and 2,000 tons of fruit were preserved by this method in 1970; peas
accounted for 42 per cent of all home-produced quick-frozen vegetables. Sales
of dehydrated products, including accelerated freeze dried foods, are also
increasing.
The industry comprises the curing of bacon and ham, the canning and pre¬
serving of meat and fish, the manufacture of sausages and pies and the pre¬
paration of extracts and pastes. The labour force numbers 107,000. Output of
canned meat and canned meat products in 1970 rose to 132,000 tons, and
the quantity of bacon and ham cured increased to 247,000 tons. There has
been a rapid expansion of quick-frozen fish output, and some 107,000 tons were
produced in 1970; small quantities (9,000 tons in 1970) are also canned.
Exports of fish and fish preparations had a value of £20-8 million in 1970 and
those of meat and meat products were worth £21 -3 million.
The industries producing beer, spirits, wines, cider and soft drinks have a
labour force of 155,000.
256
Whisky
Gin
Brewing and
Malting
Soft Drinks
Tobacco
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exports of whisky (almost all of it Scotch whisky) totalled 62 million proof
gallons with a value of £194 million in 1970; over half went to the United
States (£98 million or 33 million proof gallons). Scotch whisky was first
distilled in the fifteenth century. It is blended from 20 or more different types,
some from malted barley and some from other grains. Whisky requires several
years to mature, and the 140 million proof gallons of Scotch whisky produced
in the 1970 distilling year will not be on sale for some years. Stocks of whisky
amount to more than 700 million proof gallons, representing 10 years’ con¬
sumption. About four-fifths of annual sales are to overseas buyers.
Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early 1950s. The main
distillers are in London and one company accounts for a large proportion of
total output. Although the larger manufacturers also own distilleries abroad,
exports had a value of £10-1 million in 1970.
There are 87,000 employees in the brewing and malting industry. Recent
mergers have led to the creation of a few major brewery groups, marketing
their products throughout the country. In 197°, 34 million bulk barrels of
beer were produced, the highest since i945> •mcl consumers expenditure on
beer amounted to £1,258 million. Exports in 1970 of malt beer were 409,000
bulk barrels, worth £5-3 million. Firms are experimenting with new methods,
including continuous brewing processes, and automated batch production
plants are well established.
The main raw materials used in brewing are malt, hops and some sugar.
Malt is made almost entirely from home-grown barley. Some brewers make all
or part of their own malt, others purchase it from independent maltsters who
also supply distillers, vinegar brewers and malt extract manufacturers. British
malt is used by brewers throughout the world, and exports in 1970 amounted
to 51,000 tons, worth £2-6 million.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade although
sales are liable to be seasonal. Output in 1970 included 72 million gallons of
concentrated liquid, and 268 million gallons of unconcentrated drinks. Though
there has been some amalgamation in recent years, there are still several
hundred firms supplying regional markets. There are two very large firms
among about 20 producing widely advertised brands which are marketed on a
national scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by firms in the pro¬
duction of various types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes
and cordials, tonic waters and ‘mixers’, and comminuted drinks (in which the
whole fruit is used).
The tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other tobacco
goods sold in Britain. In 1970 consumers’ expenditure on these goods amounted
to £1,720 million (of which about two-thirds was tax revenue) and, in addition,
exports worth £40-1 million (of which cigarettes accounted for 86 per cent)
were shipped to a large number of overseas markets 5 Saudi Arabia, Hong Kong,
and Kuwait were the most important. The main centres of production are in
and around Bristol, Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham,
Glasgow and Belfast. The two biggest manufacturing groups account for over
90 per cent of total output. The industry has 38,000 employees.
The tobacco industry used 306-1 million lb. (138-8 million kilos) of un¬
manufactured tobacco in 1970, all of which was imported. In 197° the main
sources were the United States, Canada and India. Total consumption of
tobacco in Britain in 1970 amounted to 247-4 million lb. (112-2 million kilos),
INDUSTRY
257
BRICKS,
POTTERY, GLASS
AND CEMENT
Brickmaking
and Refractory
Goods
Pottery
Glass
including 215-4 million lb. (97-7 million kilos) consumed in cigarettes, 27-1
million lb. (12-3 million kilos) in pipe and hand rolling tobacco and 4-5 million
lb. (2 million kilos) in cigars. In 1970 127,900 million cigarettes were con¬
sumed, 3,000 million more than in the previous year; 7-8 per cent of the total
were tipped compared with 16 per cent in i960.
This group comprises the manufacture of bricks, fireclay, refractory goods,
pottery, glass, cement, abrasives, asbestos and other building materials. The
industries have a combined labour force of 330,000 which includes 57,000 in
the bricks, fireclay and refractory goods trades, 80,000 in the glass industry
and 60,000 in the pottery industry.
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
pots, fireclay ware and heat-resisting products including furnace and kiln
linings. Brickmaking, one of Britain’s oldest industries, was introduced by
the Romans, and manufacturing methods vary from traditional hand fabrica¬
tion to highly mechanised systems. In 1970 about 6,500 million building
bricks were produced in Great Britain, 40 per cent of which were of the
Fletton type, made mainly in the Bedford and Peterborough areas. Refractory
goods (firebricks, silica bricks, magnesite bricks and chrome-magnesite bricks)
are manufactured mainly for home use.
The pottery industry, supplying almost all home needs for domestic and
industrial pottery, is a long-established and complex industry, largely located
in the Stoke-on-Trent area of Staffordshire. Much of its raw material is
indigenous, such as china clay, ball clay and china stone from Devon and
Cornwall.
Domestic pottery, including china, earthenware, stoneware, jet and Rocking¬
ham, accounts for about half of the industry’s output; the other main divisions
are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware, and such specialised industrial
products as acid-proof stoneware, porous ceramics and laboratory porcelain
are also manufactured. Among famous makes of British pottery are Wedgwood,
Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton, Coalport and Royal Crown
Derby. Total sales of domestic pottery were £59-6 million in 1970 including
record export sales of £28-7 million, the highest ever; the United States and
Canada are important markets.
There has been considerable re-equipment; gas or electrically fired kilns
have replaced almost all the coal-fired kilns, and new decorating techniques
and automatic and semi-automatic machinery have been introduced.
Britain’s glass industry is the third largest in the world. The section of the
industry devoted to the manufacture of plate and sheet glass in their various
forms is organised for quantity production, much of it in the form of the
‘float’ glass process, which was developed in Britain and has been licensed
to glass makers throughout the world. Its use for internal decoration and as
a finish for internal and external walls has greatly increased in recent years.
Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor industry. Other
products include glass bricks, tubular glass (produced on a large scale),
mirrors, lamp and bulb glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres,
and all types of glass containers (often made by fully automatic machinery).
A traditional product is hand-made lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
Direct exports of glass and glassware reached the record value of £42-i
million in 1970. Those of glass were worth ^22-8 million, the most important
258
Cement
PAPER, PRINTING
AND PUBLISHING
Paper and
Board
Printing and
Publishing
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
markets being the United States, South Africa and Australia. The figures
included £7-5 million of float glass.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research
Association, and much research work is also carried out by the Department
of Glass Technology of Sheffield University.
The cement industry of the United Kingdom with 18,000 employees is chiefly
concerned with the manufacture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph
Aspdin and patented in 1824, this material and the methods of its production
have been the subject of continuous technical improvement and intensive
research. The capacity of the industry has expanded substantially in recent
years. The Dartford-Gravesend district of Kent is an important producing area.
Annual output totalled 17-1 million tons in 1970.
The paper, printing and publishing industries have 637,000 employees, in¬
cluding 84,000 in the manufacture of paper and board, 63,000 in the produc¬
tion of cardboard boxes and packing cases, 144,000 in the printing and
publishing of newspapers and periodicals, and 256,500 in other types of print¬
ing and publishing.
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until
1678, but records show that some paper was produced as far back as 1492.
The British paper and board industry is the second largest in Europe. Total
production in 197® all types of paper and board amounted to 4‘8 million
tons. Of this, newsprint accounted for 738,000 tons, board for i-3 million tons
and other paper for the remainder. Exports of paper, board and manufactured
paper items were valued at ^89 million in I970, main purchasers were
the Republic of Ireland, Australia and South Africa.
Wood pulp is the main raw material, but large and increasing quantities of
waste paper are also used. A ^20 million integrated pulp and paper mill, the
first in Britain, was opened at Fort William, in the Scottish Highlands, in
1966. Two-thirds of the timber it uses is home-grown.
There are a few very large groups in the industry and many medium-sized
and small firms. The large groups hold considerable interests abroad, includ¬
ing pulp and paper producing mills in the United States, Canada and other
parts of the Commonwealth and Europe. Sales of household paper products,
including facial tissues, have continued to rise sharply. Sales of cardboard
boxes and cartons were valued at ^135 million in 197° while those of fibre
board packing cases totalled ^I4I million. Sales of manufactured stationery
totalled £153 million in 1970. Wallpaper manufacturing is dominated by
two firms; a recent development has been the introduction of plastic and
plastic-coated wall coverings. Research is undertaken by the Research Associa¬
tion for the Paper and Board, Printing and Packaging Industries.
The printing industry produces an immense range of goods, from national
newspapers and periodicals to books, catalogues and greetings cards. The
industry includes many very small enterprises. Mergers in recent years have
led to the formation of large groups in the newspaper, magazine and book
publishing sections. Three large firms each employ more than 20,000 persons.
General printing, publishing, engraving and bookbinding remains essentially
an industry of small firms.
Book publishers’ turnover in 1970 is estimated at £146 million, of which
export sales accounted for 3^62 million. Consumers expenditure on books,
INDUSTRY
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Rubber
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
259
newspapers and magazines totalled almost £420 million in 1969. Book titles
published in 1970 totalled nearly 331,500, over 23,500 of them new ones.
Popularity of paper-backed books has increased rapidly in recent years. Ac¬
cording to the overseas trade returns, exports of printed matter, manuscripts
and typescripts were valued at £89-9 million in 1970, including books and
pamphlets (^46-3 million), and newspapers and periodicals (£17-9 million),
but these figures do not include parcel post shipments, which are possibly as
large again as the recorded totals. Australia, the United States and Canada are
the most important overseas markets. The Book Development Council, formed
in 1965, promotes the supply and use of British books overseas. Firms have
introduced the latest developments in high-speed printing equipment, includ¬
ing electronic engraving machines and advanced processes of photographic
reproduction, and several newspapers are now set by computer.
Other manufacturing industries include the timber and furniture group, with
293,000 employees, rubber manufacture, with 124,000 employees, and a group
of miscellaneous manufactures which embrace some 220,000 employees, in¬
cluding 110,000 employed in plastics moulding and fabricating.
Britain’s rubber manufacturing industry is the oldest in the world, dating
from 1819. Macintosh invented waterproof garments, and Dunlop in 1888
devised the pneumatic tyre. Tyres and tubes represent more than half the
output of the industry but firms also make a variety of goods, the most
important being rubber footwear, conveyor belting, cables, hose, latex foam
products and other vehicle components and accessories.
In 1970 the industry’s consumption of rubber totalled 478,000 tons, com¬
prising 185,000 tons of natural rubber, 269,000 tons of synthetic rubber and
23,000 tons of reclaimed rubber; the proportion of synthetic rubber used is
increasing. In 1970, 241,000 tons of rubber were used in the production of
tyres and tyre products. Tyre manufacturers include several subsidiaries of
United States and other overseas companies. The largest tyre group in Europe
came into being in January 1971, following the merger of Britain’s leading
tyre producing company and its Italian equivalent. Direct export of all rubber
manufactures in 1970 were worth ^71-1 million, with Sweden, the United
States and Denmark as the main markets. This figure included tyres and tubes
valued at £52-5 million, but excluded large indirect exports on vehicles. In
addition, the industry exported about £4-9 million worth of rubber footwear
and £3-i million of rubber gloves and other miscellaneous products.
London is the largest centre for furniture manufacturing, but High Wycombe,
in Buckinghamshire, is important for domestic furniture.
Deliveries of domestic furniture rose by 22 per cent in volume between 1963
and 1970, and in the latter year their value was ^196 million. Exports of all
furniture were worth £25-3 million in 1970. Numerous enterprises manu¬
facture furniture in Britain (including domestic, upholstered, office, school
and other furniture) with a labour force of 89,000. The bedding industry
employs 20,000 people; sales of new bedding in 1970 were valued at £37-8
million. Many firms are small but in recent years there has been a tendency
towards concentration.
Scientific research and technical information services are provided by the
Furniture Development Council and the Furniture Industry Research Associa¬
tion. The Council is concerned with the management problems of the industry
and produces an annual statistical and economic review.
260
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The brush industry is located throughout Britain, and embraces highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units. The value of sales in
1970 was £21-5 million, of which £3-2 million was for export..
The timber industry employs 105,000 people. Britain is mainly dependent
on imported supplies of timber (valued at £239 million in 1970) but sawmill
output of home-grown timber together with the output of home-grown pit-
wood totalled about 70 million cubic feet in 1970. Other products include
plywood and chipboard.
The number of people engaged in manufacturing toys and sports equipment
and children’s carriages in Britain is 48,000. Sales of toys in 1970 were worth
^72’5 million and exports had a value of £28 *9 million. The United States and
the Federal Republic of Germany were the main overseas markets. Current
trends are towards increased production of small-scale precision models of
vehicles and toys linked to television characters.
The value of manufacturers’ sales of games was £7-3 million and that of
sports equipment £26-2 million.
12 AGRICULTURE,
FISHERIES AND
FORESTRY
THE LAND AND
ITS USES
Size and
Ownership
of Farms
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on
imports for nearly half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest
and most important industries. It occupies 670,000 people or 3 per cent of the
total working population, provides about 3 per cent of the gross national
product, and uses 47 million of the 60 million acres (19 million of the 24
million hectares) of land.
In Northern Ireland 2-8 million of the 3-3 million acres (i-i million of the
1-3 million hectares) of land are in agricultural use, and the corresponding
proportions for employment and gross product are 9 per cent and 8^ per cent.
The soils of the country are extremely varied. Many of those in the west and
north, overlying hard rocks, are poor and thin. The lowlands and river
valleys are usually fertile, varying in texture from clay through silt to sandy
loam. There is also some peat. Clay soils often require under-drainage. Land
used for farming is conventionally divided into improved land suitable for
cultivation (crops and grass) and rough grazing. In hill country the area of
improved land is often small, but is usually supplemented by grazing on a
comparatively large area of hill land.
In the United Kingdom as a whole there are 30 million acres (12-2 million
hectares) under crops and grass. Improved land, rough grazing, woodlands
(ancillary to farming) and other land used for agriculture together represent
80 per cent of the land area. The rest is mountain and forest, or put to urban
and kindred uses. The area available for farming is gradually decreasing to
meet the needs of housing and industry; however, the loss is more than
outweighed by the increase in output from what remains. Rough grazing,
nearly all of which is hill or mountain land with a native herbage of coarse
grasses, rushes, bracken, heather or scrub trees, has a low potential output—
usually assessed at about one-sixth of that of agricultural land—but is valuable
for sheep. In England and Wales only one-sixth of farming land is classified as
rough grazing. In Northern Ireland the proportion is slightly less than one-
quarter, but in Scotland it is nearly three-quarters.
For many centuries the bulk of land in Britain lay in estates ranging in size
from a few hundred acres upwards, comprising farms of varying sizes let to
tenants. Social changes of the past half-century have completely changed the
pattern of rural life in England and Scotland. Estate duties have been a
principal factor in the breaking up of estates. Most surviving estates are still
owned by private individuals or family trusts, but the Crown, local authorities,
and other corporate bodies hold considerable areas. Of the farms sold, many
have been bought by the tenants already in occupation. About half the farms
in Great Britain today are owner-occupied.
262
Types of
Farming
AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION:
CROPS AND
LIVESTOCK
Production
BRITAIN 1972'. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are about 310,000 significant farming units in Britain. Just under
half are very small units, mostly farmed part-time by occupiers who have
another source of livelihood besides farming, and accounting for less than a
tenth of the industry’s total output. About half of the total output comes from
the 10 per cent of holdings classified as large farm businesses, capable of
employing four or more full-time men. There are estimated to be some
171,000 full-time farm businesses in Britain including about 54,000 medium¬
sized (two-three men) and 84,500 small businesses. The number is falling
by about 2 per cent a year.
The average size of full-time holdings in England and Wales is 165 acres
(67 hectares) of crops and grass. In Scotland the crops and grass area of the
22,100 full-time farms averages 171 acres (70 hectares) and the average for the
16,200 part-time and other holdings is only 24 acres (10 hectares).
In Northern Ireland the land is divided into about 63,000 holdings, almost
all of which are owner-occupied. About 40 per cent of these holdings are
either very small or let in conacre (seasonal lettings for crops or grazing), so
that the number of effective farm businesses is about 37,000 of which half
provide a full-time occupation for the owner. The typical farm size is between
40 and 70 acres (16 and 28 hectares) of crops and grass.
Mainly because of economic forces, the majority of British farms have gone
over to a measure of specialised production and the old concept of a general or
mixed farm has, since the second world war, largely disappeared. A feature of
farming over the last 25 years has been the increasing use of intensive methods
of production, both in crops and animal husbandry. In England the farms
devoted primarily to arable crops are in the eastern part of the country in
East Anglia, Kent, Lincolnshire and the East Riding of Yorkshire—although
cereal growing and other arable cropping is a feature of most areas. In
Scotland the rich lowlands of the east coast are also primarily arable. Potato
and vegetable growing on a substantial scale marks the farming of the Fens
(south Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers
Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Elsewhere,
horticultural crops are widely dispersed amongst agricultural crops.
Dairying and the rearing and fattening of beef cattle are other enterprises
which are widely followed, predominantly in Scotland and western districts of
England. The parts of England bordering the Pennine hills and most of
Wales are also sheep-rearing areas, though a good deal of dairying, based
on purchased feedingstuffs, is also done there. In Northern Ireland mixed
farming is practised, the most important products being milk, fat and store
cattle, pigs and eggs, with sheep and stock raising in the hill areas.. Oats and
barley are widely grown, mainly for livestock feeding, and the only important
cash crop is potatoes, both ware and seed.
The increase in production which has occurred over the past 30 years is a
result of the effort of individual farmers, of farmers’ organisations, of research
workers and advisers and of government action. The role of the Government
is described on pp. 271-76.
The steady expansion in production and in yield per acre of arable land which
has taken place since 1936 is summarised in Table 17. Apart from a slight
decline between 1961 and 1964 and another in 1968 total cattle stocks have
risen steadily each year since 1953. The milk-producing herd has been
fairly constant in size since i960 despite heavy losses in the foot-and-mouth
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
263
Years commencing 1st June
TABLE 17
Land Use,
Produce and
Livestock
in Britain
Item and Unit
Averages
1936-38 1960-62
1969
1970
(Prov.)
1970
metric
equiva¬
lents
Land Use (’000 acres)
Arable for food crops
Temporary grass, fodder
Permanent grass
Rough grazings
Total
Main Crops
Cereals: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
of which—
Wheat: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Barley: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Oats: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Potatoes: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (tons per acre)
Sugar area (’000 acres) . .
beet: harvest® (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Livestock (’000 head)
Total cattle and calves
of which—dairy cows
beef cows
heifers in
calf
Sheep and lambs
Pigs 
Poultry
Livestock Products
Milk (million gallons)
Eggs (million dozen)
Beef and veal (’000 tons)
Mutton and lamb (’000 tons)
Pigmeat (’000 tons)
Poultry meat (’000 tons)
7,476
5,611
18,750
16,476
9,903
8,132
12,683
18,202
11,407
6,536
12,348
17,568
11,360
6,428
12,217
16,629
48,313
48,920
47,859
46,634
5,301
4,442
1,856
1,651
17-8
929
765
16-5
2,403
1,940
16 1
724
4,873
6-7
335
415
24-8
8,675
3,281
554
25,786
4,466
76,236
1,556
545
578
195
435
89
7,709
10,229
2,062
3,159
30-5
3,729
4,996
26-7
1,742
1,876
21-7
757
6,691
8-8
429
819
38-2
11,855
3,234
911
818
28,779
6,163
108,775
2,482
1,085
864
257
745
331
9,131
13,352
2,059
3,311
32-2
5,962
8,527
28-6
945
1,287
27-3
614
6,117
10-0
457
891
39-0
12,374
3,275
1,211
822
26,604
7,783
126,514
2,687
1,153
929
224
908
558
9,174
12,966
2,495
4,108
32-9
5,542
7,378
26-6
929
1,214
26-2
669
7,364
110
463
939
40-0
12,581
3,244
1,300
863
26,080
8,088
143,430
2,708
1,147
959
223
958
571
4,600c
2,600c
4,950c
6,750c
18,900 c
3,720c
l,010c
4 07 d
2,240c
3-3 d
376*
3-2 d
271c
27-2
188 c
5 0
12,300 €
Source: Agricultural Departments. Annual Abstract of Statistics.
a Raw equivalent basis. c ’000 hectares. * million litres.
d tonnes per hectare.
6 From June 1970 agricultural holdings in Great Britain includes statistically significant
holdings of one acre or less, previously excluded.
264
Food Supplies
Grassland
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
epidemic of 1967-68. The beef herd is expanding steadily. Numbers of sheep
and lambs reached their highest level in 1966 but have since declined appreci¬
ably. Numbers of pigs and poultry have both expanded by about a third over
the past decade. There has been a considerable increase recently in the size
of the national turkey flock. Arable production has shown a greater diversifica¬
tion since the second world war. Total cereals production (13 million tons in
r970-7!) has increased considerably since i960 reaching a peak of nearly
14^ million tons in 1967-68. Increases in wheat and barley production have
been partly at the expense of oats. Potato production is very susceptible to
weather conditions but on average adequate supplies are being maintained
from a steadily declining area. Between i960 and 1970 output of pigmeat
increased by over one-third and eggs by about one-sixth and these, together
with the increase in beef and milk output, resulted in higher consumption of
feedingstuffs, mostly from home resources. About 6 million tons of con¬
centrated feeds are imported each year depending on the size of the home
crop of cereals.
The index of agricultural net product (all holdings) at constant prices has
risen steadily. By 1953-54 it was about 56 per cent above the immediate
pre-war average. Based on the average of 1954-55 t0 I956-57=IOO> 11 was
135 in 1966-67. On a rebased index, 1964-65 to 1966-67=100, no is forecast
for 1970-71.
Since 1939 the population of the United Kingdom has increased by nearly
8 million, or 16^ per cent. In spite of this growth Britain now produces just
over half of its total food requirements or two-thirds of all that can be grown
in temperate climates; this latter figure comparing with about one-half before
the second world war. Home production of the principal foods is shown as a
percentage by weight of total supplies in Table 18.
Table 19 shows how the level of the main food supplies passing into
consumption has changed since the end of war-time rationing. Rising living
standards have led to increased consumption of high protein foods, such as
meat and eggs. More recently the pattern of food consumption has tended to
stabilise but with a more pronounced trend towards partly prepared and
‘convenience’ foods.
The British climate suits grassland farming, especially in the moister west and
north, where many farms are based almost entirely on grassland production.
Even in the regions devoted largely to arable cropping, grassland forms an
important section of the economy of most farms, whether as permanent grass
mostly occupying land less suitable for cultivation, or as sown grassland
(leys), often part of the arable rotation. Temporary grass may occupy the
ground for only one year or up to seven years before being broken for cropping
or for re-sowing direct to a new ley. A wide range of herbage species and
varieties, including many from British plant breeding establishments, is
available in the seed trade; the main species used in grassland seedings are the
perennial and Italian rye-grasses.
Grassland production, both from permanent and temporary swards, has
been greatly enhanced over recent years by the development and application of
new techniques, notably the use of fertilisers (especially nitrogenous), methods
of grazing control, systems of herbage conservation for winter feed and, on
some farms, irrigation. .
Rough grazings, mostly in the higher country, remain as semi-natural
grassland used for extensively grazed flocks and herds, producing young
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
265
TABLE 18
Home
Production as a
Percentage of
Total Supplies
TABLE 19
Food
Consumption
Per Head Per
Annum
Crops
Cereals
Food product
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham (excluding canned)
Shell eggs . .
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent)
Sugar (as refined) . .
Wheat and flour (as wheat equivalent)
Potatoes for human consumption
1956
62
42
96
100
43
9
16
22
20
93
1964
69
38
98
100
42
6
10
27
47
95
1970
(Prov.)
73
40
99
100
45
14
13
30
45
96
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
1956
lb.
1964
lb.
1970 (prov.)
lb.
kg.
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham
Poultry meat
Fish: fresh, frozen and curec
Eggs in shell
Liquid milk
Cheese
Butter..
Margarine
Oils and fats
Sugar®
Flour . .
Potatoes
Fresh vegetables (including
tomatoes) . .
Fresh and dried fruit
Canned and bottled fruit
Tea
Coffee. .
101-5
23-3
7-2
19-3
27-3
323-1
9-3
15-5
17-1
21*1
109-8
178-7
224-5
107-3
71-4
13-8
10-1
1-5
103-4
25-2
15- 8
16- 9
31-9
324-4
10-6
19-7
13-3
25-8
107-6
155-5
223-6
114-9
79-3
19-4
9-3
2-5
99-9
25-0
23-0
16-2
31-7
309-4
11-6
19-3
11-8
25-7
104-8
145-0
222-7
113-3
78-9
18-4
8-7
3-5
45-3
11-3
10- 4
7- 3
14-4
140-3
5-3
8- 8
5-4
11- 7
47-5
65-8
101-0
51-4
35-8
8-3
3-9
1-6
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
® Including sugar in all home-produced and imported manufactured goods, and in
brewing.
animals for fattening elsewhere. Some rough grazings are subject to common
rights.
Temporary grass has, since 1947, greatly increased at the expense of
permanent grass much of which was of poor agronomic quality. It has also
made some inroads into the rough grazings.
Wheat is grown mainly in the eastern half of the country. There was a sharp
fall in the area under wheat in 1969 following bad weather during the previous
winter and spring. The acreage has since been restored and about 4-1 million
266
Fodder Crops
Sugar Beet
Potatoes
Dairy Farming
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tons were harvested in 1970, with average yields estimated at 32-9 cwt. per
acre (4-1 tonnes per hectare). Between one-third and one-half of the wheat
crop is used for flour milling, the remainder going mainly for animal feed.
Since i960 the area under barley has increased by over 60 per cent and
in general production has risen faster due to improved yields. The important
malting and distilling market currently absorbs about one-fifth of the crop,
most of the remainder being used for animal feeding purposes.
The widespread use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation
of drying and storage facilities on many farms. Such equipment is also widely
used on a co-operative basis.
In England, Wales and Scotland the total area of fodder crops has fallen
because in many cases farmers can provide winter feed more economically
by increased grass production and improved methods of conservation. In
Scotland greater use is made of turnips and swedes for sheep and cattle
feeding.
Beet is grown mainly in East Anglia and Lincolnshire where most of the beet
sugar factories are situated. The crop is grown under contract to the British
Sugar Corporation, which takes the entire output at guaranteed prices and also
provides technical advice and assistance. Precision drilling is the usual method
of sowing and more than three-quarters of the crop is mechanically harvested.
Potatoes are grown in most parts of Britain. First supplies of early potatoes,
for immediate marketing, normally come from Pembrokeshire, Cornwall and
Kent at the end of May and these are followed by liftings from other early
growing areas. The lifting of main crop potatoes, which may be stored for use
throughout the season, usually starts in September; the main area for the
production of maincrop potatoes is the eastern side of the country. Seed potato
production for Britain and for export is chiefly centred in Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
Britain is self-sufficient in maincrop potatoes. As yields are gradually
increasing, requirements can be met from a steadily declining acreage. The
area planted with potatoes has declined from 829,000 acres (335,000 hectares)
in i960 to 669,000 acres (270,000 hectares) in 1970. A record yield of 11 tons
an acre for the 1970 crop resulted in a substantial surplus of supplies. A
greater interest in convenience foods has led to an increased demand for
processed potato; home production is expanding to meet the demand but some
is imported. Although the planting, cultivation, harvesting and grading of the
potato crop are becoming increasingly mechanised, much hand labour is still
needed.
Milk is much more valuable when sold on the liquid milk market than when
converted into cheese, butter or other milk products. In Great Britain milk
is produced primarily for liquid consumption, but in Northern Ireland the
greater part of the milk is used for manufactured products. Average consump¬
tion of liquid milk per head is 4-6 pints per week.
Average yields per dairy cow have increased during the last decade by
about 10 per cent and now average some 830 gallons (3,75° litres) a year.
Freedom from tuberculosis has reduced herd wastage, and a campaign to
eradicate brucellosis is under way. Through the artificial insemination (AI)
centres, operated by the Milk Marketing Boards and other organisations, the
influence of a relatively small number of high-potential bulls is widely
disseminated. It is estimated that about two-thirds of Britain s total cattle are
Livestock
Beef Cattle
Sheep
Pigs
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 26j
bred by AI. The Friesian breed is dominant in the dairy herds of England,
Wales and Northern Ireland, but in Scotland the Ayrshire breed is the most
numerous. Average herd size is 30 cows and is expected to increase. Milk
production has also been stimulated by advances in grassland management,
intensive grazing techniques and new methods of making high quality hay and
silage. Most dairy farmers practise some degree of intensive grass manage¬
ment, but hay or silage of the traditional type remain the basic winter feeds;
they are supplemented with purchased concentrates.
Clean dairy farming methods and hygienic standards for equipment and
buildings used in milk production are prescribed by regulations made by the
appropriate ministers.
A great number of specialised breeds of livestock have been developed over
the centuries in Britain. It has been found that they meet the needs of breeders
in most countries and substantial export sales of animals and semen are made
to buyers seeking to replenish and improve their herds.
In the hill regions hardy herds of beef cattle are kept, especially of the Galloway
and Welsh Black breeds and their crosses; in marginal land and lower areas
the sires used are predominantly of the Aberdeen Angus and Hereford breeds.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the dairy herds,
some females being mated to beef sires, the majority by AI. There is a large
and complex trade in store cattle (increased by animals imported from the
Irish Republic), a typical movement being from the upland west to grazing
areas in the Midlands.
British breeds have recently been joined by continental breeds, such as the
Charolais, Limousin and Simmental, in the hope that these will, in due course,
make a useful contribution to the British livestock industry. The demand for
lean tender beef at an economic price has stimulated the development of
intensive and semi-intensive systems of production, leading to increasing
popularity for the larger, fast-growing breeds.
Britain has outstandingly good pastures for sheep. Moreover, veterinary
research has provided vaccine and sera protection against nearly all the
epidemic diseases to which sheep are subject. More than 30 breeds and
innumerable crosses are to be found in Britain, each breed having originated
within a circumscribed area.
In the hills, and especially in the Highlands, winter conditions are usually
severe. Draft ewes and lambs are brought from the hill areas every autumn
to swell the lowland flocks, usually in two stages; first, to farms at inter¬
mediate altitudes, where they are mated with rams of a larger and more
rapidly maturing breed; then, the cross-bred progeny pass on in due course
to the more genial lowland conditions and especially to the Midlands and the
south and east of England, where they become crossed again with Down
rams for fat lamb production. The hill breeds bring in hardiness and the
lowland sires fecundity and early maturity. Fat lamb production provides the
main source of income for sheep farmers but wool is also of considerable
importance, especially to farmers in hill areas.
Pig production is carried on in most parts of Britain but is particularly
important in the eastern and southern counties of England. In the past pigs
were found on the majority of farms but there is now an increasing concentra¬
tion into specialist units and larger herds. The most frequently used breeds are
the Large White and the Landrace though considerable cross-breeding takes
268
Poultry
Horticultural
Crops
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
place. Pig improvements are fostered by the Meat and Livestock Commission
and by leading commercial firms through schemes for progeny and perform¬
ance testing, litter recording and other development work. Attention is focused
on utility qualities, such as size and weight of litters, and on food consumed
per pound of liveweight gain. AI is available as a nationwide service.
Carcases are used for curing as bacon, for sale as fresh pork and for manu¬
facturing into sausages and other processed forms. In terms of pig meat, about
30 per cent is used for bacon and 70 per cent for pork and manufacturing.
The British poultry industry has expanded rapidly in the last ten years, largely
owing to the application of improved husbandry and management techniques
in intensive production units and to genetic improvements in stock. There is a
continuing trend towards vertical integration. There are about 60 flocks of
over 100,000 birds and only a small proportion of total production is in the
hands of the smallest producers. About 80 per cent of the laying birds on farms
are in flocks of 1,000 or more. With the rise in the poultry population and in
the yield of eggs per bird (now averaging well over 200 eggs a year), the
estimated production of eggs has more than doubled the 1938 level and for
several years nearly all eggs consumed in Britain have been home-produced.
About 290 million broilers and other special table chickens were produced in
1970.
Horticultural crops occupy only a small fraction of the cultivated land of
the country—about 2% per cent of the area under crops and grass—but their
value in terms of output per acre is very high. The total value of horticultural
crops sold in 1970-71 is estimated at about ^286 million, out of an estimated
total value of £2,364 million for all output from agricultural holdings in
Britain. The June 1970 Census of open-grown crops showed that there were
about 505,000 acres (205,000 hectares) of vegetables (excluding potatoes),
about 204,000 acres (82,500 hectares) of fruit, and 37,000 acres (15,000
hectares) of flowers and nursery stock.
Vegetable and fruit-growing are concentrated chiefly in rural areas with
favourable soil and climatic conditions. Eastern counties continue to be the
most important areas for vegetables with a large degree of specialised growing
for the canning and deep-freeze trade. Other important vegetable areas are
Bedfordshire, Kent, Yorkshire and the Vale of Evesham. Districts with mild
climates such as the Penzance region of Cornwall are favoured for the produc¬
tion of selected early crops. Traditional market-gardening which once
flourished around the large centres of population, notably in the Lea Valley
near London, has declined over the years due mainly to the growth in the
field scale production of vegetables which has accelerated in recent years to
meet the demands of the processing industries.
Specialised horticultural holdings range in size from a few acres to 300
acres (120 hectares) or more. Output per acre of many crops has increased
steadily in response to the introduction of improved planting material, new
techniques of cultivation and environmental control, and to the widespread
use of machinery.
There are about 4,000 acres (1,600 hectares) under glass in England and
Wales, with about 10 per cent in the Lea Valley (in Essex and Hertfordshire)
and other significant concentrations in West Sussex and Hampshire, Lanca¬
shire, the rest of Essex, the East Riding of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire
(Holland). Seventy-five per cent of all glass is heated, and the use of automatic
temperature and ventilation control is now widespread. The use of wide-span
Hops
FARM
EXPENDITURE
AND EARNINGS
Capital
Requirements
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 269
houses and other technological advances has enabled growers to achieve the
flexibility required in the choice of cropping programme.
Fruit production is concentrated in Kent, Cambridgeshire, Essex and
Worcestershire. Half the cooking apple acreage in Britain, more than one-
third of the dessert apple acreage, more than half of the pear acreage and a
quarter of the plum acreage is located in Kent. About 23,000 acres (9,300
hectares) of varieties of cider apples are grown mainly in Devon, Herefordshire
and Somerset. Soft fruit production is fairly widely distributed but raspberries
are exceptional in that of some 9,000 acres (3,640 hectares) grown in Britain
over five-sixths are in Scotland, mainly in the Blairgowrie district of Perthshire
and in Angus.
Hop-growing for the brewing industry is confined to two main areas, in Kent
and Sussex and in Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Capital outlay and
cultivation costs are very high, but marketed crops per acre average about
12 cwt., worth some £440. The total annual value of the crop is about £7
million.
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and the aggregate net income of agri¬
cultural producers are prepared annually by the agricultural departments
(see Table 20). In June 1970 the scope of the agricultural census was widened
to cover holdings producing commercially significant quantities of agricultural
produce on one acre or less of agricultural land, previously excluded in Great
Britain. On the old basis the aggregate net income of farmers rose from £392
million in 1960-61 to £561^ million in 1969-70. Net income on the new basis
for 1969-70 is £574 million, rising to £589 million in 1970-71. The annual
cost of direct support to agriculture from public funds has averaged £260
million during the past five years. The figures given in Table 20 show that
Britain’s farming is predominantly based on livestock enterprises. About two-
thirds of total farm output is in the form of livestock or livestock products.
Of farm expenses, purchased feedingstuffs amount to about one-third,
wages to about one-fifth and machinery (including depreciation) and equip¬
ment to about one-sixth. Since i960 male agricultural earnings have risen by
about 80 per cent, offsetting the manpower economies made possible by
mechanisation and increasing farm size, while labour productivity has risen
by about 6 per cent a year since 1964-65.
The capital required for land and buildings may be provided by the farmer,
if he is an owner-occupier, or by the landlord, if the farm is let to a tenant.
In 1970 ‘fixed capital’ totalling nearly ^106 million was added to the value of
land and buildings and ^116 million was invested in new plant, machinery
and vehicles. The bulk of the capital required to stock and run the farms
is provided by the occupiers. Bank advances are an important source of
outside capital, both fixed and working; about two-thirds of the total bank
advances to agriculture are believed to be for short-term purposes. Agricultural
merchants are also an important source of short-term credit. Mortgage loans
form the chief source of long-term credit and are provided by specialised
financial institutions (see p. 274) and private sources.
Accounts of some 2,000 farms in England and Wales, collected by university
agricultural economists in 1969-70, show average valuations of occupiers’
capital ranging from just over £10 to more than £70 per acre (£25 to £175 per
hectare), or well over £100 (£250) for intensive holdings. In Scotland a
similar sample of 800 accounts shows a wide range in valuations per acre,
270
TABLE 20
Estimated
Farm Output
and Input in
Britain 1970-71
Mechanisation
Net Incomes
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Output
Farm crops
Livestock
Livestock products
Horticulture
Other
Total Output
Production grants
and sundry
receipts
Total Receipts
Work in progress
Gross Output
£
million
458
884
703
286
33
2,364
132
As a Per¬
centage
of total
19-4
37-4
29-7
12-1
1-4
100-0
Input
£
million
Feedingstuffs
Seeds
Imported livestock
Fertilisers and Lime
Machinery
Farm maintenance
Miscellaneous
expenditure
Total Expenditure
Stocks change .
Gross Input
Gross Product®
Depreciation
Net Product
Labour ..
Net rent and interest
Net Income
649
59
76
163
173
101
168
1,389
- 4
1,384
1,248
206
1,042
361
92
589
As a Per¬
centage
of total
46
4
5
11
12
7
12-1
1000
Source: Annual Review 1971 (Cmnd. 4623).
Figures may not add to the totals shown because of roundings.
“ Gross Product = Gross Output less Gross Input.
from about £3 (£7-4 per hectare) on hill sheep farms with extensive rough
grazings to between £50 and £60 per acre (£123 and £148 per hectare) on low¬
land farms. In Northern Ireland average valuations of occupiers’ capital range
from over £100 on the more intensive farms to £55 per acre (£250 to £136 per
hectare) on the larger farms. On all types of farms investment in machinery is
a heavy item: on dairy and arable farms it averages nearly £20 per acre
(£5° Per hectare); on stock-rearing farms it may amount to £7 per acre
(£17 per hectare).
Britain has one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world, with over half a
million tractors in 1970, or one to every 35 acres (14-2 hectares) of arable land.
Power-take-off implements now characterise arable farming; and some
65,000 combine harvesters were in use in 1970. A wide variety of machines for
harvesting and preservation of grass are employed. Milking machines are
installed on all except the smallest farms, many with mechanical means of
handling milk.
Over 90 per cent of the farms in Great Britain have an electricity supply
and accompanying equipment. There are about 1,100 farmers machinery
syndicates through which farmers have the use of expensive equipment
without tying up their own capital.
Research, development and testing of farm machinery are carried out by
the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering.
The range of net incomes between individual farms is very wade, varying
THE ROLE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Machinery of
Government
Government
Policy
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 271
with the type and size of farm, quality of land, and managerial ability of the
occupier. The average net income for farms of different types is mostly within
the range of £6 to £16 per acre (£15 to £40 per hectare) with the exception
of pig and poultry farms and horticultural holdings, which are more in¬
tensive in their use of land. Net income per acre on dairy and arable farms
has nearly always been higher than on stock-rearing farms, which are generally
larger than the other types and are situated on poorer land.
By the beginning of the 1930s the need for some form of State assistance to
agriculture had become pressing: it was during this time that the Govern¬
ment initiated the various forms of protection and financial assistance for agri¬
culture.
During the second world war and the immediate post-war years, agri¬
cultural production was closely controlled by the State, with County War
Agricultural Executive Committees, composed of landowners, farmers and
farm workers, acting as the Government’s local agents.
The functions of government in relation to agriculture are mostly exercised
by the agricultural ministers, that is to say, for England and Wales the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for
Wales, for Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, and for Northern
Ireland the Home Secretary, who is the Minister responsible for United
Kingdom aspects of Northern Ireland agriculture, local aspects being the
responsibility of the Northern Ireland Minister of Agriculture. In England
and Wales, the Agricultural Advisory Council and the Horticultural Advisory
Council advise the Minister on the experimental, development and advisory
functions of the Ministry including the identification of subjects on which
further information is required.
The headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is
divided functionally, each division being responsible for a particular sub¬
ject or service. Its relations with individual farmers are conducted mainly
through its local offices, grouped in England in regions, with line management
through regional managers. Local offices in Wales are grouped under a Welsh
Secretary with similar functions and with special responsibility for Welsh
affairs.
In Scotland most of the agricultural functions of the Secretary of State are
discharged through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries. The
Secretary of State for Scotland also appoints the members of the Crofters
Commission (see p. 275) and the Red Deer Commission, which deals with the
conservation and control of red deer.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for imple¬
menting agricultural policy inaugurated by the Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment. It is organised on similar lines to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, for which it acts as agent in the administration in Northern Ireland
of United Kingdom agricultural schemes.
In November 1966 an Economic Development Committee for agriculture
was established, comprising representatives of farmers, workers and land-
owners, as well as official members.
Government policy today is founded on the Agriculture Acts 1947 and 1957,
the Agriculture and Horticulture Act 1964 and the Agriculture Acts 1967 and
1970. The main objective, as set out in Section 1 of the 1947 Act, continues to
be ‘a stable and efficient agricultural industry capable of producing such part
272
Annual Review
Price
Guarantees
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of the nation’s food and other agricultural produce as in the national interest it
is desirable to produce in the United Kingdom, and of producing it at mini¬
mum prices consistent with proper remuneration and living conditions for
farmers and workers in agriculture and an adequate return on capital invested
in the industry’. To this end, the Government is empowered to provide, for
the main agricultural products, guaranteed prices determined in the light of
annual reviews (see below). To facilitate long-term planning, the last Act gave
statutory effect to assurances that set limits to reductions in the price deter¬
minations that may be made after an annual review.
The Agriculture and Horticulture Act 1964 gave the Government powers to
introduce minimum import prices and levy arrangements for agricultural and
horticultural products. Before 1971 these powers were used in the case of
cereals and for eggs and certain egg products. The present system of support
is being changed gradually to one relying increasingly on import levies. To
this end interim levies were introduced in July 1971 on beef, veal, mutton,
lamb and milk products other than butter and cheese, while an existing scheme
for cereals was modified. Understandings with overseas suppliers on the
sharing of the bacon, butter and cheese markets became effective in 1964 and
were renewed in 1969.
In February each year, in accordance with the 194? Act, the agricultural
ministers review the economic condition and prospects of the industry. In
holding reviews, the ministers are required to consult with representatives of
agricultural producers—in practice, the three farmers’ unions in the United
Kingdom. The ministers consider such factors as production trends and
market requirements, world market prospects, the cost of subsidies, income
trend in the industry as a whole, the increasing efficiency of the industry and
changes in production costs. In the light of their conclusions from the review,
ministers determine guaranteed prices for fat cattle, fat sheep, fat pigs, eggs,
wool, milk, cereals, potatoes and sugar beet. These guarantees apply to live¬
stock and livestock products for the ensuing 12 months, and to crops to be
harvested in the current year. Consideration is also given to the relevant
production grants (see p. 273) which are broadly those connected with current
farming activities (for example, the fertiliser subsidy) as opposed to grants for
longer-term improvements, and they are taken into account in calculating the
total value of the guarantees. The Government s conclusions and its decisions
on changes in guaranteed prices and relevant production grants are published
each year.
The cost of government support to the industry in 1970-71 was about
£270 million; the estimate for 1971-72, made before the 1971 review de¬
cisions, forecast an increase to about £297 million.
In general, the present support system acts by means of deficiency payments
to stabilise prices to farmers at appropriate levels. These payments make up
the deficit between the open market price of a commodity and the price
guaranteed by the Government. To encourage orderly marketing of home
supplies the deficiency payments are in certain cases limited to the difference
between the guaranteed price and a target indicator price set by the Govern¬
ment.
The aim of the interim import levy schemes is to limit and reduce the call
on the Exchequer for agricultural support by transferring more of the cost to
the consumer. The guaranteed prices will continue to be the main influence
on producers’ returns.
Production
Grants
Capital Grants
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 273
The deficiency payments scheme for cereals is administered directly by the
agricultural departments, and payment is made on the acreage harvested or
available for harvesting as grain. Deficiency payments for fatstock are made
weekly to producers on certified sales on a liveweight or deadweight basis. For
eggs, a subsidy, based on the difference between the guaranteed price and the
estimated producer price, is paid to producers through registered packing
stations. The Government intends to phase out the subsidy and remove eggs
from the guarantee by the end of March 1974*
For most of the remaining commodities and for fat pigs in Northern
Ireland, the Government operates the guarantee through the appropriate
marketing board, which takes account of any payments from or to the Govern¬
ment in deciding what to pay producers for their produce. In the case of milk
there are five boards, and the full guaranteed price is paid only on a ‘standard
quantity’ relating to the volume of liquid milk sales plus a reasonable reserve.
Milk produced in excess of the standard quantity is sold for manufacturing
below the full guaranteed price. The retail price of liquid milk is determined
by the Government so as to cover the full cost of the guarantee and, taking one
year with another, there is no Exchequer subsidy. Support is provided for
maincrop potatoes (excluding new potatoes) through a system of acreage
limitation and the purchase of surplus potatoes, as many as possible of which
are then sold for stockfeed. The Potato Marketing Board undertakes support
activities in Great Britain and the Ministry of Agriculture in Northern Ireland
in order to bring the average market price for the season up to the guaranteed
price. The Government pays the greater part of the cost.
For wool a fixed price is guaranteed to the British Wool Marketing Board
for every pound of fleece wool it buys from producers. This enables it to fix in
advance a schedule of producers’ prices, based on types and quality, after
making allowance for the Board’s marketing costs.
Under the Sugar Act 1956 and the Agriculture Act 1957 the British Sugar
Corporation contracts to buy the whole of the sugar beet crop produced from
a specified acreage—at present 443,000 acres (179,000 hectares) at a scale
of fixed prices, determined as a result of the annual review and related to
sugar content. Refined sugar produced by the Corporation is sold, under
market-sharing agreements with the refiners, at a price based on the world
price.
The Sugar Board buys Commonwealth sugar under the Commonwealth
Sugar Agreement and sells it commercially. The deficits or surpluses which
result from the transactions of both the Corporation and the Board are
ultimately reflected in the Board’s accounts. When these accounts show a
deficit a surcharge is made on all sugar, imported or home-produced, entering
the British market, including the sugar content of composite sugar imports,
and when there is a surplus a distribution payment is made correspondingly,
so that taking one year with another the Board balances its accounts.
The price supports outlined above relate only to current production. To
increase productivity, however, the Government offers to farmers a wide
range of inducements, known as production grants. In 1970-71 the contribu¬
tion in the form of production grants was £114 million of which ^57 million
was provided as an inducement to maintain breeding herds of cattle and flocks
of sheep (particularly in upland areas). It included a calf subsidy on animals
suitable for beef production.
Grants are available under the farm capital grant scheme, introduced by the
274
Amalgamations
of Small Farms
Horticulture
OTHER
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
AND ACTION
Agricultural
Credit
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture Act 1970, towards capital expenditure incurred on a wide range
of work and facilities for agricultural businesses. Among the items eligible for
grant are farm buildings, farm waste disposal systems, facilities for the supply
of gas and electricity, field drainage, roads, fencing, reclamation of waste land
and land improvement. The standard rate of grant under the scheme is 30 per
cent but there are rates up to 60 per cent for certain work. Until March 1972
the rates will range from 40 per cent to 70 per cent. The scheme, which came
into effect on 1st January 1970, replaced many of the old capital grant arrange¬
ments including the Farm Improvement Scheme, Hill Land Improvement
Scheme and field drainage and farm water supply grants, under which total
grants of about £42 million were paid in 1970-71.
A farm amalgamations and boundary adjustments scheme offers grants to
encourage the voluntary amalgamation of small uncommercial farms with
other land to form commercial units. The grant is at the rate of 60 per cent of
the approved costs of the amalgamation until 18th March 1972, after when it
will be 50 per cent. Under a related scheme lump sums or annuities are paid to
farmers who give up uncommercial holdings for approved amalgamations.
Horticultural produce, because it is perishable and liable to seasonal variation
in quantity and quality, does not lend itself to a system of guaranteed prices.
Prior to the 1964 Act the principal means of support was tariffs on imports,
but greater emphasis has since been placed on the need to strengthen the com¬
petitive efficiency of the industry so as to reduce its dependence upon tariffs.
To this end grants of one-third are available to meet the capital cost of a wide
range of buildings, plant and equipment used in the production, storage, pre¬
paration for market and transport of horticultural produce. Additionally,
small-scale horticulturists who are prepared to undertake a three-year pro¬
gramme for improving the efficiency of their businesses may qualify for a grant
of up to £500. The cost to the Exchequer of these schemes is over £4 million
a year.
A number of facilities for specific purposes enjoy government encouragement
and support.
In England and Wales finance for the purchase or improvement of agri¬
cultural land and buildings is available from the Agricultural Mortgage Cor¬
poration Ltd. The Corporation’s funds are derived mainly from public
issues of stock, but it receives some government support. Similarly in
Scotland, loans for agricultural purposes secured on agricultural land in
Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Ltd.
Improvement loans for carrying out improvements to agricultural land and
buildings are also available to landowners from the Lands Improvement
Company, whose funds are provided privately.
In Northern Ireland loans are available to farmers from the Agricultural
Loans Fund, administered by the Ministry of Agriculture and financed out
of public funds. Half of the loans issued are short-term for agricultural
machinery and the remainder are medium- or long-term loans for such
purposes as the purchase of livestock, the erection and improvement of farm
buildings and farm dwellings, and the purchase of land for amalgamation and
subsequent restructuring.
Under the Agriculture Act 1967 the Government can make loans in Great
Britain to help finance the purchase of land acquired for approved amalgama¬
tions of small farms (see above), and approved remodelling expenditure.
Smallholdings
Crofting
Arterial
Drainage and
Sea Defence
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 275
These loans may be granted up to 90 per cent (100 per cent for certain small
amalgamations) of the valuation of the combined unit determined by the
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Ltd. in England and Wales and the
Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Ltd. in Scotland, which act as
the Government’s agents.
Since 1892 county councils and county borough councils in England and
Wales have had powers to provide land for smallholdings. For financial
assistance in improving smallholdings, authorities can obtain the amalgama¬
tions and capital grants available to farmers generally and these are supple¬
mented for certain smallholdings. In England and Wales, about 12,250
smallholdings are provided by local authorities and about 800 lettable holdings
by the Ministry. The Minister and local authorities may make loans for work¬
ing capital to their smallholding tenants. In this way the tenants can be helped
to obtain livestock, machinery, implements and other necessary items;
tenants must, however, have available at least 25 per cent of the capital
required.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central
Government, which now owns and maintains about 420,000 acres (170,000
hectares) of land settlement estates, comprising some 3,355 crofts and holdings.
In the seven Scottish crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness, Inverness, Orkney,
Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland and Shetland—much of the land is farmed
by crofters, tenant farmers whose holdings are generally either rented at a cost
of not more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding 75 acres (30 hectares).
The Crofters Commission, with headquarters in Inverness, is responsible
for the administration and regulation of crofting. The Commission’s functions
are to reorganise, develop and regulate crofting in the crofting counties, to
promote the interests of crofters and to keep under review matters relating to
crofting. The Commission’s statutory powers include supervising the letting
of crofts and collaborating with other organisations whose activities affect
crofting interests. It also acts as the Secretary of State’s agent in administering
grants and loans for cropping and land improvement.
Land drainage (including flood protection) in England and Wales is the
responsibility of 27 river authorities (see p. 231), two catchment boards
(which exercise the functions of river authorities) and about 370 internal
drainage boards. Local authorities also have general land drainage powers.
There are no comparable authorities in Scotland, where arterial drainage of
agricultural land is the owners’ responsibility. River authorities have powers
to maintain and improve watercourses designated as main rivers. Their work
is concerned with the improvement of land drainage by increasing the capacity
and efficiency of rivers and erecting pumping stations, the prevention of
inland flooding and the construction and maintenance of defences to protect
low-lying areas from tidal flooding. River authorities also have powers relating
to water resources generally, freshwater fisheries and river pollution.
Internal drainage boards are concerned with very much smaller areas and
their work is chiefly in low-lying agricultural districts. Their main function is
to keep the land drained in their area by improving the main drains and,
where necessary, by pumping from low-lying land.
River authorities and catchment boards obtain most of the funds needed for
drainage purposes from local authorities. The Government pays grants to¬
wards the cost of improvement schemes carried out by these authorities. The
276
Land Tenure
MARKETING
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
grants vary from 10 per cent to 80 per cent according to the financial position
of the authority, with an additional premium for sea defence works. Internal
drainage boards levy drainage rates on owners and occupiers and also receive
government grants at a flat rate of 50 per cent. Local authorities receive grants
ranging from 20 per cent to 50 per cent. In Scotland 50 per cent grants are
available to owners or occupiers of agricultural land.
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Agriculture is the drainage authority
in respect of watercourses designated by the Drainage Council as main or
minor watercourses.
In Great Britain more than half, and in Northern Ireland almost all, farms are
owner-occupied. The traditional form of tenancy in England and Wales runs
from year to year; in Scotland longer leases for terms of 10 to 14 years are
more common, although most tenants farm on a year-to-year basis. The
tenancy agreement may be either written or verbal (in Scotland it must be
written if the period of the lease exceeds one year) and may (but need not)
include provisions about such matters as rights of cropping, liability for repair
and maintenance, and compensation for tenant’s improvements.
In order to protect the respective interests of landlords and tenants and to
eliminate uncertainty as to their rights and liabilities, a code of landlord and
tenant relationships has been written into legislation. The Agriculture Acts
1947 (England and Wales) and 1948 (Scotland) lay down the basic rules of
good estate management and good husbandry for owners and occupiers
respectively. The Agricultural Holdings Acts 1948 (England and Wales) and
1949 (Scotland) as amended by the Agriculture Act 1958 and the Agriculture
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Acts of 1963 and 1968 contain more detailed
provisions concerning the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants.
The Acts provide for any tenancy of agricultural land, with the exception
of certain short-term lettings to which exemption can be given by the Minister
or Secretary of State, to continue in force from year to year until terminated
by a valid notice to quit. With certain exceptions the tenant can contest it by
serving a counter-notice; the notice to quit then becomes inoperative unless
the landlord can satisfy an independent body (in England and Wales the
Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish Land Court) that
his claim for possession is in the interests of sound estate management or good
husbandry or that the land is required for certain purposes specified in the
Acts
The Acts lay down a code of compensation to which the tenant is entitled
on termination of the tenancy. Rent is a matter for negotiation between
landlord and tenant and may be varied by agreement at any time or, failing
agreement, by arbitration at intervals of not less than three years in Englan
and Wales and five years in Scotland.
Agricultural products are marketed mainly through private trade channels
such as corn merchants, livestock auctions and markets, and bacon factories;
or through producers’ co-operative organisations. A fairly recent development
has been the growth of contract farming, the growing, for example, of fruit or
vegetables under contract for the freezing and processing industries. For certain
commodities, however, marketing arrangements are influenced by boards
operating under the Agricultural Marketing Act 1958 (which consolidated
earlier legislation). These marketing boards are producers’ organisations with
statutory powers to regulate the marketing of particular products. The schemes
under which they are constituted and operate must be approved by Parliament
Co-operation
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 277
and confirmed by a poll of the producers. Most of the members of the boards
are elected by the producers but a minority are appointed by the minister or
ministers concerned. Further safeguards serve to protect consumers and other
interests affected by schemes and the public interest generally.
Marketing boards fall into two broad categories: first, those which are sole
buyers of the regulated product from all producers not specially exempted
or, alternatively, those exercising a comparable influence by controlling all
contracts between producers and first buyers; and, secondly, boards which
maintain only a broad control over marketing conditions, leaving producers
free otherwise to deal individually with buyers. The boards for hops, milk and
wool fall into the first category and the potato board into the second. Northern
Ireland has its own marketing boards, based on local legislation, for milk, pigs
and seed potatoes.
The Home-Grown Cereals Authority, established under the Cereals
Marketing Act 1965 to improve the marketing of home-grown cereals,
operates a scheme of bonuses and provides market intelligence. It has reserve
trading powers.
The Meat and Livestock Commission, established under the Agriculture
Act 1967, is charged with improving the production, marketing and distribu¬
tion of livestock and meat in Great Britain. It has a range of executive functions
extending from breeding to retail distribution, one of the most important of
which is to evolve a general scheme of carcase classification. It is not em¬
powered to trade in either livestock or meat.
Since April 1971 eggs have been covered by a broadly based Eggs Authority
which is restricted to support buying and more general market matters.
Grants of up to one-third are available for the modernisation of major
wholesale horticultural markets; Covent Garden market is being moved to a
new site at Nine Elms in south London, which should be in use in the early
1970s.
National statutory grades have been introduced for apples, pears, tomatoes,
cucumbers and cauliflowers to improve the competitive position of home¬
grown horticultural produce as against imported supplies and to speed its
transit through distributive channels.
The Central Council for Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation was
established under the provisions of the Agriculture Act 1967 to promote and
develop co-operation in agriculture and horticulture and to administer a
scheme of grants. The Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation Scheme
1971, which superseded the 1967 scheme, provides grants for co-operative
production and marketing of agricultural and horticultural produce, including
capital grants on the same terms as are available to individual producers under
the Horticultural Improvement and Farm Capital Grant Scheme.
The day-to-day work of treating animal disease is the responsibility of the
veterinary profession in private practice. The State veterinary service,
inaugurated in 1865 and covering Great Britain, deals with situations beyond
the control of the individual veterinary surgeon. Centred on London and
Edinburgh, it is able to deal promptly with outbreaks of notifiable diseases.
For many years Britain has been free from many serious animal diseases,
including rinderpest, sheep scab and glanders. Two cases of rabies in imported
dogs occurred in 1969-70 after an absence of cases for nearly 50 years. A
prohibition on imports of dogs, cats and certain exotic species of animal was
imposed but was lifted for dogs and cats in September 1970. The campaign
278
Plants
Infestation
Control
Agricultural
Chemicals
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to eradicate swine fever has been successful. A major epidemic of foot-and-
mouth disease was experienced towards the end of 1967 but was eradicated
successfully by a stringent slaughter policy supported by other vigorous
control measures; the last case of the disease occurred in June 1968. In i960
the whole of the United Kingdom became a bovine tuberculosis attested area.
The incidence of bovine tuberculosis is now very low; cattle (except for certain
categories) are tuberculin tested at regular intervals and reactors to the test are
slaughtered, compensation being paid to the owners. A voluntary Brucellosis
(Accredited Herds) Scheme, introduced in 1967 as a first stage towards
eradication of the disease, was replaced in 1970 by an incentives scheme which
offers payments for healthy herds rather than compensation for reacting
animals. On 1st November 1971 a start will be made with eradication schemes
in three areas—in north-west England, in south-west Wales and in western
Scotland, including certain of the Western Islands. Fowl pest, which had
declined,considerably since 1963, reappeared in epidemic proportions in a
series of outbreaks in 1970 and early 1971 after which outbreaks declined.
The work of the service is backed by the extensive facilities of the Central
Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, Surrey, and those of its subsidiary
laboratory at Lasswade, near Edinburgh. In addition, there are 22 investiga¬
tion centres with well-equipped laboratories in England and Wales. These
centres perform work requiring specialist knowledge and give advice on
disease problems to private practitioners. In Scotland a similar service is
provided by the investigation centres of the three Scottish agricultural colleges.
In Northern Ireland the veterinary services are organised similarly to those
in Great Britain but are administered separately by the Northern Ireland
Government. Animal health control policies and the geographical situation
have kept the country free from nearly all the major epizootic diseases. A
scheme for the eradication of brucellosis was virtually complete by mid-1971.
The full-time veterinary service is supplemented by the central veterinary
laboratory at Stormont, Belfast.
The plant health services, operated by the Agricultural Departments, are
responsible for statutory controls designed to limit the spread of plant pests
and diseases present in Britain and prevent the introduction of new ones from
abroad. They also issue the health certificates required by other countries to
accompany plant material imported from Britain. Voluntary certification
schemes are operated to encourage the development of healthy vigorous and
true-to-type planting stocks, particularly of crops subject to degenerative
diseases. The Plant Pathology Laboratory at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, and
the Agricultural Scientific Services Station, East Craigs, Edinburgh, provide
scientific and technical advice on which statutory controls and certification
schemes are based.
The problems of controlling mammalian and avian pests are studied at the
Ministry of Agriculture’s Pest Infestation Control Laboratory at Tolworth,
Surrey, and its Land Pests Department at Worplesdon, Surrey; a branch
at Slough, Buckinghamshire, studies insect infestation of stored food pro¬
ducts. The laboratories provide information to and liaise closely with Regional
Pest Officers who in turn advise local authorities, farmers and others on
modern control techniques.
Safeguards against the dangers which could arise from uncontrolled use of
pesticides have been devised and are operating successfully. Regulations made
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 279
under the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act 1952 provide protection
for workers using the more toxic chemicals. The voluntary Pesticides Safety
Precautions Scheme, operated by the Government with the support of
industry, ensures that new pesticides intended for use in agriculture, forestry
and food storage, or new methods of using existing pesticides, are not intro¬
duced until enough experimental work has been done on their possible hazards
(including those to users, consumers of treated produce, livestock or domestic
animals and wild life) to allow the Government to make recommendations for
their safe use. Products approved for safety may then be submitted through the
Agricultural Chemicals Approval Scheme for efficiency approval. The purpose
of this scheme is to enable users and advisers to choose efficient proprietary
brands of agricultural chemicals for the control of pests and diseases, the
destruction of weeds, for growth regulation and for the control of insects and
mite pests of stored grain.
Under a similar voluntary scheme, veterinary products on direct sale to
farmers are scientifically considered and recommendations made for safe use.
Since 1969, stricter controls on the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry
and veterinary medicines have been and are being introduced. As a result an
increasing number of antibiotics formerly used freely in feedstuffs are now
available only on prescription or with veterinary authority.
A key role in the administration of the safety schemes is played by the
Government’s Advisory Committee on Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemicals.
Its report, published in 1969, concluded that there was no evidence that the
use of certain persistent organochlorine pesticides had any adverse effects on
human beings. However, to reduce amounts in the environment the Committee
recommended that certain of these chemicals (including DDT, aldrin and
dieldrin) should be withdrawn. Its recommendations will have been im¬
plemented by the end of September 1971.
The Medicines Act 1968 provides for the safety, quality and efficacy of
medicine products for both human and veterinary use, including use in animal
feedingstuffs, mainly through a system of licensing and control of sale and
supply. It is being brought into effect on a series of ‘appointed days’ as
necessary subordinate legislation is introduced. The British health and
agriculture ministers are advised by a Medicines Commission and by expert
licensing committees. The new arrangements will, in due course, replace and
amplify the voluntary scheme and certain statutory controls.
AGRICULTURAL
ADVISORY
SERVICE
In England and Wales technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural
matters is available through the Agricultural Development Advisory Service
(ADAS), a unified service which has operated since March 1971 and which
comprises the former National Agricultural Advisory Service, the Agricultural
Land Service, the State Veterinary Service and the Drainage and Water
Supplies Service. ADAS, which operates mainly from the Ministry’s regional
and divisional offices, provides free advice when no alternative commercial
source of advice exists. It charges only for certain services, such as soil
sampling and laboratory analysis.
When possible ADAS concentrates on group rather than individual advice.
In Scotland the agricultural advisory service is provided by the three
regional independent colleges which are financed almost entirely by public
funds. The service is similar to that provided by the ADAS and covers all
branches of advice.
In Northern Ireland advisory work is organised by the Ministry of Agri¬
culture on a county and district basis.
28o
RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION
Economic
and Market
Research
Agricultural
Education
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Basic agricultural research in Britain is described on p. 32^- The ADAS
operates 22 experimental husbandry farms and horticulture stations, and two
sub-stations whose functions are to investigate local and national problems, to
test research findings and integrate them into improved production systems
and to communicate them to advisers and the industry. In England and Wales,
research in agricultural economics is undertaken by 12 university Depart¬
ments of Agricultural Economics. Ten of these conduct work on farm incomes
and the economics of particular products for the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (see p. 269). In Scotland, agricultural economists are on
the staff of the three agricultural colleges. The agricultural departments in
England and Wales and Scotland have economics and statistics units.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture also has an Economics and
Statistics Division and nine other research divisions dealing with different
aspects of agricultural research and development and responsible for university
teaching of agriculture.
There are four types of institution which provide full-time education in
agricultural subjects: universities; non-maintained agricultural colleges,
in England and Wales, county agricultural colleges and institutes; and in
Scotland, farm schools. Ten universities in Britain provide degree and post¬
graduate training in agriculture. A National College of Agricultural Engineer¬
ing was established in i960 at Silsoe, Bedfordshire, and it offers degree and
postgraduate courses in agricultural engineering. In Northern Ireland there
are three agricultural colleges offering non-degree courses while Queen s
University, Belfast, provides degrees.
The three agricultural colleges in Scotland which provide advisory services
are also teaching establishments whose prime function is to provide diploma
and post-diploma courses.
A new pattern of three-year sandwich courses leading to Ordinary and
Higher National Diplomas has been introduced at the four non-mamtamed
agricultural colleges and at 17 of the county agricultural colleges and institutes
in England and Wales. Similar courses are provided at the three agricultural
colleges in Scotland and at two of the colleges in Northern Ireland. The older
two-year courses will be phased out in a year or two as the new pattern be¬
comes established. The 34 county colleges and institutes in England and the
six in Wales also provide one-year residential courses in general agriculture or
horticulture with supplementary courses covering the various specialisms in
greater depth and five of them offer a new pattern of two-year sandwich
courses leading to the award of the National Stockmans Certificate in Pou try
Practice. Local education authorities also provide short courses, block-release,
day-release and other part-time classes for farmers, farm workers and horti¬
culturists, as well as an advisory service for domestic producers.
An Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board was
set up in 1966 under the Industrial Training Act 1964 (see p. 395)- Grants are
available to employees on recognised courses in agriculture, horticulture or
forestry. Where possible the Board arranges courses through industrial or
local authority facilities but otherwise runs its own courses. The Board s
expenses in respect of forestry are met by a levy on employers within
the private sector. This is the usual method of financing training boards
but, owing to special circumstances in agriculture, agricultural and horti¬
cultural training is financed by a direct grant through the annual review
mechanism. , , , . v-
There are three farm schools in Scotland, run by local education authorities,
Fishing Ports
Methods of
Sea Fishing
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 281
providing courses—mainly residential—of from one to three years’ duration
for boys and girls of from 12 to 16 years.
The agricultural departments offer a limited number of postgraduate
training awards in agricultural subjects.
Under the terms of the Sugar Act 1956 research and education on home¬
grown sugar beet is financed by the industry. A levy on each ton of sugar beet
grown is paid into a special fund under the control of the Minister of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food, who draws up annual programmes in consultation
with the Sugar Beet Research and Education Committee.
FISHERIES
The sea fishing industry is of especial importance to the economy of Scotland.
In the rest of the United Kingdom it is an important source of employment in
the major fishing ports. The industry falls into three main divisions, concerned
respectively with white fish, herring and shellfish. The major element of the
catch (about 82 per cent by weight) is white fish: the catches of herring and
shellfish, although important, are relatively small. White fish are demersal fish
(such as cod, haddock, plaice, turbot and sole) which live on or near the sea
bed, and also pelagic fish (such as pilchards, mackerel and sprats) which live
mainly in intermediate waters or near the surface. Herring is a pelagic species
and constitutes a separate fishery. Shellfish include Crustacea (such as
lobsters, nephrops and crabs) and molluscs (such as escallops, mussels, cockles,
clams and oysters).
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three main groups:
the distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The
distant waters are those round Iceland and in the west Atlantic, Greenland,
Bear Island and the north coast of Norway, and the Barents Sea; the middle
water grounds lie around the Faroe Islands; and the near water grounds are
those in the North Sea, the Irish Sea and in the coastal areas around Britain.
The herring fishing grounds are almost entirely in Scottish waters. The in¬
shore waters also yield considerable quantities of shellfish.
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleet-
wood, North Shields, Lowestoft and Milford Haven. In Scotland the chief
centres for white fish are Aberdeen, Granton, Fraserburgh, the Moray Firth,
the west coast and Shetland Islands; herring landings are made mainly at the
east coast port of Fraserburgh, the west coast ports of Ullapool, Mallaig,
Oban and Ayr and in the Shetland Islands. In Northern Ireland the main
fishing ports are Kilkeel, Portavogie and Ardglass.
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining and ring
netting. Trawling is carried out throughout the year in the distant and near
waters for all species of demersal fish. Seining is also used for catching
demersal fish all the year round, mainly in the North Sea, the Minches, the
Firth of Clyde and the Irish Sea. There are about 550 Scottish and Northern
Ireland seiners, and about 170 operating from English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is summer fishing for herring
based on the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland and the north-east
coast ports of England. Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast
of Scotland, in the Isle of Man area and off southern Ireland.
The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and
282
The Fishing
Fleet
Supplies
Sea Fish
Processing
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
methods of capture; in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs,
lobsters, shrimps, mussels, escallops, cockles and oysters, and, off Scotland,
north-east England and in the Irish Sea there are valuable catches of nephrops
(‘Norway lobsters’ or Dublin Bay prawns).
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and Fleet-
wood, numbered 161 at the end of 1970. They are over 140 feet (42-5 metres)
in length and most of them make voyages of 17 to 23 days to fishing grounds
in the Arctic Circle, Newfoundland, Labrador, Greenland and the Norway
coast. Freezer trawlers and factory ships, which spend from one to three
months at sea and freeze much or all of their catch, in some cases as fillets, have
become an important part of the distant water fleet in recent years At the
same date, near and middle water vessels numbered 352; they are between
80 and 140 feet (24*5 and 42-5 metres) long and most of them work nearer
home, making voyages of from a few days up to more than two weeks, although
some of the larger vessels fish regularly off the Faroes and seasonally as far
afield as Iceland. Included in the near water group are vessels engaged in
fishing for herring which normally make daily landings. The inshore group
consists of vessels of under 80 feet (24-5 metres) which, except for seiners are
seldom at sea for longer than two or three days and more usually make daily
landings, often fishing within sight of land.
In the British fishing industry in 1970 there were about 18,000 fishermen
in regular employment and some 4,000 occasionally employed; about two-
fifths of the former and one-third of the latter were from Scottish ports. In
Northern Ireland there are about 500 regular fishermen.
In 1970 landings of all types of fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British
fishing vessels totalled 960,000 tons (719,000 tons of demersal fish 185,000
tons of pelagic and 56,000 tons of shellfish), valued at about £76 million.
Imports totalled about 108,000 tons of fresh and frozen fish (including
60 000 tons brought direct from the fishing grounds), valued at about £26
million. Cod accounted for 47 per cent of the total value of demersal and
pelagic fish landed by British vessels; haddock (20 per cent) and plaice (9 per
cent) were the other most important sources of earnings to the industry.
Imports of fish and shellfish (fresh, frozen, salted, canned or otherwise
preserved) in 1970 amounted to about 183,000 tons valued at £73 million,
including 24,000 tons of canned salmon to the value of £21 million and other
canned fish and shellfish worth £14 million.
Weekly disposals of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish an
imported canned fish) in Britain averaged about 16,000 tons landed weight
in 1070. Consumption has been declining slightly, on an edible (fillet) weig
basis; it was 16-2 lb. (7-3 kg.) per head in 1970 (see Table 19) in comparison
with a peak total of 28*7 lb. (13 kg.) in 1948.
Processing and packaging of fish-curing, kippering, canning and quick-
freezing for consumer packs—are the subject of continuing research and
development. The growth of quick-frozen fish production has altered radically
the structure of the industry. With the increase in quick-freezing (which now
processes just over a quarter of all white fish landings) new export out ets have
opened up for white fish, which in 1970 accounted for almost half the total
exports of fish and fish preparations, valued at £21 million. Exports of mos
forms of fish increased in 1970.
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal tor
Freshwater
Fisheries
Distribution
System
Promotion and
Regulation of
the Industry
The Herring
Industry Board
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 283
animal food and, to a much lesser extent, for fertilisers. Home production of
white fish meal and herring meal in 1970 was 84,000 tons.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout, especially when
caught by rod and line. Sea fishing for salmon by drift net and other methods
is prohibited in a wide area off the coast of Scotland and, outside national
fishery limits, off England, Wales and Northern Ireland; drift netting within
the limits is controlled by licence. In Scotland, where salmon fishing is a
private right, the main commercial methods are fixed nets on the coast outside
estuaries and sweep netting within estuaries and in rivers. River authority
licences are required for the limited amount of estuary and river netting
carried out in England and Wales. In England and Wales the landed value of
the salmon catch is approximately £275,000 a year, in Scotland it amounts to
about £1-5 million, and in Northern Ireland to some £270,000. In Northern
Ireland, eels worth about £400,000 a year are captured by long lines and by
eel nets placed in river weirs.
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate
Market in London, which handles about 250 tons a day, but other large cities
also have central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is through
wholesalers, located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell to inland
wholesalers; the port wholesalers prepare the fish for onward shipment. Fish
lorries, including insulated and refrigerated vehicles, transport the catch daily
from the ports to inland centres, although rail transport is still used from some
ports. Retail sales are handled by some 18,000 to 22,000 fishmongers and fish
friers; the latter use about a third of the landings of white fish.
Trawler-owning companies have entered into the marketing and distribu¬
tive system. This process has been encouraged by the growing popularity of
quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold by other retail outlets, such as
grocers, as well as by fishmongers.
The government departments mainly responsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
and the Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland. The safety and welfare
of crews of fishing vessels are provided for under the Merchant Shipping Acts
administered by the Department of Trade and Industry. A committee of
enquiry into deep-sea trawler safety reported to the then Board of Trade in
1969. This led to amendment of the Acts to provide for the making of detailed
regulations containing additional safety measures. These regulations are under
consideration.
The Herring Industry Board was set up under the Herring Industry Act
1935 now consolidated in the Sea Fish Industry Act 1970 to reorganise,
develop and regulate the herring industry. The Board consists of a chairman
and three other members, all part-time and independent of the industry, who
are appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the
Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and the Home Secretary. The
Board, whose activities are financed partly by levies and licence fees and
partly by government grants and loans, is advised by the Herring Industry
Advisory Council, consisting of 32 members representing all sections of the
industry and consumers.
The functions of the Board include the promotion of sales of herring, both
284
The White Fish
Authority
Operating
Subsidies
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
at home and abroad, and the application of the benefits of technical progress
to the industry, including the adoption of new methods of catching, processing
and distributing herring. The Board administers the government grant and
loan schemes which provide for assistance towards the purchase of new fishing
vessels, and the improvement of existing vessels. Fishermen may also obtain
loans from the Board towards the purchase of second-hand vessels under
80 feet in length and towards the cost of new nets and gear. Up to 31st March
1971 £2,510,728 in loans and £2,221,913 in grants had been advanced.
The White Fish Authority and the Committee for Scotland and Northern
Ireland of the Authority were set up in 1951 under legislation now con¬
solidated in the Sea Fish Industry Act 1970. The function of the Authority is
to reorganise, develop and regulate the white fish industry, and that of the
Committee to advise the Authority about the exercise and performance of its
functions in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The Authority is composed of a
chairman and six members, and the Scottish and Northern Ireland Committees
of five members and a chairman who is a member of the Authority. They are
appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food the
Secretary of State for Scotland, the Home Secretary and (in the case of the
Authority) the Secretary of State for Wales. The White Fish Industry Advisory
Council was also set up under the 1951 Act to advise the Authority about the
exercise and performance of its functions. It normally consists of 53 members
representing the various interests of the fishing industry.
The White Fish Authority administers government grant and loan schemes
for the purchase of new fishing vessels and engines and the improvement of
existing vessels. It also administers loans for the purchase of nets and gear and
processing plants. Up to 31st March 1971, £35‘9 million in loans and £32-4
million in grants were approved for these purposes by the Authority. Its
other activities are financed by levies on first-hand sales of most white fish, an
a government grant towards research and development.
Subsidies are paid to the inshore fishing industry under the provisions of the
Sea Fish Industry Act 1970 at the rate of so much per day at sea according
to the length of the vessel or at so much per stone (6-35 kg.) of fish landed,
which varies according to the kind of fish, from certain vessels under 60 feet
(18-5 metres) in length. No subsidy is paid for shellfish. Subsidies for white
fish cost £1 -18 million in 1970-71 and those for herring £200,000.
The White Fish Subsidy (Deep Sea Vessels) (United Kingdom) Scheme
came into operation on 1st April 1968 for a period of three years. Subsidies
payable up to 31st July 1971 were at a basic £2 million a year and were adjusted
by reference to the level of profitability of the industry, subject to a maximum
total of £4 million. Payment was related to the operating efficiency of vessels and
not to their classification. These arrangements replaced the previous policy of
progressively decreasing operating subsidies to deep-sea vessels. Subsidies cost
£1-53 million in 1970-71. A new scheme to be run on broadly similar lines is in
preparation.
FORESTRY
The estimated total area of productive woodland in Great Britain is 3-6
million acres (1 -46 million hectares), or about 6^ per cent of the total land area.
If account is taken of areas of scrub and old felled areas, including those cut
down in the second world war, the total rises to 4-52 million acres (1-83 million
hectares), or 8 per cent of the land area; about half of the area is in England,
The Forestry
Commission
and Forestry
Policy
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 285
two-fifths in Scotland, the remainder in Wales. The high proportion of un¬
productive woodland is largely a legacy of two wars and, while rehabilitation
of these areas continues to proceed, it is unlikely that all areas (for instance,
because of remoteness and poor site conditions) will be replanted.
The area of productive forest managed by the Forestry Commission, at
1-79 million acres (0-72 million hectares) represents 50 per cent of the total.
The annual rate of productive forest expansion is currently about 53,000 acres
(21,000 hectares) by the Commission mainly in Scotland, and about 56,000
acres (22,000 hectares) by private woodland owners. The Commission’s
programme includes considerable planting in upland areas, and consists mainly
of conifers because of the difficult site conditions encountered and because
over 90 per cent of industrial demand is for softwoods. The major species used
are Sitka spruce, Lodgepole pine, Scots pine and Norway spruce. In the older
woodlands and taking the country as a whole, the most common coniferous
trees are Scots pine, Sitka spruce, Norway spruce and the larches, while,
among the broadleaved, beech and oak occur widely.
Total employment in state and private forests was 25,000 in 1971 and a
further 11,000 were engaged in the transport and milling of home-grown
timber.
Except for the period of the two world wars, when much over-felling took
place, home woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribu¬
tion to the nation’s total requirements of wood and wood products. Some
25 per cent of the Commission’s woodlands are now in production. Britain
imports 90 per cent of its needs by volume and a higher proportion still by
value, the total import cost of wood and wood products including pulp and
paper being over £743 million in 1970, of which £237 million was accounted
for by timber imports.
The Forestry Acts 1919 to 1945 established the Forestry Commission as the
national forestry authority charged with promoting the interests of forestry,
the development of afforestation and the production and supply of timber in
Great Britain (the Forestry Acts 1919 to 1963 were consolidated in the
Forestry Act 1967). As more and more of its coniferous woods reach the
production stage the Commission has assumed an increasingly important role
as a timber seller and has encouraged the setting up of some 20 new timber¬
using industries in the past 12 years. The Commission consists of a part-time
chairman, a full-time director general, three full-time executive commis¬
sioners and five part-time commissioners. The Commissioners comply with
directions given by the forestry ministers, who are the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland has its own separate organisation (see p. 287).
The Commission’s total estate covers some 2-9 million acres (1-2 million
hectares) and includes 2-1 million acres (0-85 million hectares) of forest land,
of which about 1-79 million (0-72 million hectares) are under trees in 380
forests distributed throughout England, Scotland and Wales. All these forests
are covered by management plans, which provide for such work as planting,
road construction, thinning, fire protection and timber production, facilities
for public recreation, wildlife conservation and the landscaping of plantations.
As already stated, a substantial amount of the Forestry Commission’s new
planting is carried out in Scotland, much of it in the Highland counties. The
poorer types of land are being used, such as sour, peaty soil which is unsuitable
for agricultural purposes, but has become suitable for forestry as a result of
advances in the technique of deep ploughing.
286
Finance
Private
Forestry
Advisory
Bodies
Consultative
Machinery
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production of felled and thinned timber from commission woodlands is
expected to rise from about 1 -3 million tons in 1969-70 to about 2-2 million tons
by 1980 and to 4 million tons by 1990. Some ofthis produce is meeting traditional
requirements of the coal mines but much is taken by the paper pulp industry
and by factories established to make chipboard, fibreboard and wood wool.
The Forestry Fund was constituted under the 1919 Forestry Act; from it is
paid all the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid
amounts voted annually by Parliament, together with the Commissions
receipts from sales of produce, rentals and other sources. In the period ending
31st March 1970, drawings from funds voted by Parliament amounted to
£15-1 million, and receipts were £7-6 million.
Privately owned woods comprise nearly 60 per cent of the total forest area m
Great Britain and contain most of the mature and semi-mature timber. The
size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges from a few acres to several
thousand acres, and a high proportion of the private woodland area is in small
ownership—that is, owners of up to about 250 acres (100 hectares).
Impetus was given to the effective management of private woodlands by
the Dedication of Woodlands Scheme, initiated in 1947. Under this scheme,
owners are invited to put their land permanently to timber production and to
manage their woods in accordance with a plan agreed with the Forestry Com¬
mission, in return for the provision of planting and management grants and
technical advice. By March 1971 the total area dedicated was 1-06 million
acres (424,000 hectares). In addition, there are the Approved Woodlands
Scheme and the Small Woods Scheme under which a planting grant, but no
management grant, is paid. More than i-2 million acres (494,000 hectares)
are managed under the first two schemes. Woodland owners are represented,
in their relations with the Forestry Commission, by the Forestry Committee
of Great Britain, which co-ordinates the work of two associations of woodlan
owners: the Timber Growers’ Organisation (for owners in England and Wales)
and the Scottish Woodland Owners’ Association. .
The Trees Act 1970 allowed for tree preservation orders to be imposed,
with the consent of the Commission, on dedicated and other grant-aided
There are a number of forestry co-operative societies providing for and-
owners and farmers the services of skilled staff, centralised purchasing facilities,
and a central agency for the disposal of forest produce. The Forestry Com¬
mission also co-operates with the principal forestry societies, such as the
Royal Forestry Society of England and Wales and the Royal Scottish Fores ry
Society, in disseminating technical knowledge.
Under the Forestry Act 1967 the Commissioners maintain national com¬
mittees for England, Scotland and Wales, composed partly of Forestry
Commissioners and partly of persons outside the Commission. These commit¬
tees act in an advisory capacity, particularly as to the social, recreational
and amenity aspects of the Commissioners’ activities and relationships with
other land users. The Commissioners also maintain a regional advisory
committee for each Conservancy.
Other bodies have been set up to provide for consultation on the marketing
and utilisation of home grown timber. The Home Grown Timber Advisory
Committee (HGTAC) is a statutory body and includes representatives of
associations of landowners, timber merchants and processors and the trade
Forestry
Education and
Research
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 287
unions under an independent chairman. The Advisory Committee on Utilisa¬
tion of Home Grown Timber, a sub-committee of the HGTAC advises on
measures designed to promote utilisation of produce from British woodlands.
Under a scheme agreed upon in 1961 for consultation on proposals for affor¬
estation of land within National Parks (see p. 177), the Timber Growers’
Organisation and the Country Landowners’ Association advise their members
to notify the park planning authorities about their planting proposals.
Forestry training is the responsibility of the Department of Education and
Science. A three-year sandwich course providing education at the supervisory
level and other courses are run at Newton Rigg, near Penrith.
An Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board and a
Furniture and Timber Industry Training Board provide training in forestry for
employees of private woodland owners and in the home-grown timber trade.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities; a propor¬
tion of graduates is recruited by the Commission as forest officers.
The Commission’s Forest Research Station at Alice Holt Lodge, near
Farnham, Surrey, was opened in 1946. Expenditure on research work at this
station, at the Northern Research Station and in experimental areas in many
forests in Great Britain amounted to £o-g million in 1969-70. This sum
included grants for special forestry research work to various institutions and
to university departments including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute at
Oxford, which is also financed by the university, the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office and overseas governments. A Northern Research Station was
opened near Edinburgh in May 1970. Research into the qualities of home¬
grown timber is carried out by the Forest Products Research Laboratory at
Princes Risborough, Bucks, and also by grant-aided research associations.
When the Government of Northern Ireland was formed in 1922, the new
Ministry of Agriculture became the forest authority working with similar
powers and duties to those of the Forestry Commission. At that time the
Ministry took over some 4,000 acres (1,625 hectares) for afforestation, of which
700 acres (285 hectares) had been planted.
Forest policy is carried out under the authority of the Forestry Act (Northern
Ireland) 1953, which replaced earlier legislation. This Act provides the
Ministry with powers to acquire and manage land, and to give financial and
technical assistance for private planting. It introduced measures for the
protection of all woodlands, whether owned by the State or privately owned,
against destruction by over-cutting, fire or depredation by animals.
The state forest area has grown steadily and at a greatly accelerated pace
since the end of the second world war. By 1971 over 150,000 acres (60,750
hectares) had been acquired, of which over 100,000 acres (40,600 hectares)
had been planted. It has been officially proposed that 300,000 acres (120,000
hectares) of state and private forest be established by the end of the century.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and
from receipts from forest produce and other sources. About 900 people are
employed in field labour and ancillary work. The area of exploitable private
woodlands is at present about 30,000 acres (12,000 hectares), and private
planting, which is gaining impetus, is assisted by schemes for the supply of
young trees from the Ministry’s nurseries at a low cost, by grants towards the
cost of the establishment of new plantations, and by free technical advice.
The public may visit almost all the forests, five of which have been desig¬
nated Forest Parks, and use the amenities provided.
  iiihi
13 TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
SHIPPING
Technical
Trends
Inland and overseas transport and communications employed 7 per cent
of the total labour force in Great Britain in June 1970. Of the i-6 million
persons so occupied, 32 per cent were engaged in road passenger transport
and road haulage contracting, 16 per cent in railways and 29 per cent in
postal services and telecommunications 5 sea and air transport each absorbed
5 per cent; port and inland water transport and miscellaneous transport
services and storage absorbed 13 per cent. Transport and communications
contribute about 9 per cent of the gross national product and are responsible
for a rather higher proportion of the nation’s gross fixed capital formation.
SEA TRANSPORT
Of the world’s active sea-going tonnage of 100 gross tons1 and over nearly
10 per cent is registered in Britain, making the British merchant fleet the
third largest in active employment after those of Liberia and Japan.
The British shipping industry meets severe international competition and
encounters difficulties from practices such as flag discrimination and the use of
‘flags of convenience’. While the British fleet increased by 20 per cent to
25-8 million gross tons between i960 and 1970 total world tonnage rose by
over 70 per cent to 227-5 million gross tons. However, the British fleet is now
increasing more rapidly than world tonnage—by 9 cent in 197®- Britain
has the world’s second largest oil tanker fleet, at 12 million gross tons, and the
fourth largest ore and bulk carrier fleet, at 3-9 million gross tons.
Technological change has been proceeding rapidly. Vessels are becoming
obsolete over a shorter period and as they do so are being replaced by larger
ships, with generally lower building costs per ton; labour-saving devices,
greater speeds and faster turn-round facilities are reducing operating costs.
The tendency to greater average size has been the most marked in tankers and
dry bulk cargo ships. Vessels are specially built to carry ore, cement, wine and
various kinds of chemicals. Many ships have been designed to carry fully
loaded road vehicles, pallets and containers. In particular the use of containers
on door-to-door journeys can result in speedier, safer and cheaper carriage of
a wide range of goods. Two consortia of British shipping companies are
operating specially designed deep-sea cellular container ship services, several
British companies are involved in international container consortia, and a few
are operating services of their own. Similar arrangements exist in bulk carrier
services.
1 One gross ton (g.t.) = 100 cubic feet. One deadweight ton (d.w.t.) = 1 long ton
(2 240 lb.). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed spaces on a ship.
Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before sub¬
merging the load-line.
Relations with
the Government
THE MERCHANT
FLEET
EMPLOYMENT
OF SEAFARERS
Qualifications
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 2^9
The Department for Trade and Industry is the government department
responsible for most matters connected with merchant shipping. Under the
Merchant Shipping Acts, it administers many regulations for marine safety
and welfare, for instance: certifying the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows
that a ship is not overloaded; ensuring that standards of safety are observed
in ship construction; ensuring the provision of adequate life-saving, fire¬
fighting and radio equipment; and dealing with the discipline, professional
standards, health and accommodation of seamen. Most of the work which
these responsibilities entail is carried out by the staff of the Marine Survey and
Mercantile Marine offices at the ports. There is also a Registrar-General of
Shipping and Seamen, in whose office at Cardiff a complete record of all
British ships and seamen is kept. Abroad, certain parts of the Merchant
Shipping Acts are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers of Common¬
wealth Governments.
Much of the law relating to employment at sea is being revised under the
Merchant Shipping Act 1970, in particular some disciplinary provisions are to
be relaxed and arrangements for welfare and safety of seamen improved.
A committee of enquiry reported in May 1970 in favour of the establish¬
ment of a Ship Research and Development Institute, an Industrial Training
Board for Shipping, a Statutory Marine Authority for safety control, and an
international code of practice for shipping conferences.
Britain’s merchant fleet has been increasing rapidly in response to new
methods of handling goods. Gross tonnage of ships delivered to British
owners in 1970 is estimated at 2-75 million, about a quarter of which was built
in British yards. Over half of the fleet is diesel driven.
In June 1970, 21-4 million gross tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons and
over were both owned and registered in Britain.1 These ships are usually
employed as follows: 6-4 million gross tons as foreign-going passenger and
cargo liners; 4-2 million gross tons as foreign-going tramps; 10 million gross
tons as foreign-going tankers; and o-8 million gross tons in coasting and trade
with ports between the Elbe and Brest (home trades).
The Queen Elizabeth 2 (66,000 g.t.), the most advanced and one of the
largest passenger liners ever built, designed for the transatlantic route and for
cruising, went into service in 1969.
About 85,000 United Kingdom personnel are employed by the merchant fleet.
A considerable number of other nationals are also employed.
The Department of Trade and Industry holds examinations for, and issues
certificates of competency to, ship’s officers as master, first mate and second
mate of foreign-going ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as
first-class engineer and second-class engineer. Officers may not normally
serve on board ships in these grades unless they hold the appropriate, or a
higher, certificate.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of competency in radio¬
telegraphy issued by the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications on the
results of an open examination.
1 The remaining tonnage included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary craft, Admiralty
vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carriage of cargo, and
shipping registered in Britain but owned in other Commonwealth countries (including
over 1 million gross tons of tankers).
290
Conditions of
Employment
SHIPOWNERS
SHIPPING
ORGANISATIONS
Lloyd’s Register
of Shipping
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A seaman may not be rated as A.B. (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom
registered ships unless he holds a certificate of competency as A.B. granted
by the Department of Trade and Industry, or an equivalent certificate. To
obtain this certificate a seaman must, among other qualifications, have served
three years at sea on deck, have obtained a certificate of efficiency as lifeboat-
man and have passed a qualifying examination. Seamen qualify by seniority
for promotion to the rating of petty officer. Service as a deck rating qualifies
for the purpose of admission to the examination for a second mate’s certificate.
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies
of apprentices, cadets and ratings who are preparing for their examinations
for the various certificates of competency.
Wages and conditions of employment of the majority of seafarers are negoti¬
ated by the National Maritime Board. Minimum wages and holidays with pay
are guaranteed for both officers and ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy
Established Service Scheme, introduced by the Board in 1947, has removed a
great deal of the uncertainty formerly associated with a seafaring life. Officers
and men can now take contracts of at least one year s duration, not only with
individual shipping companies but with the Merchant Navy Establishment
Board, and get special benefits between voyages in addition to the normal
unemployment insurance benefit.
About one-third of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom
consists of foreign-going passenger-cargo and cargo liners, mostly the latter.
Practically all these ships are owned by large liner companies. Many operate
wide networks of scheduled cargo and passenger services which, between
them, cover every ocean. The 4’2 million gross tons of foreign-going tramp
ships are operated by a large number of private owners, some having only a
small number of ships and some only one ship.
Examples of major British liner shipping companies operating scheduled
services from the United Kingdom are: Cunard, to North America; Blue
Funnel, to Australia and the Far East; Peninsular and Oriental (P. & O.) and
the British India lines, to India, Australia and the Far East; Union Castle, to
South and East Africa; Elder Dempster, to West Africa; Furness Withy, to
North America and the West Indies; the New Zealand line, to Australia and
New Zealand; and Shaw Savill and Albion, to Australia and New Zealand.
These and the other major liner companies have for the most part amalga¬
mated to form a small number of major groups, of which the largest and best
known are the P. & O., the Furness Withy, the Ocean S.S., and the British
and Commonwealth groups.
Over two-thirds of the total tanker fleet belong to the oil companies,
although there are a few important independent United Kingdom tanker¬
owning companies.
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s, see
P- 357) which surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their
safety and operational efficiency. It will accept responsibility for surveying
and giving technical advice on vessels of all flags from the initial stages o
building, at regular intervals during their service, and after casualties. A
satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an underwriter that he
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
29I
Shipowners’
and Shippers’
Organisations
Employers’
Organisations
The National
Maritime Board
Conferences
The Baltic
Exchange
SAFETY AT SEA
Sea Rescue
may accept the risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between the
Register and the Society of Lloyd’s.
The representative body speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for
the most part, owners of fishing vessels) is the Chamber of Shipping of the
United Kingdom. There are a number of local associations of shipowners
centred around the main port areas. Other organisations represent companies
specialising in a particular trade or type of cargo.
The British Shippers’ Council, formed in 1955, represents the shipping
interests of exporters and importers in matters of both national and inter¬
national concern.
The British Shipping Federation Limited is the employers’ organisation
concerned with labour relations and the regulation of employment. It is
responsible for the administration of the Merchant Navy Established Service
Scheme, under which shipowners engaging crews for ships of 200 gross tons
and above engage them through the Merchant Navy Establishment Administra¬
tion unless they are prepared to offer company service contracts.
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representa¬
tives of the shipowners and seafarers’ unions and is responsible for negotiations
of wages and conditions of service.
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other
and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a
series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates,
and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle
of a conference is the establishment of a common tariff of freight rates or
passenger fares from each port of departure. Each conference meets from
time to time to review and revise existing rates, or to compile new ones. Some
of the conferences are connected by rate agreements, or have joined together
to form wider groupings. There are over 60 conferences dealing with trade to
and from the United Kingdom.
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of
London’s seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world’s largest market
for the chartering of ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’
representatives meet here to arrange the chartering of dry-cargo tramp ships
for the carriage of goods to and from all parts of the world. In addition sale
and purchase of ships, chartering of aircraft and trade in certain commodities
are carried on there.
The Department of Trade and Industry’s responsibilities for safety include
administration of the Coastguard Service, and certain administrative functions
concerning lighthouses and pilotage. The Department makes regulations to
ensure safety and navigation and to prevent oil pollution, and conducts
enquiries into accidents at sea.
The Coastguard Service co-ordinate search and rescue measures for vessels in
distress off the coasts of Britain, and gives direct assistance where appropriate.
There are some 550 regular coastguards and about 7,000 part-time auxiliary
coastguards. Constant watch is maintained all the year round at certain main
2Q2
Lighthouses
Pilotage
Traffic
Control
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
stations and where necessary at a number of others. During the year ended
31st March 1971 life-saving action was taken on 2,919 occasions.
The Coastguard calls upon shipping, the lifeboats and inshore rescue boats
of the Royal National Life-boat Institution, and service aircraft to assist as
necessary. It has at its disposal a civilian rescue helicopter based at Mansion
in Kent. The Royal National Life-boat Institution is supported entirely by
voluntary contributions, and depends for its operation on voluntary workers.
From its foundation in 1824 to the end of 1970 it saved 92,983 lives. Lifeboats
and inshore rescue boats were launched 2,633 times in 1970 and rescued 1,250
people.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel Islands
and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received its first
Royal Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a Board of ten
Elder Brethren, elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Navy.
Lighthouses in Scotland and Ireland are the responsibility respectively
of the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses and the Commissioners of
Irish Lights. These authorities control about 180 lighthouses, many minor
lights and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced
by unattended sea marks or by light towers.
Trinity House is the chief pilotage authority, licensing some 700 pilots in
41 districts in England and Wales, including London, Southampton and
Milford Haven. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is the
pilotage authority. In Britain there are 48 pilotage authorities for the 92
pilotage districts and over 1,700 licensed pilots.
Every year some 300,000 vessels pass through the Dover Strait, one of the
most congested stretches of water in the world. Recommended one-way routes
were marked in 1967 by navigational aids provided by the French and British
lighthouse authorities—a scheme worked out jointly by the Institutes of
Navigation of France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Britain and
agreed upon by the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation
(IMCO), a United Nations agency with headquarters in London. Following a
succession of accidents early in 1971 the British Government proposed to
IMCO that the scheme be made mandatory and its area extended.
POLLUTION OF The discharge of oil into British territorial waters was first restricted in 1922.
THE SEA Britain is a party to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of
the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. Under amend¬
ments made in 1962 and put into force in 1967 the nations ratifying this
convention (now numbering over 40) agreed to prohibit their national fleets
from discharging persistent oil within 100 miles (161 kilometres) of any coast,
or in some cases more; ships of 20,000 gross tons and over, built after 18th
May 1967, were prohibited from discharging persistent oil anywhere at sea.
Britain enforces these restrictions on British ships through the Oil in Navigable
Waters Acts of 1955 and 1963.1 Amendments agreed upon in 1969 prohibit the
discharge of persistent oil at sea except at a rate which has been shown not to
cause harmful pollution; no oil whatever may be discharged from cargo spaces
of tankers within 50 miles (80 kilometres) of land. These amendments, not yet
enforceable internationally, will be applied to British ships under the Oil in
Navigable Waters Act 1971.1 In 1969 Britain signed the International Con-
1 Now consolidated within the Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1971.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
293
PORTS
National Ports
Council
Development
vention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution
Casualties, enabling a state to take action on the high seas to prevent pollution
of its coastline by oil from a damaged tanker, and the International Convention
on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, facilitating the obtaining of com¬
pensation for damage by oil pollution. Britain will give effect to the latter
convention under the Merchant Shipping (Oil Pollution) Act 1971.
There are some 250 port authorities or public wharf operators in Britain, and
about 1,400 other undertakings engaged in various harbour operations, such as
stevedoring, towage, warehousing and lighterage. Port authorities are of four
main types: nationalised bodies, public trusts, local authorities and private
companies.
Public trust port authorities consist mainly of representatives of users of the
port, such as shippers, importers, exporters, and shipping companies and
members of the relevant local authorities. Examples of such public trusts are
the Port of London Authority, the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board (Liver¬
pool), and the Belfast Harbour Commissioners. Local authorities own about
one-third of Britain’s ports, including the major port of Bristol, and Preston
and Boston; ports owned by private and limited liability companies include
Manchester and Felixstowe. Many private ports deal with the traffic of
individual industrial firms in commodities such as petroleum, china clay and
paper pulp.
Since 1948 about a quarter of total port capacity has been owned by the
Government; the majority of these ports, including Southampton, Hull,
Immingham, Cardiff, and Swansea, are owned by the British Transport Docks
Board (see p. 297). In 1970 shipping arrivals and departures at the Board’s
docks totalled nearly 113 million net registered tons (including fishing vessels)
and total cargo handled was over 86 million tons. The British Railways Board
controls certain ports, which are largely used for the cross-Channel services of
the railways: (for example, Folkestone, Holyhead, Heysham, Stranraer and
Parkeston Quay at Harwich) while the British Waterways Board owns
Sharpness (Gloucester) and Weston Point (Manchester).
Port authorities, in the main, operate with statutory powers and responsibili¬
ties set out in private Acts of Parliament. Most are members of the Docks and
Harbour Authorities Association, formed in 1917 to further the common
interests of port authorities in their relations with the Government, shipowners
and traders.
The National Ports Council, set up as a statutory body under the Harbours
Act 1964, is financed by a levy on port authorities. It advises the Government
on major port developments and has various responsibilities in relation to
research, training, statistics and charges. It has encouraged the amalgamation
of harbour authorities in certain estuaries into single port authorities, as on the
Forth, Clyde and Tees, and is at present engaged in drawing up, in co¬
operation with the port authorities, a programme of financial, commercial and
management improvements.
Large-scale modernisation of the port transport industry has been taking place
in recent years, as a result both of the increase in Britain’s trade, especially
with other European countries, and of technological changes affecting sea¬
going traffic. The growing size of tankers and bulk carriers has necessitated
more deep-water berths, while development of mechanical handling methods,
packaging of general cargo, containers and ‘roll-on, roll-off’ services has created
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a demand for new types of port facilities. Capital investment in ports has risen
from about £18 million a year in the early 1960s to some ^40 million in 1970.
A major development at Tilbury, port of London, costing £30 million oyer
a number of years, has provided 12 deep-water berths, including a riverside
grain terminal, four of them for container traffic. Another major scheme is
the construction of the new Seaforth docks at Liverpool, costing ^4° mibion
and due to come into use at the end of 1971; it will provide ten deep-water
berths, four to handle containers, two to handle bulk grain and meat carriers,
and others to handle computer-controlled general cargo and packaged timber.
Container facilities are being expanded at a cost of some £14 million for the
Far East traffic at Southampton, where a computer-linked harbour surveillance
and shipping information system is being installed to provide radar and VHF
radio coverage over 20-miles (32-kilometres) of port area. Deep-sea container
facilities have also been constructed at Felixstowe, the Clyde, and Manchester.
In addition over 70 specialised container roll-on berths have been constructed
for the short-sea trades with continental Europe, including Scandinavia and
Ireland. A £20 million deep-water harbour at Port Talbot, South Wales, serves
as an ore terminal for the British Steel Corporation. Other ore terminals are
to be built at Redcar, Yorkshire, and possibly at Hunterston on the Clyde.
Labour About 100,000 people are employed in the port transport industry of the
United Kingdom. At the end of 1970 46,000 dock workers were registered
with the National Dock Labour Board. They were responsible for the physical
and mechanical handling of cargo. The remainder included administrative,
technical, clerical and commercial staff.
The system of casual labour common among dock workers in the past has
gradually been superseded. A start on ‘decasualisation’ was made in 1941 when
war-time controls were imposed. In 1947 the National Dock Labour Board
was established, with members appointed by the then Minister of Labour and
representing both employers and employed, to administer a scheme under
which registered dock workers received a minimum wage for attendance even
when no work was available. In September 1967 each registered dock worker
was placed in employment on a permanent basis with an employer licensed by
the port authority, under the provisions of the Docks and Harbours Act 1966.
Port Traffic Some 330 million tons of cargo a year pass through the ports of Great Britain.
Of this total coastal traffic of over 100 million tons consists mainly of petroleum
and coal. Of about 180 million tons of imports from overseas over 100 million
tons consists of petroleum and petroleum products. Manufactured goods form
about two fifths of exports.
The total of vessels in the foreign trade entering and leaving with cargo at
United Kingdom ports rose by over 5 per cent during 1970 to over 212 million
net registered tons. The corresponding figure for coastal trade was over 90
million.
A large proportion of the general cargo traffic through British ports, is
handled by unitised transport methods in containers and roll-on goods
vehicles, which carried 15-4 million tons of goods in 1970. British ports handle
more containers than the rest of northern European ports together and account
for the largest share of the container traffic across the North Atlantic. London,
with i-6 million tons, was the leading port for this type of traffic in i97°>
followed by Liverpool, Preston and Felixstowe, each with 1-4 million tons.
Principal Ports Britain’s largest port is that of London. In 1970 some 60 million tons of goods
were handled, including 29 million tons of petroleum and 8 million tons of coal.
SHIPPING
One of the fleet of
deep sea cellular
container vessels
in service between
Manchester and
Montreal.
Below left:
A dual-purpose
timber and ore
carrier.
Belozv right :
A combined
container ship
and car carrier.
CARGO HANDLING
Above: Tilbury docks.
Fruit handling at
Port of London.
Timber loading,
London docks.
Containerisation,
Grangemouth,
Scotland.
Oil terminal,
Immingham,
Lines.
1 *♦>♦♦♦♦ tTTTTTrmi i
TRAINING OF
SEAMEN
'Fhe Planetarium
at London’s
School of
Navigation.
A lesson in
navigation, using
closed-circuit
television.
Belozv left:
A tanker safety
course at the
British School of
Navigation,
Southampton.
Below right:
Navigation cadets
at Plymouth
School of
Maritime Studies.
Tanker
Terminals
HOVERCRAFT
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 295
Liverpool is the second largest port and Britain’s major export outlet,
especially to deep-sea trading areas. In 1970 26 million tons of goods were
handled, about one-half consisting of dry cargo—grain, chemicals, iron and
steel, and other manufactures.
Southampton is the chief port for ocean passenger traffic, and specialises
in trade with South Africa; it has the advantages of deep water and double
tides. Bristol, with Avonmouth, has a large traffic in grain imports, and is
Britain’s main port for imports of animal feedingstuffs. The South Wales
ports import much of Britain’s requirements of iron ore, especially through
Port Talbot and Newport (Monmouthshire). Swansea is important for the
export of coal, iron and steel and tinplate and for imports of oil. Milford Haven,
handling 41 million tons, has now become Britain’s major oil port. The in¬
land port of Manchester, reached from the Mersey via the 36-mile (58-
kilometre) Manchester Ship Canal, has at Eastham Britain’s largest oil
dock, covering 19 acres (8 hectares), and exports manufactured goods and
chemicals.
In Scotland the Clyde is the principal port, serving the central industrial area
and possessing a crude oil terminal at Finnart. On the Forth, Grangemouth
is associated with petroleum, petro-chemicals and timber, while Leith is the
port for Edinburgh.
Newcastle and other ports on the Tyne serve England’s industrial north¬
east, and the port of Tees and Hartlepools handles iron ore, steel and engineer¬
ing products, and chemicals, especially fertilisers. Hull and Grimsby on the
Humber handle nearly half the wet fish landed in Britain and are among the
largest white fish ports in the world. With Immingham they serve the industrial
areas of Yorkshire and the Midlands, especially in trade with Scandinavian and
Baltic ports. Belfast is the principal port of Northern Ireland and handles the
main traffic across the Irish Sea.
Most of the oil tankers coming to Britain to discharge crude oil are berthed at
special tanker terminals owned and operated by the oil companies to serve
their own refineries. Facilities have been extended to accommodate larger
vessels, and a new terminal at Immingham (Humberside) will eventually take
tankers of 250,000 d.w.t.
British ports offer the deepest water access in Northern Europe for fully
laden tankers to pipe crude oil direct to refineries. Milford Haven in Wales,
after a £12 million dredging scheme, can accommodate fully laden vessels of
250,000 deadweight tons on all tides at four private oil company terminals.
Finnart on the Clyde will also accept vessels of this size and can be readily
adapted to accept the half-million-ton tankers of the future; it is frequently
used in lightening operations to allow part-laden vessels to proceed with
shallower draft to other ports in Northern Europe.
Pipelines connect Finnart with the refinery at Grangemouth on the Firth
of Forth, Angle Bay with the refinery of Llandarcy (near Swansea) and Stan-
low (Merseyside) with the refinery at Heysham (Lancashire).
The hovercraft, a vehicle which rides on a cushion of air over both land and
water surfaces, has been in regular public passenger service around the coasts
of Britain since 1965. Services are run by several privately owned firms, these
include Hoverlloyd Ltd., which has a purpose-built hoverport at Pegwell
Bay in connection with its car and passenger ferries between Ramsgate and
Calais, and Hovertravel Ltd., which operates across the Solent to the Isle of
Wight and has a subsidiary which does training and charter work. Two
296
Long-term
Trends in
Transport and
Traffic
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
publicly owned bodies, the British Railways Board and the Scottish Transport
Group, have hovercraft interests. British Railways’ subsidiary, British Rail
Hovercraft Ltd. (‘Seaspeed’), was set up in 1966, and is the world’s largest
commercial hovercraft operator. It also runs regular services across the
Channel between Dover and Boulogne, using two 165-ton Mountbatten
(SRN4) hovercraft, the largest in the world, carrying passengers and accom¬
panied cars. It operates two services across the Solent, and has taken on charter
work.
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain1 is carried mainly by
road and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, pipelines and
inland waterways are important in carrying certain types of freight, particularly
bulk goods. A small but increasing proportion of freight goes by air.
Part of the inland transport system of Great Britain is publicly owned;
namely, the railways, a large proportion of road passenger and some road
haulage services, most of the inland waterways and some of the vessels on them.
Road haulage is largely, and coastal shipping almost entirely, in the hands of
private enterprise.
In the third quarter of 197° there were nearly 15 million vehicles licensed
for use on the roads. Of these 11*5 million were motor cars and i-i million
motor cycles; 2 per cent of the 1 ’6 million road goods vehicles and two-thirds
of the public road passenger vehicles (excluding taxis) were publicly owned.
In 1970 61 per cent of freight, in terms of ton-mileage,2 travelled by road,
20 per cent by rail, 17 per cent by coastal shipping, and 2 per cent by pipeline
and inland waterway.
Since 1945 the rapid growth of private and commercial motor traffic, causing
congestion problems of increasing severity, especially in cities and towns, and
the changing pattern of demand for transport services have led successive
Governments to undertake or commission fundamental studies of probable
trends in transport and problems which may arise therefrom. The Buchanan
report, published in November 1963, was the result of a study group set up to
examine the problems of traffic in urban areas. It estimated that Britain would
have 40 million vehicles on its roads by a.d. 2010 and proposed radical
measures to rebuild and adapt cities and roads to handle the growth of traffic.
It is expected that the number of vehicles on the roads will double by 1990.
Total passenger mileage is expected to grow by over 50 per cent during the
next ten years with demand for public transport diminishing and travel by
private transport still rising fast. Total freight ton-mileage is expected to
increase substantially, although fuel traffic will fall as a result of structural and
technological change.
Research is being carried out into new forms of inter-urban travel, such as
high-speed passenger trains, tracked hovercraft, and vertical take-off aircraft.
The railway network has been reduced by over a third in the past decade
but it was decided in 1967 to fix a basic network of some 11,000 route-miles
(17,700 route-kilometres) for modernisation and development.
1 For an account of inland transport in Northern Ireland, see p. 3°7- .
2 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual dxstanc
it was transported.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
297
NATIONALISED
TRANSPORT
Transport
Legislation
1947-68
Statutory Boards
RAILWAYS
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
The present role and structure of the nationalised transport undertakings are
the result of a series of legislative measures, starting with the 1947 Transport
Act under which they were taken into public ownership. In accordance with
this Act the British Transport Commission (BTC) was established on 1st
January 1948 and assumed control of Britain’s railways, all railway-owned
steamships, docks, hotels and road transport interests, most of the country’s
canals (including all those owned by the railways), certain rivers (as navigation
authority) and the whole of the London passenger transport system. It was also
to arrange for the gradual acquisition of privately owned long-distance road
haulage firms.
Changes of policy following the coming into power of a Conservative
Government in 1951 were put into effect under the Transport Act 1953 which
modified the functions of the BTC. A considerable part of the publicly owned
road haulage fleet was denationalised between 1953 and 1956.
Over the next few years it became widely held that the BTC’s activities
were so large and diverse that they could not be run effectively as a single
undertaking. The Transport Act 1962 therefore dissolved the BTC and set
up four boards, for British Railways, London Transport, British Transport
Docks and British Waterways. Each of these was responsible to the Minister
of Transport, who appointed the members.
The shipping services operated by British Railways and certain ports and
docks used for them passed to the British Railways Board.
The hotel property of the BTC was transferred to British Transport Hotels
Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary, first of the BTC and later of the British
Railways Board.
Road passenger, haulage and other undertakings, such as British Road
Services, the Tilling Bus Group, the Scottish Omnibuses Group, Thomas
Cook and Son, were operated as companies incorporated under the Companies
Act, with their own boards; they were grouped under a Transport Holding
Company, responsible to the Minister of Transport.
The 1968 Transport Act has considerably altered the transport pattern laid
down by the 1962 Act. The 1968 Act provided for a capital reconstruction and
reorganisation of British Railways; the setting up of Passenger Transport
Authorities to control and co-ordinate local transport arrangements; three new
nationalised bodies—a National Bus Company, a Scottish Transport Group
and a National Freight Corporation; a new licensing system and safety pro¬
visions for road haulage operators; and new grants for public transport. Most
of the functions of the Transport Holding Company have been distributed
among the new bodies, and the Government intends to wind it up once its
remaining interests have been sold.
Britain was the pioneer of railways. The opening of the Stockton to Darlington
Railway in 1825, and of the Liverpool and Manchester line in 1830, when
George Stephenson’s famous ‘Rocket’ locomotive was used, began a century
of widespread railway development. The great period of railway building was
from 1840 to 1875.
The railways first came under centralised government direction during the
first world war, and afterwards some 130 private companies were amalgamated
into four large regional groups under the Railways Act 1921. Thereafter they
suffered from the prolonged industrial depression and growing competition
from road transport, and following the second world war the Transport Act
298
Operations
Development
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1947 brought the railways under public ownership as a single enterprise,
British Railways, operated under the overall management of a Railway
Executive established as the agent of the BTC. Under the Transport Act 1962
the British Railways Board was set up and came into existence on 1st January
1963 with sole responsibility for managing railway affairs.
In spite of technical and operational advances the Board’s financial position
remained unsatisfactory and, following a detailed review of railway policy,
the 1968 Transport Act made far-reaching changes. Capital debt was written
down from £1,627 million (of which £705 million had already been suspended
under the 1962 Act) to £365 million. Grants for rail passenger services which
are unremunerative but which are regarded as socially necessary were intro¬
duced; £62 million was so paid in 1970. Grants not exceeding a total of £50
million may be paid to the Board on a gradually diminishing scale during the
years 1969 to 1973 towards the cost of maintaining surplus track and signalling
equipment pending their elimination; £12 million was paid in 1970. Deficit
financing, which had been in operation since 1963, ceased in 1968 and the
Board is now expected to pay its way. Other provisions of the Act removed
certain restrictions on the Board’s powers to manufacture and to run hotels,
and reduced the size of the Board.
The process of rationalisation arising from changing public transport require¬
ments is reflected in the reduction of over 6,400 miles (10,300 kilometres) of
standard-gauge route since 1961. A total of 824 million passenger journeys
was made and 199 million tons of freight traffic conveyed on the railways in
1970; total receipts amounted to £57! million. The Board made a profit of
£9-5 million following interest payments of £42 million. At the end of 1970
it employed 273,000 people. , , r
In 1970 a subsidiary, British Transport Hotels Ltd., owned 34 hotels of
which it managed 33. It also managed the catering facilities on trains (includ¬
ing Pullman trains) in addition to station refreshment rooms.
British Railways’ subsidiary, British Rail Hovercraft Ltd., runs regular
hovercraft services (see p. 296). ... ■ ^ t? ■ u
The Railways Board and the shipping subsidiaries of the National Freight
Corporation have between them a fleet of about 100 vessels, providing
passenger and freight services on most of the important routes between
Great Britain and the Continent and the Republic of Ireland, as well as on
many domestic routes. Ownership of domestic services in Scotland was
transferred to the Scottish Transport Group under the Transport Act 1968;
its two shipping subsidiaries own some 4° vessels between them.
In December 1970 the Board produced its first five-year corporate plan, which
will be revised annually and which analyses all sectors of business, setting
targets for them. The plan stressed the need for continuing investment in
modernisation of the railways. In recent years the most important develop¬
ments have been the replacement of steam by diesel and electric traction
completed in 1968; the improvement of inter-city passenger services with the
emphasis on speed, reliability and comfort; the introduction of express freight
services (‘freightliners’) enabling freight to be handled throughout transit in
standard containers (now the responsibility of Freightliners Ltd., see p. 300),
and increased mechanisation in the carrying of coal and other bulk com¬
modities. Capital expenditure in 1970 amounted to £76 million.
At the end of 1970 there were 4,126 diesel, 323 electric and 50 diesel-electric
locomotives. In addition there were 3,621 diesel passenger-carrying multiple
unit vehicles and 7,358 electric multiple unit vehicles.
Passenger Services
Freight
Workshops and
Technical Centre
National Freight
Corporation
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 299
The Board’s current programme includes the replacement of old passenger
coaches by new stock with improved amenities, and the construction of new
electric multiple unit stock to replace old vehicles. On certain sections of the
London-Bristol-South Wales line and of the London-Edinburgh line pass¬
enger trains are permitted to run up to 100 mph (161 kmph). Similar speeds
are also in operation on the London Midland Region’s services on the electrified
line between London, Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool. This electri¬
fication scheme, costing some £160 million and completed in 1967, was the
largest individual capital investment project ever undertaken by the British
Railways Board and included station reconstruction, bridgeworks, a new
colour-light signalling system and new rolling stock. A 70 per cent increase
in numbers of passengers has resulted. Electrification is being extended by
235 route-miles (378 route-kilometres) to Glasgow at a cost of £25 million;
a ^30-4 million route rationalisation and resignalling scheme is associated
with it.
Motorail services (carrying both passengers and cars) increased their traffic
by 10 per cent in 1970 and have a current capacity of 107,000 cars on 22
services.
The efficiency of freight services is being improved as new vehicles come into
service and as facilities for concentrating traffic at fewer and better equipped
and sited marshalling yards and terminals are completed. The freightliner
services, the responsibility of Freightliners Ltd. (see p. 300), serve a network
of over 20 main terminals. Services are operated throughout the country and
to the Continent. The first freightliner ran in November 1965.
The London International Freight Terminal, opened in 1967, links the
British Railways Board container port of Harwich with the main freightliner
network. The first fully cellular container ships built in a British yard are
being used in the Board’s container services between Harwich and Zeebrugge,
opened in 1968.
Bulk products traffic is increasing. Oil is being moved from refineries under
long-term contracts, while coal is being fed direct from collieries to power
stations in ‘merry-go-round’ trains, on which coal is loaded and discharged
automatically from a new type of high-capacity wagon. Long-term contracts
are in operation for the carriage of cars, china clay, milk, grain, newspapers,
steel, chemicals and other goods.
British Railways Board’s subsidiary, British Rail Engineering Ltd., has 14
main workshops, employing some 37,000 people, mostly on repairs and con¬
struction of rolling stock, locomotives and containers.
The Railway Technical Centre at Derby covers 20 acres (8 hectares) and
employs about 2,000 people. Work is proceeding on a large number of projects,
a major one being the development of a 150 mph (241 kmph) gas turbine
‘advanced passenger train’ to run over existing tracks. Like the associated
train control system and a number of smaller projects, it is being given govern¬
ment financial help.
The National Freight Corporation was set up under the 1968 Transport
Act to provide and promote the provision of integrated road and rail freight
services, making the maximum economic use of rail. The Corporation took
over all the road haulage and most of the shipping interests of the Transport
Holding Company, and from the Railways Board the depots, vehicles, ware¬
houses, containers and other equipment, though not the actual trains used,
in the freightliners and sundries services, and also the Board’s road haulage
300
Freight
Integration
Council
Channel Tunnel
ROADS
Development
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
vehicles. It has a capital of about £100 million, and employs 66,000 people;
annual turnover amounts to some ^17° rnillion.
Freightliners Ltd., a company jointly owned by the Freight Corporation
and the Railways Board (with 51 per cent and 49 per cent of the shares
respectively), is responsible for the marketing and management of freight-
liner services. The Railways Board makes a charge for providing and hauling
the trains, and profits are divided between the Board and the Corporation in
proportion to their holdings. In 1970 some 480,000 containers were carried on
about 60 routes.
A Freight Integration Council, set up under the 1968 Act, advises the Depart¬
ment of the Environment and the Secretary of State for Scotland on the
provision of integrated freight services by publicly owned bodies. It consists
of several independent members with an independent chairman, the chair¬
men of the Freight Corporation and the Railways Board, and members
representing union interests.
The British and French Governments have chosen an international group of
banking and other interests with which to pursue the project for a rail tunnel
between Britain and France under the Channel. Final studies for the project
began in April 1971. The tunnel would provide ferry train services for road
vehicles in addition to through rail services.
The advent of the motor vehicle made it necessary for the Government to
set up a central road authority; accordingly, the Road Board was established
by the Development and Road Improvement Funds Act 1909. In 1919 the
Board’s responsibilities were taken over by the newly established Ministry of
Transport (see p. 51).
Roads are classified according to their traffic value. Trunk roads provide
a national network of routes for through traffic; other roads are divided for
grant purposes into principal and non-principal roads.
In June 1971 Great Britain had nearly 208,000 miles (334,743 kilometres)
of public highway. There were 9,000 miles (14,484 kilometres) of trunk roads,
of which 829 miles (1,334 kilometres) were motorways; 20,000 miles (32,186
kilometres) of principal roads of which some 10 miles (16 kilometres) were
motorways, and 179,miles (288,072 kilometres) of other roads, including
unsurfaced roads.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is the highway authority for
trunk roads in England and on these roads he administers expenditure, which
is provided wholly from central Government sources, although for many pur¬
poses he employs local authorities as his agents. The Secretary of State for
Scotland has corresponding responsibilities for roads in Scotland and the
Secretary of State for Wales for roads in Wales. Work on major trunk road
schemes in England, including motorways, is controlled by regional road con¬
struction units, manned jointly by Department of the Environment and county
council staff. The highway authority for principal roads is, in general, the
council of the county or county borough in whose area the roads lie. The
Secretary of State makes specific grants towards approved expenditure on con¬
struction and major improvement of these roads and contributions from public
funds towards maintenance and other expenditure is made through grants to
local authorities. Roads other than trunk and principal roads are entirely the
responsibility of the local authority in whose area they lie.
A large and steadily expanding road-building programme has been in progress
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
301
Motorways
Bridges and
Tunnels
Research
ROAD
TRANSPORT
since 1955. Public expenditure on new and improved roads in Great Britain
is estimated at over £470 million in 1971-72. The current programme
includes a considerable mileage of motorways constructed for the use of
limited classes of traffic under powers granted by the Special Roads Act 1949
(consolidated in the Highways Act 1959).
The motorways form part of a programme designed to provide a national
network of modern through routes. At the same time, work done under this
programme is eliminating some of the worst bottlenecks in urban areas and
thus helping to give free outlets from the big cities and from other main
sources of traffic to the trunk routes.
At the end of June 1971 in England 740 miles (1,190 kilometres) of motorways
had been opened for traffic and construction had started on a further 262 miles
(421 kilometres). Schemes for an additional 599 miles (964 kilometres) were
being prepared. In Wales 23 miles (37 kilometres) were in use. In Scotland
137 miles (220 kilometres) of motorway are planned, of which over 66 miles
(106 kilometres) are in use. (See map on inside of back cover.) Some 160 miles
(257 kilometres) of motorway are due to be opened to traffic by the end of
1971.
A comprehensive programme of trunk road improvements is also well
advanced. Over 1,200 miles (1,931 kilometres) of all-purpose trunk roads in
Great Britain now have dual carriageways, in addition to 700 miles (1,127
kilometres) of principal roads.
A large programme of bridge and tunnel building has been undertaken in
recent years. The bridges include the Medway Bridge on the M2, the sus¬
pension bridge across the Firth of Forth, the Severn Bridge incorporating
major advances in suspension bridge design, and the 7,000-ft (2,134-metre)
bridge across the Firth of Tay. A £7 million bridge over the Clyde at Erskine
was opened in 1971, a ten-lane bridge at Glasgow was opened in 1970, and the
new ^4 million London Bridge is to be completed in 1972. The Western
Avenue extension in London, a motorway viaduct 2^ miles (4 kilometres) long,
was opened in 1970.
Major tunnels, including one under the Thames and one under the Tyne,
have been built in recent years. Work on a second Mersey crossing began in
1967; the first of the twin tunnels was opened in 1971 and the second is due
for completion in 1974.
Research on roads is carried out at the Road Research Laboratory (see p. 320).
Its aims are to find more economical ways of designing, constructing and
maintaining roads and of facilitating the flow of traffic on them and to reduce
road accidents. The layout of roads, their traffic, the safety features of road
vehicles and the behaviour of road users are investigated, and new methods,
materials and processes are developed for building roads and providing them
with a smooth, safe and durable surface. The Laboratory has a Tropical
Section, which undertakes research and advises on road problems in countries
overseas.
In 1970 there were nearly 15 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great
Britain’s roads. Of these, i-6 million were goods vehicles and 200,000 were
public road passenger vehicles (that is, buses and taxicabs).
The first world war stimulated the development of motor vehicles, which
became serious competitors of the railways. Government regulation of public
road transport began with the passing of the London Traffic Act 1924, which
3°2
Licensing
Publicly Owned
Road Haulage
Public
Passenger
Transport
by Road
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
gave the then Minister of Transport power to control the number of buses and
their journeys in London; this was followed in 1933 siting up of the
London Passenger Transport Board (see p. 305).
The Road Traffic Act 19301 ended the licensing of public service vehicles
(that is, buses and coaches) by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas
each under the control of three traffic commissioners. The commissioners
regulate, by means of a licensing system, public road passenger transport
services, and they sanction routes and time-tables in order to secure proper
co-ordination of services and eliminate unnecessary competition; they may
control fares. .
The Road and Rail Traffic Act 1933 established a system of licensing tor
road haulage vehicles designed to restrict vehicle operations to proved needs.
Under the Act the licensing authority (that is, the chairman of the appropriate
body of traffic commissioners) could grant licences to public haulage vehicles,
where their services appeared to be needed and grant automatically, on
application, licences for the carriage of the licensee’s own goods.
Under the 1968 Transport Act a new licensing system, with the sole aim of
improving safety, has replaced the system described above. Over 900,000
goods vehicles not exceeding 3} tons gross loaded weight have been exempted
from licensing. Operation of larger vehicles requires an operator’s licence
certifying ability to maintain vehicles adequately, control loading and the hours
worked by their drivers, and adequate financial resources to enable them to
maintain vehicles properly. There are now no quantitative restrictions of any
kind; under the new system holders of operators’ licences may carry their own
or other people’s goods subject only to restrictions imposed to ensure safety.
New rules effecting the reduction in hours worked by drivers of goods and
public service passenger vehicles laid down by the 1968 Transport Act came
into force in March 1970, together with a new system of written records to be
kept by goods vehicle drivers and their employers. The restrictions on hours
have since been modified to ease certain practical difficulties. Regulations con¬
cerning the fitness and loading of vehicles have been made more stringent
under recent legislation.
From September 1956 to January 1963 the nationalised road haulage services
were controlled by British Road Services (BRS), a division of the British
Transport Commission, and operated through five companies, which together
owned about 16,000 vehicles. Under the Transport Act 1962, these organisa¬
tions operated companies incorporated under the Companies Act, with their
own boards, and were grouped together under the Transport Holding Com¬
pany, responsible to the then Minister of Transport. The road haulage
interests of the Holding Company have been transferred to the National
Freight Corporation (see p. 299), which operates some 30,000 vehicles.
The 1968 Transport Act enables Passenger Transport Authorities (PTAs) to
be set up to control and co-ordinate the different forms of transport in any
particular area. The first PTAs were set up in April 1969 in south-east
Lancashire—north-east Cheshire, Merseyside, the West Midlands and
Tyneside. The constituent local authorities appoint most of the members,
but up to one-seventh may be appointed by the Secretary of State for t e
1 Consolidated in the Road Traffic Act i960.
Road Safety
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 303
Environment (or by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales). Each
appoints its own chairman, with the relevant Secretary of State’s approval.
The PTAs control policy and finance, and appoint professional executives—
Passenger Transport Executives—to be responsible to them for day-to-day
operations. The Executives may operate services themselves and enter into
agreements with other bodies, such as British Railways or the National Bus
Company, to operate others; they have taken over all the former municipal
bus undertakings in their areas.
The National Bus Company was formed to take over the former bus
operating and manufacturing subsidiaries of the Transport Holding Company
in England and Wales, and operates through locally based subsidiaries.
A separate Scottish Transport Group has been set up to control bus and
some shipping services in Scotland, and has taken over the relevant interests
of the Transport Holding Company, operating through subsidiaries.
The National Bus Company and the Scottish Transport Group operate
about 21,000 and 4,700 vehicles respectively. The PTAs control 6,300 vehicles.
The remainder of the industry, excluding London Transport, comprises 4,800
operators owning 35,000 vehicles; 79 of these operators are local authorities
outside PTA areas operating 11,000 vehicles, and 3,500 are small concerns
operating not more than five vehicles.
Capital grants may be made by the Government towards the cost of invest¬
ment in public transport, at rates of up to 75 per cent of approved cost. Eligible
schemes include improvements or extensions of railway lines, new fixed track
rail and bus systems, interchanges, stations, and car parks. Grants at the rate
of 25 per cent are available towards the cost of new buses complying with
specifications approved by the Department of the Environment. Local
authorities may assist unremunerative bus services in rural areas, and the
central government may make 50 per cent grants in such cases.
Britain has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the world. Road
accident statistics are compiled and published by the Department of the
Environment, the Scottish Development Department and the Welsh Office
from reports made by the police. In 1970, 7,501 people were killed on the
roads and about 93,500 seriously injured. The fatal accident rate per vehicle
is lower than that in most other European countries.
Modern roads, designed for present-day traffic and segregating pedestrians
from vehicles, are safer than the roads they replace and surveys have shown
they result in a marked fall in casualties. The more important measures
directed primarily towards road safety include speed limits of 30 and 40 mph
(48 and 64 kmph) in built-up areas and 50 mph (80 kmph) on certain trunk
and important classified roads in rural areas; a 70 mph (113 kmph) speed limit
on all motorways and on ordinary main roads where no lower limit applies;
the provision of pedestrian crossings—usually illuminated by flashing beacons
and marked with conspicuous white stripes (‘zebra’ crossings); and the system
of road markings and traffic signs which are being replaced by greatly im¬
proved signs in accordance with general European practice. The Road Safety
Act 1967 made it an offence to drive with more than a prescribed level of
alcohol in the blood, at present 80 milligrammes of alcohol per 100 millilitres
of blood.
The design of vehicles, their use on the roads, and the maintenance of their
mechanical condition are controlled by regulations. The regulations are kept
under constant review, and amended whenever necessary in the interests of
safety or for control of pollution and noise. Private cars and light vans which
3°4
Control of Traffic
LONDON
TRANSPORT
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are three or more years old must be tested annually at private garages author¬
ised as test stations. Heavy goods vehicles are tested annually at government
test stations. Public service vehicles must be specially approved before being
licensed to carry passengers, and are tested at regular intervals. Any vehicle
may be stopped on the road at any time by the police and examined.
All drivers of motor vehicles, unless they have either held a full British
licence or passed the driving test in the last ten years, are required to pass the
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Until they pass the test they
must obtain a ‘provisional’ licence which necessitates their displaying ‘L’
(Learner) plates on their vehicle, and in all cases, except solo motor-cycles
and motor-cycle combinations, where vehicles are constructed to carry pass¬
engers, learner drivers must be accompanied by a qualified driver. (Newly
arrived residents of Britain may drive under their overseas driving licences for
three months before becoming subject to these rules.) A learner driver of a
solo motor-cycle is restricted, until he passes the driving test, to a machine not
exceeding 250 cc. Professional driving instructors must be approved by the
Department of the Environment. A scheme for special licensing and testing of
drivers of heavy goods vehicles, which lapsed in 1939, was reintroduced in
February 1970.
The Road Traffic Acts, which embody the law relating to road users, are
enforced by the police and the courts. A person convicted of any of the 26
most serious offences is liable to be disqualified from driving for a period. The
standard of conduct for all road users and a summary of the requirements of
the law is set out in easily understandable form in the Highway Code, which
was revised in 1969. A failure to observe the code does not of itself render a
person liable to criminal proceedings but may be taken into account in any
such proceedings.
National campaigns to persuade people to take greater care on the roads are
conducted by the Department of the Environment and the Royal Society for
the Prevention of Accidents with assistance from the local authorities, which
also help by arranging courses of instruction, especially courses for children.
The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1967 empowers traffic authorities to make
orders regulating traffic and imposing parking control. With the exception of
trunk roads, which are the concern of the central Government, traffic is the
responsibility of local authorities. Extensive schemes are being undertaken
for the improvement of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion. These
include: ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads from cities; and traffic
management measures, including comprehensive control of street parking,
‘one-way’ systems, peak hour ‘clearways’ prohibiting waiting on busy roads,
and ‘tidal flow’ arrangements. A Traffic Advisory Unit set up in 1965 in the
then Ministry of Transport advises local authorities. In most town centres
street parking is permitted for limited periods only, and in London and some
other towns on payment at parking meters usually under the supervision of
traffic wardens. Disc schemes providing free but limited parking facilities are
in operation in some towns, including Cheltenham, Devizes, Harrogate and
Ripon. Off-street facilities are being increased, including multi-storey car
parks. A computer-controlled system to regulate traffic was installed in west
London in 1968. Similar systems are operating in Glasgow and Liverpool.
London is one of the world’s four largest cities. The area known as Greater
London, within a radius of about 15 miles (24 kilometres) from Charing Cross,
contains just over 7+ million people.
Reorganisation
The London
Transport
System
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 305
London’s passenger transport system, in its modern sense, began in 1829
when the first omnibus, horse-drawn, appeared on the London streets. The
first regular tram service, also horse-drawn, began in 1870. In 1863 the first
underground steam railway, the Metropolitan, was opened. It was built by
digging a great trench for the line and roofing it over. In 1870 the world’s
first tube railway, the Tower Subway, under the river Thames opened; it was
cable-operated and ran for only a few months. The first electric tube railway
in the world, the City and South London Railway, was opened in 1890, and
this was followed in 1900 by the opening of the Central London Railway.
Shortly afterwards the original steam-operated underground lines were
electrified. Meanwhile horse-drawn trams were being replaced by electric
trams, and later horse-drawn buses by motor buses.
Until 1933 there were many separate undertakings providing passenger
transport facilities in London, but in that year they were all vested in a single
public corporation, the London Passenger Transport Board. In 1948, with the
establishment of the British Transport Commission, the London Transport
Executive took over control as an agency of the Commission.
Under the Transport Act 1962 the London Transport Executive was re¬
placed by a financially independent board, the London Transport Board.
Exchequer loans financed the Board’s external capital needs. From 1965 to
1969 the Board ran a deficit, due mainly to competition from the private car
and to increasing traffic congestion. The deficit was met by Government
grants.
Under the Transport (London) Act 1969, which came into effect on 1st
January 1970, the Greater London Council (GLC) became the overall
transport planning authority for London and assumed responsibility for the
central bus and underground rail services formerly operated by the London
Transport Board (LTB). These services are managed and operated by the
London Transport Executive, appointed by and responsible to the GLC.
The LTB’s country bus and Green Line coach services were transferred to
London Country Bus Services Ltd., a subsidiary of the National Bus Company
(see p. 303). Under a financial reorganisation the Government has written off
the entire capital debt of the former LTB, some j£27° million.
The London Transport undertaking operates all road and rail passenger
transport services in the London area with the exception of the London lines
of the British Railways Board, the Green Line coach services and the taxicabs.
Some 8,250 taxicabs that ply for hire in the streets are privately operated by
companies or owner-drivers and are licensed annually by the Metropolitan
Police. There are about 13,300 licensed cab drivers.
London Transport’s railway network stretches over 20 miles (32 kilo¬
metres) from north to south and 35 miles (56 kilometres) from east to west. In
March 1971 the total length of the railway over which London Transport
trains operated was 254 miles (409 kilometres), of which 100 miles (161 kilo¬
metres) were underground. London Transport trains serve 276 stations and its
buses travel over 1,702 miles (2,739 kilometres) of roads. To carry traffic over
all this area London Transport owns 4,423 railway cars and 6,428 buses. The
total staff employed is over 60,000.
Improvements being carried out by London Transport have included
extension and modernisation of parts of the Underground system, and the
introduction of automatic fare collection and automatic trains. One-man
operation of buses is being steadily extended over a period of years. The
306 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
first one-man-operated double decker buses were introduced at the beginning
of 1971.
Work on a new 14-mile (23-kilometre) underground railway between
Walthamstow in north-east London and Brixton in south London was
completed in 1971 (except for one station), and work begun on a scheme to
link Heathrow airport with the underground railway system.
London Transport set up an international advisory service for city transport
in 1969.
INLAND In 1761 James Brindley completed the Bridgewater Canal to take coal from
WATERWAYS t|ie collieries owned by the Duke of Bridgewater at Worsley to Manchester.
This marked the beginning of canal building in modern Britain, with which
the names of Brindley, Telford, Rennie, Jessop and other great engineers are
associated. Canals played an important part in promoting industrial and
commercial expansion in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The whole canal system was practically complete by 1830. As a result of
developing competition from the railways, however, about one-third of the
canal mileage had passed to the control of the railway companies by the middle
of the nineteenth century. During the two world wars government control
of railways included railway-owned canals. Under the Transport Act 1947,
most of the country’s canals passed to the British Transport Commission in
January 1948. Under the Transport Act of 1962, control has been vested
in the British Waterways Board since January 1963. Under the Transport
Act 1968 a grant-in-aid is being paid primarily to enable the Board to main¬
tain an extensive network of amenity waterways; in 1970-71 ^1-85 million
was paid and a further £1*1 million for the costs of improving bridges.
The System There are about 2,500 miles (4,023 kilometres) of navigable inland waterways
in Great Britain,1 some 2,000 miles (3,219 kilometres) of which belong to the
British Waterways Board; the remainder are mainly still in the hands of
local authorities or private companies. Many of the Board’s canals are narrow
waterways which can generally be used only by boats not exceeding 7 ft
(2*13 metres) in width, the remainder are broad waterways and canalised rivers,
some of which can be used by craft of up to about 75° tons capacity. The
Caledonian and Crinan Canals in Scotland are broad waterways. Of the
inland waterways under the control of the British Waterways Board some
340 miles (547 kilometres) are commercial waterways. A substantial additional
mileage (1,100 miles—1,770 kilometres—known as cruising waterways) is to
be maintained for recreational purposes; a statutory Inland Waterways
Amenity Advisory Council advises the Secretary of State for the Environment
and the Board. _ ,
Engineering, commercial and estate work is directed from the Board s
headquarters in London and Watford, and through regional offices at Leeds
and Gloucester. In Scotland the canals (other than the Caledonian, which is
run by a manager) are, for engineering purposes, under the control of the
engineer-in-charge at Glasgow; estates work is supervised centrally from
In 1970 traffic on the Board’s waterways amounted to just oyer 6-4 million
tons, of which 27 million tons were coal, 1 -4 million tons liquids in bulk and
2 7 million tons general cargo. Some 97 per cent of the traffic is carried on
1 In Northern Ireland, the only inland waterway which is still used for commercial
transport purposes is the Lower Bann Navigation.
Development
PUBLIC
TRANSPORT
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
Roads
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 307
340 miles (549 kilometres) of commercial waterways, which are mainly
canalised river navigations.
Although the British Waterways Board is the largest single carrying
operator, most of the traffic is handled by independent carriers or by traders
in their own craft. The Board at the end of 1970 owned 542 freight-carrying
craft (including tugs) with a carrying capacity of 25,739 tons. It operates
2 docks and 25 warehouses.
The Board is anxious to develop its cruising waterways for purposes of
recreation and amenity. These include the Llangollen branch of the Shrop¬
shire Union Canal, the Oxford Canal, and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal.
The principal commercial waterways are the river navigations and broad
canals in the Yorkshire-Humberside area, the Trent Navigation, and the
Gloucester and Sharpness Canal. Freight traffic is declining, but some im¬
provements to facilities are being carried out.
The total turnover of the British Waterways Board in 1970 amounted to
£5 million, of which £0-3 million arose from the Board’s own freight¬
carrying activities, £1 -2 million from warehousing and terminal services, and
£o-y million from the docks. The sale of water for industrial and agricultural
purposes brought in £o-g million. Receipts from pleasure boating were
£170,300. The number of pleasure craft licensed in 1970 was 12,607.
Reorganisation of public transport in Northern Ireland was completed in
1968. Under the Transport Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 the Ulster Transport
Authority was wound up and its assets and liabilities transferred to a new
company, the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Responsibility
for operating services on the 200 miles (322 kilometres) of railway track was
given to the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd., a subsidiary of the
Holding Company. The Act also provides for a licensing system for road
passenger operators.
Ulsterbus Ltd., another subsidiary of the Holding Company, has taken
over the road passenger operations of the Authority, which formerly provided
all public road passenger services, apart from those of the City of Belfast. A
number of privately owned bus companies now operate in addition.
In 1966 the Authority’s monopoly of road carriage of freight was replaced
by a licensing system. About 1,900 operators and 4,150 vehicles have been
licensed, the biggest single operator being Northern Ireland Carriers Ltd.,
owned jointly by the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company and
the British National Freight Corporation.
On 31st March 1971 there were 14,160 miles (22,287 kilometres) of public
roads in Northern Ireland, comprising 379 miles (610 kilometres) of trunk
roads, 1,018 miles (1,638 kilometres) of Class I roads, 1,736 miles (2,794
kilometres) of Class II roads, 2,883 miles (4,640 kilometres) of Class III roads
and 8,144 miles (13,107 kilometres) of unclassified roads.
The Ministry of Development is directly responsible for the trunk road
system and bears the entire cost of maintenance and construction work on
these roads. In addition to major construction schemes on trunk roads, an
extensive system of motorways is planned including an urban motorway
system in Belfast. About 54 miles (87 kilometres) of motorway were in use by
the middle of 1971.
The Ministry of Development administers the Road Fund (the proceeds of
motor vehicle taxation, driving licence fees, etc.), from which grants are paid
3°8
Commercial
Organisation
The Role of the
Government
Air Services
Licensing
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to the local authorities (county, county borough, borough and urban district
councils) which are responsible for the other roads. The rates of grant range
from 90 per cent for major improvement works on Class I roads to 25 per cent
for maintenance work on the unclassified roads.
Gross capital expenditure on all roads in the financial year to 3^®^ IVlarch
1970 was £15 million, and expenditure on maintenance and minor improve¬
ments was about £$ million. Gross capital expenditure in the five-year
period 1970-74 is expected to be about £80 million, compared with about
£62 million in the five-year period to 31st March 1969. Expenditure on
maintenance and minor improvements in the five-year period to 31st March
1970 was ^24 million.
CIVIL AVIATION
British airmen were among the first to carry mails (at the time of the Corona¬
tion of King George V in 1911) and among the first to operate regular mail
and passenger services, which were inaugurated on 25th August 1919, when
a daily passenger service was opened between London (Hounslow) and Paris
(Le Bourget).
In April 1924 four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited and this company pioneered the commercial development of inter¬
continental air routes. By 1929 there was a through service from England to
India. The first passenger service to Australia started in 1935.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), a public corporation,
took over the undertakings of Imperial Airways Limited and British Airways
Limited in 1940. British European Airways (BEA) was established under the
Civil Aviation Act 1946 as a separate public corporation to cover the United
Kingdom and Europe. In addition to the two nationalised corporations, 46
independent air transport operators hold Air Operators’ Certificates.
General responsibility for the development of United Kingdom civil aviation
rests with the Department of Trade and Industry, which has certain statutory
powers and duties in respect of the air corporations, including the power, very
seldom used, to give directions of a general character as to the exercise and
performance of their functions in relation to matters affecting the national
interest. The Department appoints the Boards of the corporations and, with
the approval of the Treasury, has power to make loans within the limits laid
down by Parliament to finance capital investment. It is responsible for
approving the lines of the corporations’ capital expenditure, and also sets, after
consultation with the corporations, their financial targets and, in BOAC’s case,
approves the amount payable annually as dividend. There is close consultation
on overseas traffic rights and air safety. Day-to-day matters concerning the
corporations’ activities are the responsibility of the commercial management
of BOAC and BEA. . . . . .
The Department plays an important part in the activities of the International
Civil Aviation Organisation and other international aviation bodies.
Under the post-war nationalisation legislation the air corporations had a
statutory monopoly of British scheduled services, and independent operators
were confined, broadly, to charter work. From 1949, and increasingly from
1952, the independents were allowed to develop new scheduled services,
provided they secured ministerial approval and operated, technically, as
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
3°9
The Air Transport
Licensing Board
(ATLB)
The
Corporations:
Constitutions
and Functions
Finance
Growth of
Air Services
British
Overseas
Airways
Corporation
(BOAC)
associates of the corporations. The Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act i960
abolished the corporations’ monopoly and provided for a licensing system,
administered by an Air Transport Licensing Board, to which the nationalised
and independent operators could apply on an equal footing for licences for
scheduled or charter services, or for revocation or variation of existing licences.
The ATLB is an independent body of six to ten members appointed by the
Department of Trade and Industry. Its main function is to consider and decide
on applications for licences (or their revocation or variation). The ATLB
must have regard to an applicant’s financial resources, staffing, organisation,
the need for the proposed services, the adequacy of, and possible effect on,
existing services, and any objections or representations made by interested
parties. It also has the general duty of furthering the development of British
aviation. There is provision for appeals on ATLB decisions to the Department,
which appoints independent commissioners to hear appeals publicly and report
with recommendations upon them.
A committee set up to enquire into the affairs of the civil air transport
industry reported in May 1969. On the basis of its recommendations, under
the Civil Aviation Act 1971, a new Civil Aviation Authority is to be set up
in April 1972 to take over general control of the industry, in particular of
safety regulations and licensing. It will absorb the present Air Registration
Board (see p. 313) and Air Transport Licensing Board. At the same time a
new British Airways Board is to assume powers of general supervision over
BOAC and BEA. The committee also recommended that a privately owned
‘second force’ airline be set up from among the independent operators. Such
an airline was formed in December 1970 through a merger of British United
Airways and Caledonian Airways.
The constitution and functions of BOAC and BEA are laid down in the Air
Corporations Act 1967, which consolidates, with certain exceptions, the
provisions of the Air Corporations Acts 1949 and 1966, and in the Air
Corporation Act 1969. Each corporation consists of 5 to 11 members, includ¬
ing the chairman. The chairman of each board is a member of the other.
As a result of BOAC’s capital reconstruction in 1966, £35 million ‘Exchequer
Dividend Capital’ on which a variable dividend, related to each year’s
earnings, is payable, was created, together with a reconstruction reserve of
some £30 million and appropriate loan capital. The introduction of Public
Dividend Capital (now £65 million) is experimental. The statutory limit on
BOAC’s total borrowings is ^120 million. BEA’s borrowing limit is ^200
million, which can be increased by Order to £230 million.
Total capacity-ton-miles offered on all services by British airlines has more
than trebled since 1959, and had risen to 3,960 million capacity-ton-miles in
1970. In 1955, 2-5 million passengers entered or left the United Kingdom by
air, compared with 5-7 million who arrived or departed by sea; in 1962 there
were for the first time more air than sea passengers, and by 1970 the figures
had risen to 21-7 million by air and 11-5 million by sea.
BOAC is engaged on long-haul operations. Its scheduled services link Britain
with continental Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, Africa and
North and South America, and it also provides complete round-the-world
services. It co-operates closely with airlines of several other Commonwealth
countries; it also has financial interests in seven companies operating local and
3IG
Operations
Financial Results
British
European
Airways (BEA)
Operations
Financial Results
The
Independent
Airline
Companies
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
regional services in the various parts of the world adjacent to BOACs main
routes, and in a number of hotel companies in areas attractive to business and
holiday travellers.
The capacity offered on BOAC’s own scheduled services reached 1,974
million capacity-ton-miles in the year ended March 1971 having risen by
6-4 per cent over the previous year. Over half of this capacity was on t e
western routes to North and South America. The overall load factor in
1070-71 was 49-4 per cent; the break-even load factor (the figure at which
operating costs are covered) was 477 per cent. The Gorporatmn’s
up entirely of pure jets, consists (June 1971) of Super VC jos (i6), VC 10s
(n), Boeing 707-436$ (18), Boeing 707-336$ (11); and 6 Boeing 747$ wit
another 6 on order and options on another 4. .
The VC 10, introduced into service in 1964, operates alongside Boeing 707
on world-wide routes. The Boeing 707-336C took over transatlantic all¬
freighter operations in January 1966 and also operates all-traffic services to
the Far East and Australia. The Boeing 747 began to operate over the North
Atlantic in April 1971. : a ^
The Corporation is making a substantial investment over a period of ten
years in one of the most advanced airline computer systems in the world
(BOADICEA). Applications include seat reservations, departure, cargo, an
stock control, message switching, payroll and costing.
In 1070-71 BO AC earned an operating surplus of £5 million and net profits of
rv2 million after interest on borrowings and taxation. Of its gross tra c
revenue (£196 million), £131 million was earned in foreign currencies.
BEA and its associates operate services to some 100 destinations m35 countries
in Britain and the rest of Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. Its
services in Britain include a number which cannot be operated on a commercia
basis but which meet a vital social need, mainly the services to the Highland
and Islands of Scotland. BEA also co-operates with other airlines in order to
create ‘through travel’ facilities. It has a financial interest in several associated
companies, most of which collaborate with BEA in providing a network o
services. Two major subsidiaries are British Air Services, operating secondary
domestic services, and BEA Airtours Ltd., a new tours company.
For the year ended 31st March 1971 increases in capacity offered and
passenger-miles flown on scheduled services were 6-5 per cent and o-5 per
cent respectively over the previous year; fre.ght-ton-m.les flown fell by 12 5
per cent. In the same year some 87 million passengers were carried.
P BEA’s fleet consists (March 1971) of BAC One-Elevem (iS),Tndent Threes
(6 with 20 on order); Trident Twos (15), Trident Ones (21), Comet
Viscounts (24), Vanguard 951s (5), Vanguard 953s (8) and Herons (2). B
converting the Vanguard aircraft into the Merchantman used solely for freight.
The first Merchantman service opened in February 1970.
In 1970-71 the corporation earned over £133 million in revenue and made
a net profit of £520,000. It has earned a profit in 7 out of the past 10 years.
Although the two State corporations had a statutory monopoly up to 1961
there has been a significant expansion in recent years not only of the number
of passengers and volume of freight carried but also in the diversity of services
operated by the independent operators. As well as a wide network of domestic
Overseas
Trade by Air
Air Freight
Private Flying
Aerodromes
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 311
and international services they provide vehicle ferry services; specialised air
cargo facilities; and enable travel agents to offer low-cost all-in holidays
abroad. The independent companies compete with BEA over several domestic
routes, including the busiest internal route in Europe, from London to
Glasgow. In 1970 they carried some 3 million passengers. British Caledonian
Airways, the new ‘second force’ airline (see p. 309), has a fleet of 31 aircraft,
used on both chartered and scheduled passenger and freight services, and carries
some 275 million passengers a year.
In addition to the public transport operators there are a large number of
companies engaged in miscellaneous aviation activities such as crop-spraying,
aerial survey and photography, and flying instruction. About 30 companies
carry out air-taxi operations.
The proportion of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air is increasing steadily.
In 1956, 17 per cent of imports and 2-9 per cent of exports (by value) were
carried by air. In 1970 the corresponding percentages were 13-6 in both, and
the total value of exports, imports and re-exports by air was £2,324 million.
The chief export items are expensive machinery and parts, aircraft and vehicle
parts, and electrical and electronic products; furs and skins account for a large
proportion of the total value of re-exports.
At Heathrow, London, freight traffic is increasing at an annual rate of 12
per cent and totalled 335,670 metric tons in 1970. Scheduled services of
British airlines carried about 267,000 tons of freight in 1970, compared with
240,000 tons in i960.
The estimated number of aircraft on the United Kingdom register used for
business and private purposes is over 1,000, while approximately 860 are
owned by clubs, groups and training schools. About 15,000 private pilots
hold licences. About 130 companies use private aircraft and some 80 companies
are members of the Business Aircraft Users’ Association. There are some
4,000 glider pilots.
The Department of Trade and Industry has a general responsibility for civil
aerodromes. It may itself establish and maintain airports, and local authorities
may also do so subject to its approval. Aerodromes which are municipally or
privately owned and which are used for the public transport of passengers and/
or flying instruction are subject to government licensing, inspection and
regulation. The Department is also responsible for navigation facilities at a
number of main municipal airports.
The British Airports Authority, an independent statutory body operating
on a commercial basis, took over on 1st April 1966 the ownership and manage¬
ment of London’s two major airports (Heathrow and Gatwick), Prestwick in
Scotland and Stansted in Essex. In April 1971 it took over Edinburgh airport.
At these airports the Department of Trade and Industry is responsible for the
provision of navigation services and may direct the Authority to take measures
to control noise and vibration.
There are approximately 140 civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom; in
addition, 56 Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those under civil
control include 12 directly controlled by the Department of Trade and
Industry, 3 in the Channel Islands and 1 in the Isle of Man administered by
the local island governments, and 40 aerodromes licensed for public use, of
which 24 are owned by municipalities. Two of the Department’s aerodromes
312
Development
Air Safety
Aircraft Research
Flight Safety
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and 28 others are designated Customs airports; limited customs facilities are
available at a further 31 aerodromes.
In April 1971 the Government announced that a third London airport
would be built at Foulness, on the Essex coast; the first runway should be in
use by 1980.
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal airports have risen very
markedly in the last five years, and in 1970 United Kingdom civil airports
handled 32-4 million passengers. The number of movements of aircraft
engaged on commercial transport operations was 606,700.
For international scheduled services Heathrow and Gatwick are the mam
airports, and Heathrow is the busiest centre of international travel in the
world. The number of passengers handled at Heathrow, 14 miles (22 kilo¬
metres) west of central London, has increased from 5-4 million in i960 to
ic-6 million in 1970 of which 12-6 million were international passengers. The
British Airports Authority plans to spend nearly £80 million on improve¬
ments to Heathrow and its other airports in the period ending in 1973. The
shorter of the two main Heathrow runways was extended to 12,800 feet
(3,900 metres) in 1971. An fn million passenger terminal primarily for British
short-haul airlines and Aer Lingus was completed in 1969, and extensions
have been made to several other buildings. To accommodate the rapid
expansion expected in freight movements, £25 million has been invested in
a new cargo terminal and associated developments, which came into use in
1969. New facilities costing some £13 million have been provided for handling
Boeing 747 (jumbo jet) aircraft, which began to use the airport early in 1970.
Work has begun on the extension of London’s underground railway to
The airport at Gatwick, 28 miles (45 kilometres) south of London, was
opened in June 1958 as the second airport for the London area. Built along¬
side the main London to Brighton railway and the A23 road, Gatwick airport
was the first in the world to contain road, rail and air transport in one unit.
In 1970 it handled 37 million passengers. The existing runway has been
extended; a further extension is under consideration.
A privately owned helicopter terminal (or ‘heliport’) is in operation at
Battersea on the south bank of the Thames.
Prestwick airport in Scotland has been developed to accommodate large
jet aircraft. Already one of the best equipped freight airports in the world, a
new cargo terminal is being built there. The airport at Abbotsinch, owned and
run by the Glasgow Corporation, handled 17 million passengers in 1970.
A new main runway and other improvements are to be provided at Edinburgh.
Manchester and Luton airports each handled nearly 2 million passengers
in 1970; Birmingham, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Stansted each handled over
500,000.
The role of the Government in promoting air safety lies in research and in
setting up and supervising standards for both aircraft and personne .
Research on aircraft design and construction is done at the Royal Aircraft
Establishments at Farnborough and Bedford, which are exceptiona y we
equipped with testing facilities.
The Department of Trade and Industry determines the policy and legislative
requirements for the safe operation of civil aircraft, analyses accidents and
initiates preventive measures and research in flight safety.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
3I3
The Air
Registration
Board
Air Operators'
Certificates
Flight Crew
Qualifications
Training
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Technical
Provisions
All aircraft registered in the United Kingdom must have a valid certificate
of airworthiness issued (or rendered valid) by the Department on the recom¬
mendation of the Air Registration Board (ARB), which was set up in 1937
and consists of 18 members, four of whom are independent, including the
chairman. No aircraft built in Britain is granted a certificate of airworthi¬
ness unless it has been constructed in accordance with British Civil Air¬
worthiness Requirements, a code compiled and frequently reviewed by the
ARB. Continued airworthiness is ensured by regular inspection and by re¬
quiring aircraft to be maintained in accordance with a schedule approved by
the ARB.
Every operator of aircraft above a certain weight used for public transport
must possess an Air Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the Director of
Aviation Safety when he is satisfied that the operator is competent to secure
the safe operation of his aircraft. The Director is advised by the Department
of Trade and Industry’s flight operations inspectors (who are experienced
airline pilots) on all matters affecting the operation of aircraft, except aircraft
maintenance, which is the responsibility of the Air Registration Board.
Each member of a flight crew must hold the appropriate official licence. Flight
operations inspectors check the standards maintained by the operators, which
must be adequate for purposes of the Air Operator’s Certificate.
In order to supplement the diminishing supply of well-trained pilots for civil
airlines from the Royal Air Force, the College of Air Training was set up at
Hamble in i960. It is sponsored by the Government and the two airways
corporations. Commercial pilots must attend a course of training approved by
the Department of Trade and Industry. Such courses have been approved at
the training schools at Carlisle, Oxford and Perth, in addition to Hamble.
The corporations set up a new engineering apprentice school at Cranebank,
near Heathrow, in 1970.
An Air Transport and Travel Industry Training Board has been established
under the Industrial Training Act 1964.
Responsibility for policy planning and execution of both civil and military
air traffic control over the United Kingdom and the surrounding seas rests
with the National Air Traffic Services, under the joint control of the Secretary
of State, Department of Trade and Industry and the Secretary of State for
Defence.
In 1950 a system of airways covering the main traffic routes with control zones
around the major airports was introduced. Subsequently, the airway system
has been revised and extended to meet traffic requirements. There are three
main air traffic control centres: at London for southern England, at Preston
for the north of England and Wales, and at Prestwick for Scotland and the
Atlantic Ocean to 3o°W.
A variety of radar installations and other equipment provide the means by
which the system can accept the increasingly heavy load of air traffic. Britain
was the first country to use radar for the control of civil air traffic. During
the next few years, under a scheme (Mediator) which will eventually cost some
£50 million, virtually the whole of the airspace over Britain above 5,000 feet
(1,524 metres) will be brought under surveillance by the latest types of primary
and secondary radar equipment, which will provide data to be used in two air
traffic control centres, located at West Drayton (near London) and Prestwick.
The first stage was introduced in February 1971. A subsidiary centre will be
3I4
Eurocontrol
Noise Control
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
located at Manchester to deal with traffic in the Manchester terminal control
area. Extensive use will be made in these centres of automatic data processing
and other advanced electronic techniques. The Department of Trade and
Industry provides radio navigational aids to help pilots navigate in all weat er
conditions, and has installed the Instrument Landing System (ILS) at all its
m Britain^has pioneered in the development of all-weather landing systems.
The Blind Landing Experimental Unit of the Royal Aircraft Establishmen
at Bedford and private industry have worked towards fully automatic land¬
ing, which has now been achieved with passenger-carrying aircraft, in goo
visibility.
Britain is a member of Eurocontrol, a European international agency con¬
cerned with the traffic control problems arising from the increasing use of
high-flying, high-speed jet aircraft. Set up in 1963 it provides control at the
higher flight levels for civil aircraft and for military aircraft operating accor¬
ding to civil procedures.
From 1st January 1971 all new types of subsonic aircraft using British airports
are required to hold a ‘certificate of quietness’. The noise standards laid down
in the certificate follow the recommendations of the special meeting held by
the International Civil Aviation Organisation in Montreal in 1969.
Noise abatement measures in force at various airports include limitations
on noise levels at take-off, route restrictions, procedures designed to lessen
noise on the ground, and limits on the number of jet movements during
summer nights.
Organisation
Finance
Development
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office, founded in 1657, provides postal, public telecommunications,
data processing and Giro services. It was formally set up as a public authority
under the Post Office Act 1969, having previously been a government depar
ment.
The Post Office is headed by a chairman and board, appointed by and respon¬
sible to the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications. It has some 420,000
employees and approaching 25>ooo post offices.
The Post Office has authority to borrow up to £2,300 million. At 31st March
1971 it had borrowed £2,193 million. Over 90 per cent of total exPeijdlture
on fixed assets is accounted for by telecommunications. The postal, tele¬
communications and data processing services are now managed separate y.
The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from
the time when horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modern
airmail transport. The first dispatch of mails by train was made in 1830
between Liverpool and Manchester. The inauguration of the penny post
(the uniform charge for any inland distance being prepaid by means of postage
stamps, which originated in Britain) in 1840 was followed by a rapid exten¬
sion of the scope of the postal services. The registered P^st, ensuring a 1-
tional safety for valuable mail, was introduced in 1841. The money ord
system which had operated as a private venture from 1792 to 1838 was
supplemented in 1881 by the issue of postal orders for fixed amounts. Letter¬
boxes had been instituted in London in 1855, and in 1883 the parcel post was
Counter
Services
Telegraph
Services
Telex Service
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 315
introduced. In 1919 the Post Office inaugurated its own motor transport
fleet and the first mail was carried by air in Britain in 1911.
Approaching 11,000 million items of correspondence are carried annually
by the inland postal services. Each year about 7,500 tons of mail are carried
by air within the United Kingdom. Out of the 523 million items of overseas
mail carried in 1970-71, 69-5 per cent was carried by air.
The air parcel service now operates to all countries in Europe and to over
190 countries outside Europe.
Several new highly mechanised sorting office buildings were opened in
1970 and 1971. Letter segregating and facing machines are being installed at
over 60 centres. Postal address coding is being continuously extended, and
will cover over 13^ million addresses by the end of 1971; the remainder of
Britain’s 18 million addresses are to be included by the end of 1972. A two-
tier letter service was introduced in 1968 consisting of a faster, more highly
priced service for first-class mail and a cheaper one for less urgent items. Some
^50 million is being invested in an improved parcels service.
A ‘Datapost’ special delivery service for computer data was started in 1970.
A Postal Consultancy Service offers facilities to overseas countries to aid
them in the planning and mechanisation of their services.
At the post office counter, besides making use of its postal and telegraph
facilities, the citizen can draw his pension and his family allowance, buy a
licence for his dog, or television receiving set, renew his car licence and buy
national insurance stamps. He can also use the wide range of facilities for
savings and investments (see p. 352) offered by the Department for National
Savings, and the money transmission services of the National Giro. In much of
the work at its counters the Post Office acts as agent for government depart¬
ments or local authorities.
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of
the Postmaster General in 1870. Teleprinter-working for the transmission
of inland telegrams was introduced generally in 1928 and conversion to the
present automatic switching system was completed in mid-1954. It is now
one of the most up-to-date systems in the world and gives direct connection
between any of the 320 or so larger telegraph offices. The international
telegraph services were shared until 1950 between the Post Office and Cable
and Wireless Ltd. This company was brought into public ownership in 1947.
The Post Office, which acquired the British services, operates all telegraph
services from the United Kingdom, except those offered by foreign telegraph
companies. Cable and Wireless Ltd. continues to operate its cable and wireless
services in many dependencies and foreign countries.
Telegraph services to countries overseas are operated from Electra House in
London, the world’s largest overseas telegraph office, and from nine other
London and provincial area telegraph offices. Direct connection via the Centex
system between these British offices and the larger towns in Belgium, France,
Federal Republic of Germany, Holland, Luxembourg, Italy and Norway
minimises delivery delay. In addition, the Post Office is well to the fore in the
development of telegraph message relay techniques for services beyond Europe.
The Telex Service (opened in England in 1932) combines the speed of the
telephone with the accuracy of the printed word. Calls may be made direct
between the rapidly increasing number of telex users in Britain (about 32,000
by the end of 1970) and also to well over 300,000 subscribers throughout the
Datel
Services
Telephone
Services
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
world. Britain is linked to over 140 countries by telex. For call charging
purposes Britain is divided into 50 charging areas, each with its own telex
centre. The United Kingdom telex service is fully automatic and immediate
connection is made by direct dialling to any subscriber in this country and to
many subscribers in Europe, New Zealand, the United States, Canada,
Australia and South Africa. Calls to countries without an automatic service
are connected through the International Telex Exchange in London. Overseas
telex traffic is growing annually by about 20 per cent; the Post Office is plan¬
ning for a system of about 140,000 United Kingdom subscribers by 1980
A radioteleprinter service extends the use of telex to ships at sea (see p. 318).
The demand for facilities enabling digital data for computers to be trans¬
mitted over telephone and telegraph lines has greatly increased; to meet it
the Post Office has developed a range of datel services providing for trans¬
mission at speeds of up to 50 bits per second over telegraph-type circuits
and up to 2,400 bits per second over speech-type circuits. Speeds ot 4°>°00
bits per second can be accommodated by special arrangement. Datel facilities
are available to a number of European countries and over speech-type circuits
to North America and Australia. In the year ending March 1971 the number ot
British Post Office datel terminals amounted to some 15,000.
When the Post Office bought the property of the National Telephone Com¬
pany in 1912 it became the owner of almost the whole telephone service.
Hull Corporation was the only municipality to exercise its option of operating
its own service under licence from the Postmaster General; this service is
connected to the Post Office trunk network.
At the end of March 1971 there were 6,151 local telephone exchanges and
nearly 15 million telephones. On that date, only 86 exchanges remained to be
changed to automatic working. All London’s exchanges are now automatic.
Trunk dialling by subscribers (STD) began in Bristol in December 1958; by
March 1971 the facility had been extended to 3,402 exchanges, serving 90 per
cent of all subscribers. STD brings the advantages of quicker service, auto¬
matic accounting and cheap long-distance calls of short duration. Telephones
in London and five other large cities have been given all-figure numbers in
which exchange names are replaced by figures, to facilitate handling of rapidly
expanding domestic and international traffic. . ,
The first operational electronic exchange in Europe was opened at Amber-
eate Derbyshire, in December 1966. New small and medium-sized exchanges
are being ordered as electronic exchanges. Similar equipment for larger
exchanges is being developed. #
Pulse code modulation systems are being used to increase the circu
capacity of lines on short-distance routes between exchanges. Over 1,000
should be installed by the end of 1971. A new time-division electronic
switching system for interconnecting routes equipped with pulse code modu¬
lation systems has been used experimentally. Research is proceeding in o a
new digital transmission and waveguide system to increase capacity.
International subscriber dialling operates from London, Edinburg ,
Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool and Manchester, and to most of Western
Europe and the United States. Britain has two automatic Internationa
telephone exchanges in use and a third under construction. It is expected that
by 1975 75 Per cent of international calls will be dialled by the subscriber,
compared with 62 per cent in 1971. . , _ ,
Operator-connected calls are handled at the London Continental Exchange,
Special Telephone
Services
Private
Telecom¬
munications
Services
Submarine
Cables
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 3*7
from which well over 2,000 direct telephone circuits give service to European
countries, and at the London International Exchange, which has direct links
via the transatlantic and Commonwealth cable networks, communications
satellites and high frequency radio to over 70 countries. Almost every country
can be reached from these two exchanges, via intermediate points where
necessary.
A radio tower, 620 feet (189 metres) high, in London provides microwave
radio links for carrying long-distance telephone and television circuits. There
are over 100 Post Office communications masts and towers in use, including a
tower of 500 feet (152 metres) in Birmingham.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the *999
emergency dialling service enabling subscribers to be connected as quickly
as possible, and free of charge, to the police, ambulance or fire brigade
services. A public radiotelephone service operating in London and south
Lancashire enables users of vehicles fitted with suitable equipment to make
or receive calls to or from any telephone in the United Kingdom network.
Recorded information services include: the speaking clock, weather forecasts,
motoring information, recipes, ‘Test match’ cricket scores, Financial Times
share index and business news summary and ‘Dial a Disc’. In London a
recorded service provides details in five languages of events taking place, and
a similar service, in English only, is provided in Edinburgh during the summer.
There are over 100,000 private circuit stations not connected with the public
exchange networks. These are associated with circuits rented for private use
for telephone conversations, teleprinter connections, photo-telegraphy, tele¬
vision, music, or for the transmission of signals which represent data for
computers or operate other devices.
The first transatlantic telephone cable, TAT 1, connecting Britain with Canada
and the United States, was laid in 1956. Many submarine telephone cables
have been laid in succeeding years. Cable and Wireless Ltd., in co-operation
with the Post Office, carried out a comprehensive Commonwealth telephone
cable plan. The plan was agreed upon in 1958, and covered the construction
of three long-distance telephone cable systems: CANTAT (2,100 nautical
miles), from Scotland to Canada, was opened in 1961; COMPAC (8,130
nautical miles), connecting Canada, Hawaii, Fiji, New Zealand and Australia,
opened in 1963; and SEACOM (7,070 nautical miles), connecting Australia,
New Guinea, Guam, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore, was completed
in stages from 1965 to 1967 and opened as a complete system in March 1967.
All three can provide 80 telephone circuits throughout, apart from the heavily
used section of SEACOM between Guam and Australia, which can provide
160. The submarine cables are linked overland across Canada and Australia
by radio microwave systems. CANTAT was the first single-cable ocean
telephone system to use the new lightweight cable and rigid two-way re¬
peaters, both developed by the Post Office.
Submarine cable systems using transistors in place of thermionic valves
have been developed by British manufacturers in consultation with the Post
Office Research Station and are used in many new systems. High capacity
submarine cable systems capable of providing 1,800 telephone circuits have
now been developed and the first systems brought into service during 1971.
There are 350 underwater cables in the national network, totalling over
2,000 miles (3,218 kilometres).
3i8
Satellite
Communica¬
tions
Radio
Communica¬
tions with
Ships at Sea
Data
Processing
Service
Research
BRITAIN 1972 : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Goonhilly satellite communication earth station in Cornwall was brought
into operation in 1962, and took part in the first experiments in satellite
communications using the Telstar and Relay satellites The station now
provides commercial telephone and television circuits via high-capacity, geo¬
stationary satellites positioned over the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. By May
1971 Britain had satellite links with 26 countries via 20 earth stations. A third
large aerial at Goonhilly is expected to come into service early in I972-^
satellites used in the global communications systems are provided by
SAT (International Communications Satellite Consortium) of which Britain
is the second largest shareholder. The number of satellite circuits used by
Britain has risen from 30 at the end of 1965 to some 650 by the end of 1971-
In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post
Office has 11 coast radio stations in the United Kingdom. These stations
provide radiotelegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea
at ranges of up to some 500 miles (805 kilometres) and 250 miles (402 kilo¬
metres) respectively. There is also the long-distance radiotelegraph and radio¬
telephone station, Portishead Radio, which communicates with ships in all
parts of the world; facilities were improved in 1970.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with
safety of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radio¬
telegraph and radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or
aircraft and take immediate action to obtain assistance for zny vesstl m
distress. During 1970-71 the stations handled 202 urgent and SOS calls.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange
radiotelegrams with ships and connect radiotelephone ca Is between telephone
subscribers ashore and suitably equipped ships; they also broadcast nav g
tional warnings and weather bulletins. , , , * „
The stations operate a free medical advice service whereby the master of a
ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropnate “ed“'
on the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard ship. Dur g
1970-7!, 588 medical cases were dealt with in this service.
Since the Post Office in 1957 set up an installation to process payroll, pensions
and statistical work, it has become one of the largest users of automatic data
processing equipment and techniques in Britain. Its computer organisation is
divided into two parts: the Post Office Data Processing Service for its own
internal services, and the National Data Processing Service for services
business firms and other external users.
In addition to stock control and telephone billing computer systems are
used for large-scale document and information retrieval systems, the G
system, scheduling of mail vans in London, and control of tsvenue collecMn
from television licences. In its 14 regional computer centres he Post Office
operates over 30 computers and is processing some 50 projects. Techniques
and equipmem deployed by the staff of over 3,000, of whom over . 000 are
systems analysts and programmers, include optical and magnetic ^ ctatac'er
reader/sorters; direct keying of data on to discs and magnetic tapes, and the
direct recording of data from magnetic tapes to microti m.
The Post Office is spending nearly £n million a year on research and develop¬
ment, in collaboration with industry and the universities. A new £8 mdlion
research centre is being built at Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, to rep
eventually the laboratories at Dollis Hill.
14 PROMOTION OF THE
SCIENCES
THE GOVERN¬
MENT AND
SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
The Pattern of
Expenditure
Central Advisory
Council for
Science and
Technology
The Government is the main source of funds for scientific research and
development as a whole though private industry contributes a larger propor¬
tion of funds for civil research and development. Considerable sums are also
provided by public corporations, independent trusts and foundations, and
learned societies. The Government also keeps under review facilities for
training scientists and ensures that adequate research is directed to matters of
national interest.
Total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development has risen
from ^6577 million in 1961-62, to £1,016 million in 1968-69, while remain¬
ing at about 27 per cent of the gross national product at factor cost. The pro¬
portions of total research and development carried out in the various sectors
have not changed appreciably since 1964-65 with the Government (including
the research councils) carrying out 25 per cent and universities and establish¬
ments of further education between 7 and 8 per cent. The proportion of
research and development financed by the Government remained at about 50
per cent in 1967-68, a decline in defence research and development being
balanced by the rise in civil research and development. The total grant-in-aid
to the research councils for 1970-71 is shown in Public Expenditure ig6g~yo to
iqy^-yg as about £110 million; an increase to £129 million by 1974-75 is
also provided for. Although this represents an increase of 17 per cent over five
years, the annual rate of growth will decrease from 47 per cent to 3 -2 per cent.
The Central Advisory Council for Science and Technology was established in
January 1967, under the chairmanship of the Chief Scientific Adviser to the
Government, to advise the Government on the most effective national strategy
for the use and development of the country’s scientific and technological
resources. The Council includes members who are also members of the
Council for Scientific Policy (see p. 320), and the Royal Society (see p. 322),
and independent members.
Under the Science and Technology Act 1965 central responsibility for
basic and applied civil science rests with the Secretary of State for Education
and Science, who, advised by a Council for Scientific Policy in relation to
the natural sciences as a whole, is responsible for directing and financing the
research councils. Responsibility for technology rests with the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry. Other government departments are responsible
for research and development related to their executive responsibilities.
The Department The Department of Education and Science (see also p. 50) is responsible,
of Education among other things, for Government policy regarding the universities and for
and Science promoting civil science throughout Great Britain. The Department’s relations
with the universities are conducted through the University Grants Committee
(see p. 159); and its responsibilities for basic and applied civil science are
discharged mainly through the five research councils: the Science Research
320
The Council for
Scientific Policy
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
Ministry of
Defence
Other
Government-
sponsored
Research
Transport
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Council (see p. 325), the Medical Research Council (see p. 327), the Agricul¬
tural Research Council (see p. 328), the Natural Environment Research
Council (see p. 332), and the Social Science Research Council (see p. 332).
Others may be established under the terms of the Science and Technology
Act. The Department also has, in consultation with other departments,
general governmental responsibility for Britain s scientific space research
programme, which is co-ordinated by the Science Research Council. The
Department is responsible for some aspects of international scientific relations
(see p. 334), and for Government policy regarding libraries and information
systems, including the Office for Scientific and Technical Information.
In the exercise of responsibilities for the formulation and execution of govern¬
ment scientific policy the Secretary of State for Education and Science is
advised by the Council for Scientific Policy (CSP), which replaced the former
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy. The Council, which was set up in
January 1965, consists of a chairman and 13 independent members. There are,
in addition, assessors from the research councils and from the University
Grants Committee. Among the issues with which the Council is concerned is
the balance of scientific effort in those areas for which the Secretary of State is
responsible. The CSP has conducted an enquiry into the present methods of
funding the research councils.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) (see also p. 5b), which came
formally into being in 1970, took over responsibility for the United Kingdom
Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) (see p. 329) an<^ National Research
Development Corporation (see p. 334) and most of the non-aviation functions
of the former Ministry of Technology. The responsibilities of the DTI now
include that for civil aviation and the sponsorship of most industries (excluding
aircraft) in both the public and private sectors.
The DTI, among other things, has responsibility for engineering standards
and weights and measures for the British Standards Institution (see p. 211)
and for the Metrication Board set up in 1969 to facilitate the transition to the
metric system of weights and measures in Britain by 1975 (see P* 4^3)* ^ ^as
direct control of a number of research stations and establishments (see p. 32b) ">
it also aids with grants autonomous industrial research associations.
Besides its responsibility for defence research establishments (see p. 119),
some of which are mentioned below, the Ministry of Defence has resumed
responsibility for aviation supply for defence purposes (including research).
A number of other government departments remain responsible for certain
branches of research.
The Department of the Environment (see p. 51) *s concerned with research
and development relating to inland transport and ports. Research into road
construction, traffic flow, safety, transport systems and new transport tech¬
nology is carried out mainly at the Department s Road Research Laboratory
(see p. 301) at Crowthorne, Berkshire. There are also collaborative arrange¬
ments for research in inland transport with the DTI. Economic, technical
and operational research studies are carried out also in the headquarters of the
Department and some are commissioned from consultants and universities.
The Ministry of Defence is responsible for sponsoring research and devel¬
opment in aviation.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
321
Building
Land Use and
Planning
Environmental
Pollution
Fuel and Power
Meteorology
Research on radio aids for marine navigation is undertaken by the Ministry
of Defence, which is also responsible for inter-Service electronic valve research
at the Services Electronics Research Laboratory. Research on marine nuclear
propulsion is undertaken by the AEA. The Civil Aviation Research and
Development Board now responsible to the Department of Trade and Industry
was set up in February 1970 to co-ordinate research and development work for
civil aviation equipment other than aircraft and engines.
The Department of the Environment has a Directorate General of Research
and Development (see p. 235) and is responsible for the Building Research
Station, Garston, Watford, Hertfordshire, which is concerned with the
techniques of building design and construction, and the organisation, pro¬
ductivity and economics of building work.
The Department of the Environment sponsors certain geographical, geolo¬
gical, economic and sociological research relating to the use and development
of land in England. Similar arrangements are made in Scotland by the Scottish
Home and Health Department, in Wales by the Welsh Office, and in Northern
Ireland by the Ministry of Development. A Centre for Environmental Studies
has been set up as an independent educational trust for research into the
problems of urban planning and dealing with the effects of a fast-growing
mobile population. The Centre focuses attention on the economic and social
aspects of environmental subjects and its grant has been increased by the
Government.
A permanent Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, was set up in
1970 to advise on matters both national and international concerning the
pollution of the environment; on the adequacy of research; and the future
possibilities of the danger to the environment. The Commission published its
first report in 1971 (see Bibliography p. 480). Research on pollution problems
is carried out in many different institutions, both public and private. Govern¬
ment departments with laboratories concerned with pollution include the
Department of the Environment (Water Pollution Research Laboratory and
Road Research Laboratory), the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
(Fisheries Laboratories) and DTI (Warren Spring Laboratory which works on
air pollution, clearance of oil and recycling of waste). Research Councils,
especially the Medical and Natural Environment Research Councils, are also
involved in such research. The Department of the Environment has a small
central unit on environmental pollution to co-ordinate the work of all govern¬
ment departments on the control of environmental pollution, and to co¬
ordinate the British contribution to international discussions on the subject.
A Clean Air Council was set up in 1956 and an Advisory Council on Noise
in 1970.
The Department of Trade and Industry (see pp. 56 and 320) is responsible
for research into safety and health of mineworkers. The coal, electricity and
gas industries are required to settle their general programmes of research in
consultation with the Secretary of State, who is assisted by an Advisory
Council on Research and Development. Sir liar provisions apply to the British
Steel Corporation’s general programme ^ research and technological develop¬
ment.
The Ministry of Defence finances the Meteorological Office, which is respon¬
sible for research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly for civil purposes.
The headquarters of the Office and most of its research sections are at
im mr' ^ tmi h .Hummtimi;.,: . .
322
Communications
Botany
Select
Committee
on Science
and
Technology
The
Parliamentary
and Scientific
Committee
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bracknell, Berkshire. The Ministry also makes grants for fundamental
meteorological research carried out under the auspices of the Royal Society
or in university departments.
The Post Office undertakes research and development on many aspects of the
science and engineering of communications, both in its own laboratories and
in close association with industry, the universities and government depart¬
ments. The main research station is at Dollis Hill, London, and there are
laboratories at Backwell, near Bristol, at Castleton, near Cardiff, and also at
Martlesham, near Ipswich, where a new research station is being built.
The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (founded in 1759), together with its 400-
acre estate at Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, Sussex, is administered by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and has the largest collection
of living plants in the world. Its research departments are: the herbarium,
concerned primarily with the classification and accurate determination of
plants; and the Jodrell Laboratory, for the study of plant anatomy and plant
physiology, cytology and genetics. There are two museums concerned mainly
with the economic exploitation of plants. The library, attached to the herbar¬
ium, was founded in 1852; it consists of more than 100,000 botanical books,
about 140,000 reprints and separately issued items and a collection of over
160,000 drawings and paintings of plants. The Royal Botanic Garden,
Edinburgh, founded about 1660, has, since April 1969, been administered by
the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
A Select Committee of the House of Commons on Science and Technology
was set up in December 1966 and has been re-appointed in each subsequent
Parliamentary Session. It is one of the specialist committees established to give
back-bench Members the opportunity to investigate the policies and adminis¬
tration of the Government and to participate in the formation of policy. The
Members of the Committee (not more than 15 in number) are nominated by
the House. The Committee has power to call witnesses, generally takes
evidence in public, and reports its findings to the House from time to time.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee, founded in 1939, provides for a
regular exchange of information between members of Parliament and
scientists. Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in both
Houses, and also to nominated representatives of such non-profit-making
scientific and technological organisations in Britain as may be affiliated under
its constitution.
Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the learned
societies have retained their traditional function of facilitating the spread of
knowledge. At present there are over 200 of them in Britain with approxi¬
mately 400 scientific publications. The most eminent of those concerned with
science in its broadest aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised
interests and activities) are the Royal Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal
Institution and British Association.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for the
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique
place in the country’s scientific affairs and corresponds to national academies
of sciences in other countries. Election to it is regarded by scientists as a high
honour. The Queen is Patron. There are today three main categories of
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
323
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
Fellowship: Royal Fellows, comprising the Queen Mother and three Royal
Dukes; Foreign Members, of whom there are about 70, and the main body of
Fellows numbering about 730. Election to the Fellowship, which is for life,
was for many years restricted to 25 persons a year and the foreign membership
to four a year but in 1965 the former was increased to 32 with the intention of
awarding some of the new places to applied scientists in both the physical and
biological sciences. The Society is governed by a council of 21 members.
Its activities include the holding of scientific meetings; publication of
research work, mainly in the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings’,
the presentation of medals; the giving of endowed lectures; and the award of
research appointments and grants. Among its research appointments are the
Foulerton, Wolfson and Sir Henry Dale Research Professorships and ten
other research professorships supported by parliamentary grant-in-aid. The
highest medal awarded is the Copley Medal, for which scientists from all
countries are eligible; there are also three Royal Medals, and the Rumford,
Darwin, Buchanan, Sylvester, Hughes, Leverhulme and Mullard Medals.
There are six lectureships: the Croonian (biology); the Bakerian (physical
sciences); the Ferrier (nervous system); the Wilkins (history of science); the
Leeuwenhoek (microbiology); and the Bernal (social functions of science).
The Society has set up committees, some of them jointly with other bodies, to
promote improvements in education in science and to emphasise the im¬
portance of applied sciences, especially engineering.
Although an independent private corporation, the Society has always had
a special relationship with the Government, which makes grants for certain of
its activities. The President of the Society is consulted on scientific appoint¬
ments to research councils and Fellows serve on most governmental advisory
councils and committees concerned with research.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. It represents
the United Kingdom in the international unions comprising the International
Council of Scientific Unions and appoints national committees for each of
them. It also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes such
as the International Biological Programme (1965-70), and promotes exchange
visits of scientists with many academies throughout the world. Its Inter¬
national Fellowship Scheme to foster relations with scientists of Western
European and other countries receives financial support from the Government
and other sources.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement
of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific,
artistic, technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754, one
of the Society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress and
application to useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils this
purpose chiefly by disseminating new scientific knowledge. The Society
regularly holds lectures, and publishes a monthly Journal, thus providing
effective media for the exposition and assessment by leading authorities of
developments which have a public as well as a specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating
the introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving
arts and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’.
Its character, however, was largely determined by the work of Sir Humphry
324
British
Association
Professional
Institutions
THE UNIVER¬
SITIES AND
INSTITUTIONS
OF UNIVERSITY
STATUS
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of research. Today,
the Royal Institution has extensive research laboratories, and lectures are
given on recent developments in science and other branches of knowledge. Its
library includes many early scientific works and manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831
to promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as
by eminent scientists. In addition the Association plans special lectures,
exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publica¬
tion of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the appointment of study
groups and liaison with the Press and with sound and television broadcasting
services. The Association has area committees and three lectureships for
young scientists—the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lectureships, dealing
respectively with the physical, biological and sociological sciences to en¬
courage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The
British Association has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific
bodies and learned societies. It has also made an important contribution to the
development of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles
to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
of which are playing a distinguished part in promoting their own disciplines
or are interested in the education and professional well-being of their members.
The Council of Engineering Institutions, the federal body for the chartered
engineering institutions established in I9^5» promotes the co-ordination of the
engineering profession. The Council of Science and Technology Institutes
a federal body with five member institutes representing biologists, chemists,
mathematicians, metallurgists and physicists—was formed in 1969.
Of total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the Academic
year 1969-70 (over £90 million), the largest government contribution (£60-2
million) was through the University Grants Committee (see p. 159)'
Scientific research in the universities is also supported through the research
councils. This support takes two forms. First, about half the postgraduate
students in science and technology in the universities receive maintenance
awards from the research councils, through postgraduate scholarships,
studentships or fellowships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up
to three years of training in research work and in others for shorter periods
for advanced studies. The cost of these awards is currently about £9-5 million
a year. Second, grants are given to the universities by the research councils
for specific projects, particularly in new or developing fields of research. In
recent years the research councils, in addition to making grants of this kind,
have made funds available for expensive items of university equipment
required for specific programmes of research. The research councils support
for research in the universities, excluding expenditure by the Medical
Research Council and the Agricultural Research Council on their own research
units within the universities (which remain under the control of, and are
wholly financed by, the councils), amounted in 1970-71 to ^29-8 million.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations. The contributions from sources other than the
University Grants Committee amount to about a third of the total university
expenditure on research.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
325
Statistics of
Qualified
Manpower
SCIENCE
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH
Universities in industrial centres have tended to acquire outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale
close relationships are fostered between the universities, industries and the
Government in numerous joint projects. The DTI’s industrial liaison officers
(see p. 334) are based on universities or technical colleges. Seven Industrial
Units have been opened (six at universities and one at the College of Aero¬
nautics, Cranfield) under a Government scheme. They offer consultancy and
research and development resources and are expected to become self-support¬
ing within a few years.
According to estimates in a survey1 published in 1971 there were in 1968 just
over 400,000 persons with qualifications in engineering, technology and science
in Great Britain, of whom one-half were qualified in science and one-half in
engineering. Of those economically active (350,000), 53 per cent (185,000) held
engineering qualifications, 1-2 per cent (4,140) were out of employment, 35
per cent employed in manufacturing. Education employed over 20 per cent
and over the years 1959 to 1968 there was a rapid increase in the service
sectors (commerce and consultancy). Within manufacturing the largest in¬
crease was in electrical and electronics industries (6 per cent a year). Over the
period 1959 to 1968 there was a net gain of scientists from migration and a net
loss of engineers and technologists.
The Science Research Council (SRC), which came into formal existence in
1965 and consists of a chairman and up to 15 other members, covers all
branches of fundamental science other than those for which the other research
councils are responsible. It also supports research projects in the universities,
polytechnics and technical colleges. Provision is made for it to carry out
research and development through its own establishments; to encourage and
support similar research by any other person or body; to provide and operate
equipment for common use by universities, polytechnics, technical colleges
and similar institutions; to make grants for postgraduate studies; and to
disseminate knowledge of science and technology. Its establishments include
the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herstmonceux, the Royal Observatory,
Edinburgh, the Radio and Space Research Station, the Rutherford High
Energy Laboratory, the Daresbury Nuclear Physics Laboratory, the Atlas
Computer Laboratory, and the Astrophysics Research Unit. The SRC also
co-ordinates the British scientific space research programme (see p. 330) and
provides the United Kingdom contribution to the European Organisation
for Nuclear Research (CERN) and the European Space Research Organisation
(ESRO) and the civil science programme of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation (NATO).
The greater part of industrial research in Britain is undertaken in the research
organisations of the larger firms and in government research establishments.
Research organisations in industry vary widely between the largest firms
employing thousands of qualified staff and some employing very few; though
the emphasis is on commercial development, some fundamental research is
done. Other main agencies are universities and technical colleges, industrial
research associations, independent institutes for sponsored research and con¬
sultant laboratories.
1 Persons with Qualifications in Engineering Technology and Science 1959 to 1968 (see
Bibliography p. 480).
326
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Department of
the Environment
Research
Associations
Public
Corporations
Private
Industry
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has direct control of six
industrial research establishments. These are the National Engineering
Laboratory (which includes the Birniehill Institute), the National Physical
Laboratory, Warren Spring Laboratory, the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist, the Safety in Mines Research Establishment and Torrey Research
Station. The total net expenditure of the DTI for 1970-71 on these establish¬
ments was about £12 million.
Besides research and development for industry the industrial research
establishments are engaged on the application of techniques and discoveries
to design, production, quality control and distribution. The DTI also sponsors
research by grants-in-aid to research associations and by extra-mural contracts
with industry and universities.
On 1 st January 1971 some research stations of the former Ministry of
Technology were transferred to the Department of the Environment, namely,
the Water Pollution Research Laboratory, the Hydraulics Research Station,
the Forest Products Research Laboratory and the Fire Research Station.
The scheme by which the Government gives financial help to firms with
similar interests to form organisations known as research associations, to carry
out industrial research co-operatively, was started in 1917. There are now 32
such associations whose grants are administered by the DTI. In addition there
are four (Water; Construction; Heating and Ventilating; and Timber) whose
grants since 1st January 1971 have been administered by the Department of
the Environment, and four (Flour Milling and Baking; Fruit and Vegetable
Preservation; British Food Manufacturing Industries; and British Industrial
Biological Research Association) whose grants since 1st April 1971 have been
administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Suitably
specialised associations are now available for about 50 per cent of British
industry. The largest are those dealing with production engineering, ships,
welding, electrical manufacturing, cotton and man-made fibres, non-ferrous
metals and scientific instruments. (Particulars of these and other associations
are given in Chapter 11, Industry.) The amounts of the government grants are
related to the contributions made by the industries concerned.
The research associations are autonomous bodies governed by their own
councils, the members of which are mostly representatives of industry,
although government departments are also represented. The councils are
advised in preparing research programmes, for which they have complete
responsibility, by research committees representative of their industrial
members, often with the addition of university or government scientists.
Nearly all research associations admit to membership manufacturers in
Commonwealth countries and many also admit those in foreign countries. A
Conference of Industrial Research Associations was set up in 1969. Govern¬
ment grants to research associations are being reduced so that each industry
bears an increasing proportion of the cost of its associations.
Some of the public corporations which run the nationalised industries have
their own research organisations (see Chapter 11), in particular those con¬
cerned with fuel and power, steel and transport. They also give support to
organisations concerned with research on matters of interest to them.
According to Economic Trends (November 1970), expenditure on research and
development carried out within private industry (excluding enterprises of less
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
327
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Medical
Research
Council
than 25 employees) in 1968-69 was ^601-9 million—an increase of 6 per cent
compared with the previous year. Expenditure in individual industries was as
follows (in £ million): aerospace 164-7; electronics 120-7; other electrical
engineering 32; petroleum products 11-9; other chemical products 79;
mechanical engineering 52-4; motor vehicles 43-7; scientific instruments 14-8;
food, drink and tobacco 18-8; textiles 11*7. For these groups the increase since
1966-67 was 3 per cent. These figures include funds from government sources.
Firms in science-based industries commit large private funds to research and
development in the course of business.
A number of institutes for sponsored research have been established to
extend the facilities for private research for industrial firms by studying
problems which are not within the scope of the average industrial laboratory.
In these institutes research for private firms is carried out confidentially, the
results remaining the property of the sponsor.
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the
research funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act 1911. In
1920 the Committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council
(MRC), established under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-in-aid
provided by Parliament, now through the Secretary of State for Education and
Science. The MRC was granted a new charter in 1966.
In addition to financing the MRC, the Government gives substantial
support to medical research through block grants to universities distributed
through the University Grants Committee; and to clinical research through
the National Health Service. Certain government-financed research for defence
purposes, for example, at the Microbiological Establishment at Porton,
Wiltshire, has civil applications related to medical science.
Important contributions to the support of research in particular subjects
are made by industry, especially the pharmaceutical industry, and by private
charities or voluntary organisations, such as the Nuffield Foundation and the
British Empire Cancer Campaign.
The Medical Research Council is responsible to the Secretary of State for
Education and Science and consists of a Chairman, a Deputy Chairman, and
from 10 to 14 other members. Not less than three-quarters must be scientific¬
ally qualified, representative of the different branches of medical knowledge
and actively engaged in research. All members are appointed by the Secretary
of State, the scientific members after consultation with the President of the
Royal Society and the existing Council; and the Chairman and Deputy Chair¬
man after consultation with the Council.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote research into all aspects of health
and disease. In planning and carrying out its research programme the Council
is assisted by bodies specially appointed to advise on particular subjects. Three
of the more important of these are the Clinical Research Board, set up in con¬
sultation with the health departments to assist the development of clinical
research; the Tropical Medicine Research Board, appointed in consultation
with the Overseas Development Administration, to advise on the promotion
and co-ordination of research in this field; and the Biological Research Board,
which advises on the promotion of research in the non-clinical field. In
addition, the MRC is advised by committees concerned with particular aspects
of its work. The MRC’s arrangements for the support of research fall under
four main headings: (1) investigations by members of its scientific staff, mostly
working in its own establishments; (2) short-term grants to workers in
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
universities and elsewhere; (3) long-term grants in support of specific research
programmes in university medical departments (‘programme grants’ and
‘research groups’); and (4) fellowships and scholarships tenable both at home
and abroad. The research undertaken ranges from basic biological research at
the molecular level and the extensive laboratory work that forms the scientific
basis of the practice of medicine to the study of patients and epidemiological
and population surveys carried out in the field.
The MRC’s main research establishments are the National Institute for
Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead, London, and the Clinical
Research Centre at Northwick Park in north-west London (the first patients
were admitted in 1970) which forms an integral part of the new district
hospital for the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board. In
addition the Council has over 70 smaller establishments, known as research
units, which are in most cases located in university departments, medical
schools and hospitals in Britain.
The MRC also undertakes work overseas and, with additional support from
the Overseas Development Administration (see p. 335), maintains laboratories
in The Gambia and units in Uganda and Jamaica.
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
Agricultural research is carried out by the Agricultural Research Council, the
government agricultural departments and by private industry.
Agricultural
Research
Council
Government
Agricultural
Departments
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC), established in 1931, consists of not
less than 15 and not more than 18 members, including the Chief Veterinary
Officer and certain appointments made by the Ministers of the agricultural
departments. In addition to distinguished scientists, the membership includes
people with practical farming experience. The ARC is under the general over¬
sight of the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
The ARC is responsible for 14 independent state-aided agricultural research
institutes and also has eight institutes under its direct control and 11 units
which it has established under distinguished scientists associated with
universities. Also there are eight independent institutes in Scotland financed
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland with advice
from the ARC on their scientific programmes, staffing and equipment.
The ARC makes special research grants to support promising new lines of
work in university departments. It makes a limited number of postgraduate
training awards.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food does both applied and basic
research. At its Central Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, research and
laboratory investigations are carried out into the causes, pathology, epi-
zootiology and control of diseases of farm livestock, including poultry; the
diagnosis of animal and poultry diseases (other than foot-and-mouth disease);
and the making and supplying of certain biological products. The Laboratory
is, by appointment of the World Health Organisation (WHO), the third
international laboratory for biological standards. There is a related Ministry
Veterinary Laboratory at Lasswade, Midlothian. The Plant Pathology
Laboratory at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, is concerned with plant quarantine
matters, the standards for improved crop planting material, pest and disease
assessment work, the clearance of pesticides for safety and their official
approval for biological efficiency; while at its Pest Infestation Control
Laboratory at Tolworth, Surrey, and Slough, Buckinghamshire (with a field
station at Worplesdon), it co-ordinates work on the control of insect pests of
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
329
NUCLEAR
ENERGY
stored food and conducts research on the control of harmful mammals and
birds. In Scotland research work at East Craigs, Edinburgh, by the Agricul¬
tural Scientific Services of the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries is
mainly concerned with the problems of cultivar taxonomy, seed testing, healthy
seed potato production, plant pathology, and the ecology of birds, mammals
and insects harmful to agriculture and stored products. In Northern Ireland
the Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for the promotion of agricultural
research and has research divisions dealing with a variety of aspects.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food maintains five laboratories
for marine fisheries and shellfish research and two for salmon and freshwater
fisheries research. There are four marine research ships and several smaller
vessels for inshore and estuarine work. The Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland maintains a marine research laboratory and six research
ships at Aberdeen, and a freshwater fisheries research laboratory at Pitlochry.
With the guidance of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food), the Food
Standards and Science Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food is responsible for formulating the Ministry’s general policy on the
acquisition and dissemination of scientific and technical information about
food and the food handling and processing industry; for furnishing scientific
advice to the other divisions of the Ministry; and for sponsoring or carrying
out experimental work. The division has its own experimental laboratories in
London and Norwich: in addition, four food industrial research associations
are grant-aided by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to
silvicultural and allied problems (see p. 287). By means of grants, it also aids
forest research work undertaken by various universities and other institutions,
including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), set up under the
Atomic Energy Authority Act 1954, is responsible for research and develop¬
ment in nuclear energy. It is answerable to the Secretary of State for Trade
and Industry, who is responsible under the Atomic Energy Acts 1946, 1949
and 1971 for promoting and controlling the development of nuclear energy
and ensuring that the proper degrees of importance are attached to its various
applications. As an essential part of the British Government’s nuclear power
programme, the AEA has carried out research and developed new types of
nuclear power stations for the generation of electric power on a commercial
scale and for this purpose it builds and operates experimental and prototype
nuclear reactors. Construction of commercial nuclear power stations is carried
out by industry to the order of the electricity generating boards which operate
them. Under the Science and Technology Act 1965 the functions of the AEA
have been extended so that the Government may, after consultation, require
it to undertake research and development outside nuclear energy. Non-nuclear
work is absorbing a rising proportion of the AEA’s research resources and
includes research into desalination, hydrostatic extrusion, satellite design,
tribology, non-destructive testing, ceramics, atmospheric pollution, biomedical
technology and carbon fibres. Two new design and construction companies,
with AEA participation, to design and construct nuclear power stations were
formed in 1968 and 1969.
The Atomic Energy Authority Act 1971 provided for the transfer to two
new companies (British Nuclear Fuels Limited and the Radiochemical Centre
Limited) of the assets and liabilities of the UKAEA’s trading fund. The
establishments transferred to British Nuclear Fuels Limited include those at
33°
High Energy
Physics
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Springfields, Capenhurst, Chapelcross and the Windscale and Calder Works.
Those transferred to Radiochemical Centre Limited include the Radio¬
chemical Centre, Amersham, and its facilities at Harwell.
The Secretary of State for Defence became responsible for the development
and production of nuclear weapons for the Services in 1966; in practice,
however, the AEA produces the explosive nuclear material and assemblies for
nuclear weapons under contract and carries out weapons research.
A national Radiological Protection Board has been set up under the
Radiological Protection Act 1970, which amalgamates the former Radiological
Protection Service, part of the AEA’s Central Health and Safety Branch and
the former Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee. The Board is funded
by the Secretaries of State for Social Services and for Scotland, the AEA and
the Medical Research Council. Expert advice on radiation hazards is provided
by the Medical and Agricultural Research Councils.
The Department of Trade and Industry and the AEA are jointly responsible
for co-operation with other countries in nuclear energy, partly through the
medium of bilateral agreements with a large number of individual countries
and partly through British membership of bodies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the European Nuclear Energy Agency.
The provision of facilities for research in high energy physics is the function
of the Science Research Council (see p. 325). The Science Research Council
(SRC) establishments concerned are the Rutherford High Energy Laboratory,
Chilton, with a 7 GeV (thousand million electron volt) proton synchrotron
(particle accelerator), completed in 1963, and the Daresbury Nuclear Physics
Laboratory, Cheshire, with a 5 GeV electron synchrotron, completed in 1966.
Experiments at higher energies are carried out at the European Organisation
for Nuclear Research (CERN) to which the United Kingdom contributes
through the SRC.
Government responsibility for space activities is divided between the Secretary
of State for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for Defence, the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications. Total expenditure on space activities in 1969-70 was
about ^28 million; of this, over ^14 million represented contributions to
international bodies. Of these bodies two were set up to give European
countries the opportunity of participating more fully in space research and
technology. The European Space Vehicle Launcher Development Organisa¬
tion (ELDO) was established to develop large satellite launchers; the British
Blue Streak has been used as the launching vehicle for ELDO’s Europa
rockets.
The Government announced in 1968 that it could not undertake additional
financial commitment to ELDO. The European Space Research Organisation
(ESRO) was founded to provide facilities for scientific experiments in space;
it has a programme of launchings of sounding rockets and satellites of various
sizes. Britain and 78 other countries participate in Intelsat (the International
Telecommunications Satellite Consortium), set up under two inter-related
international agreements reached in 1964 in Washington. New definitive
arrangements for Intelsat, reached in May 1971, were opened for signature in
August 1971 and have been signed by some two-thirds of members.
The execution of the civil scientific space research programme is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Education and Science, through
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
331
the Science Research Council. It provides opportunities for research workers
to carry out experiments in satellites and sounding rockets both in the United
Kingdom national programme and through bilateral and multilateral arrange¬
ments with other countries.
Scientific space experiments are arranged by scientists in the universities
and in government research establishments; the programme is under the
general supervision of the Space Research Management Unit of the SRC.
In addition to participating in ESRO activities Britain is co-operating with
the United States in a programme which includes the launching of the Ariel
series of satellites and the incorporation of British experiments in US satellites
and the analyses of lunar surface samples. Sounding rocket programmes are
also undertaken in collaboration with other Commonwealth countries.
The Ministry of Defence provides technical advice and support in relation
to the space research programme and space applications work; it is responsible
for executing satellite and sounding rocket programmes for customer Depart¬
ments and for the development of the space technology required in support of
current and future programmes. The Ministry’s National Space Technology
Programme includes the development of experimental satellites and a launch
vehicle {Black Arrow). The Ministry of Defence leads the UK delegations to
the European Space Conference and also provides the UK representatives and
contributions to ELDO.
The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, through the Post Office, is
responsible for the use of satellites for civil communications purposes and
undertakes research work in connection with communications systems using
satellites. The Post Office ground stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall are among
the most successful in the world, and British firms have built and are building
such stations overseas.
The DTI is responsible for civil aerospace policy and for the use of satellites
for the control of civil air and marine traffic.
The Radio and Space Research Station of the SRC operates the United
States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Satellite
Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (STADAN) station at Winkfield.
Optical tracking of satellites is undertaken by many individual observers in
Britain and by the Royal Edinburgh Observatory’s outstation (see below); the
prediction and co-ordination centre for this activity is at the Radio and Space
Research Station, Slough, which is also the home of one of the three World
Data Centres for space research.
The Royal Society represents Britain in non-governmental international
scientific groups such as the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
OPTICAL AND
RADIO
ASTRONOMY
Optical astronomy is carried out with Science Research Council (SRC)
support in a number of universities and at the two Royal Observatories. The
Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herstmonceux, is equipped with the 98-inch
Isaac Newton Telescope; British astronomers have access to the 74-inch
Radcliffe Observatory in South Africa. The Royal Observatory, Edinburgh,
has developed modern instrumentation, including the Galaxy measuring
machine. The SRC is building a 150-inch telescope as a joint venture between
Britain and Australia, and a 48-inch Schmidt telescope, in New South Wales.
Radio astronomy is carried out mainly at two universities, Manchester and
Cambridge. The 250-foot Mark 1 radio telescope (Manchester) is being
modernised, and a new 5km radio telescope using the techniques (evolved at
Cambridge) of aperture synthesis is under construction, at Cambridge.
332
THE NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
THE SOCIAL
SCIENCES
OTHER
RESEARCH
Zoological
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) was established by
Royal Charter in 1965 under the Science and Technology Act 1965 to en¬
courage, plan and conduct research in those sciences, both physical and
biological, that relate to man’s natural environment. The work of the NERC
falls into five main groups: the solid earth, its physical properties and mineral
resources (geology, geophysics and geochemistry); the inland waters and their
living resources (hydrology, freshwater biology, ecology and fisheries); the
terrestrial communities, their resources and amenities (terrestrial ecology,
forestry and conservation); the seas and oceans, their behaviour and their
living and mineral resources (oceanography, marine biology and ecology); and
the atmosphere (some aspects of meteorology). The Nature Conservancy
forms part of the NERC which is also responsible for the British Antarctic
Survey, the Institute of Geological Sciences, the Institute of Hydrology, the
Institute of Tree Biology, the Institute of Marine Environmental Research,
the National Institute of Oceanography, the Institute of Coastal Oceanography
and Tides, the Unit of Coastal Sedimentation, the Culture Centre of Algae
and Protozoa and the Research Vessel Unit. It is also responsible for support¬
ing the Marine Biological Association, the Scottish Marine Biological Associa¬
tion, the Freshwater Biological Association, the Fisheries Helminthology Unit
and the Marine Invertebrate Biology Unit, the Fisheries Biochemical Research
Unit and the Insect Pathology Unit.
Many of the activities of the NERC are related to university research in the
environmental sciences, which it supports by postgraduate training awards,
research grants and fellowships.
The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) was set up in December 1965,
to encourage support and to carry out research in, and to disseminate know¬
ledge about, the social sciences. It provides grants for research projects at
universities and other institutions, and makes training awards to postgraduate
students. It has also set up three research units: the Industrial Relations
RU, the Race Relations RU and the Survey Unit. The SSRC’s fields of
interest include economics; political science; psychology; social anthropology;
social and economic statistics; sociology and social administration; social
science and government; education; management and industrial relations;
human geography; planning and various aspects of a wide range of other
disciplines.
Several government departments have funds allocated for social research
related to their responsibilities, including the Home Office, which has a large
research unit which carries out a wide variety of sociological studies. The
Social Survey conducts sample survey enquiries at the request of government
departments and from time to time also carries out studies in collaboration
with universities and other independent research organisations.
Zoological research is among the activities of the world-famous Zoological
Gardens, extending over 34 acres in Regent’s Park, London, which were
opened by the Zoological Society of London in 1828. A natural zoo of 500
acres was opened in 1931 at Whipsnade, in Bedfordshire, by the Society.
Among other well-known zoos are those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester and
Dudley, and a small, private one at Chessington, Surrey. There is also an
increasing number of ‘Safari parks’ containing reservations of wild animals
through which the public can pass in closed motor cars.
The British Museum (Natural History) is the principal centre in the Common¬
wealth for the general study of natural history; it has extensive collections of
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
DISSEMINATION
AND APPLICA¬
TION OF
RESULTS OF
RESEARCH
Information
Services
333
extant and fossil animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and meteorites. The
Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied science in all
countries, but chiefly in Britain, which has always held a leading place in
engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics, and in the develop¬
ment of industrial machinery and processes. The geology of Britain is probably
known in more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and
the Geological Survey has an outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological
Museum. These three museums are in South Kensington, London. Other
important collections are those of the Museum of Science and Industry, in
Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford.
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and
to ultimate users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume of
information has grown. The traditional method of scientific publication, in
which results are written up into papers and published in journals, is still
the main means of communication among scientists. The leading learned
societies have for long been important agencies for communicating scientific
information.
The Office for Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) was set up in the
Department of Education and Science in 1965 to promote research; develop
new techniques and systems; improve existing services and experiment with
new ones; to stimulate training of scientists for information work and in the
use of information sources; and help to co-ordinate information activities at
home and overseas.
The National Lending Library for Science and Technology (NLL) at
Boston Spa, Yorkshire, also within the Department, aims to collect for loan
purposes all literature which is likely to be of interest to the practising
scientist and technologist, covering all branches of science and technology
(including agriculture and medicine) and, since 1967, the periodical literature
of the social sciences. Besides collecting all available translations of Russian
scientific literature the library is responsible for arranging the translation of
some Russian periodicals, books and articles. Details are published monthly
in the NLL Announcement Bulletin. The Library acts as a centre for
MEDLARS, a computerised medical literature search service, produced by
the US National Library of Medicine. (A description of general library ser¬
vices which also cater for scientific needs is given on p. 425.)
Aslib, representing special libraries and information units in industry,
government departments, universities, colleges and other institutions, carries
out research into the collection, utilisation and dissemination of information,
provides consultancy and advisory services and training courses and offers
members an enquiry and reference service covering all subjects. Publications
include directories to sources of information, research reports, handbooks and
monographs on information science. It also operates the Commonwealth Index
to Unpublished Translations.
The National Reference Library of Science and Invention, administered
by the British Museum, is at present divided between two separately housed
divisions. The Holborn Division, formerly the Patent Office Library, is one
of the great scientific libraries of the world. The Bayswater Division has sub¬
stantial collections, especially in the life sciences.
An Advisory Committee for Scientific and Technical Information was set
up in October 1965 to advise the Secretary of State for Education and Science
particularly in relation to the work of OSTI and the co-ordination of this
,=
nnmnmmamBwam*
334
National
Research
Development
Corporation
OVERSEAS
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
work with other government departments and independent organisations.
The Department of Trade and Industry and the AEA devote considerable
sums to advisory information services. The former has nine regional offices
and sponsors over 70 industrial liaison centres, based on universities or
technical colleges which make contacts with local industries to promote greater
use of existing scientific and technical knowledge. A Production Engineering
Advisory Service equipped with mobile demonstration units brings knowledge
of new techniques directly to the workshop floor. The grant-aided industrial
research associations circulate research reports and provide information
services to members. Besides information services provided by its various
groups, which include the Ceramics Centre and the Non-destructive Testing
Centre at Harwell, the AEA has an information centre at its London head¬
quarters, and a network of regional advisers on the use of radioisotopes.
In agriculture, the Commonwealth Agricultural Institutes and Bureaux (see
p. 335) provide abstracts and an information service in various branches of
agricultural science. The ARC publishes an Index of Agricultural Research
in Progress, and gives an account of current developments in its annual reports.
The advisory services of the agricultural departments bring research results
directly to the farmer.
Medical research results are communicated mainly through journals and
periodicals; but the MRC issues special reports and includes special articles
in its annual reports.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is an independent
public corporation financed by Government loans through the DTI. Set up
under the Development of Inventions Act 1948 its borrowing power, origin¬
ally £5 million, has been progressively increased to £50 million.
The NRDC’s functions are to promote the adoption by industry of new
products and processes invented in Government laboratories, universities, and
elsewhere, advancing money where necessary to bring them to a commercially
viable stage; and to speed up technological advance by investing money with
industrial firms for the development of their own inventions and projects.
Projects so far sponsored include the Cephalosporin C antibiotic, hovercraft,
computers, advanced types of electric motor, diesel engines, insecticides,
microelectronics and fuel cells.
Inter-governmental organisations involved in scientific co-operation with
which the Government is concerned include: specialised agencies of the United
Nations, for example, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO), the World Health Organisation (WHO), the Food
and Agriculture Organisation (FAO); nuclear energy, for example, the Inter¬
national Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the European Nuclear Energy
Agency (ENEA) and the European Organisation for Nuclear Research
(CERN); space research, for example, ESRO; and the International Agency
for Research on Cancer (IARC). There are agreements between the United
Kingdom AEA and other atomic energy authorities, including that of the
Soviet Union (and there are permanent representatives of the United States
Atomic Energy Commission in London and of the United Kingdom AEA in
Washington). Also, there are inter-governmental agreements with Euratom,
and bilateral agreements with other countries. Britain is also represented on the
three scientific committees of the OECD. In areas of non-governmental
collaboration, the primary representative of the United Kingdom is the Royal
Society.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
335
Commonwealth
Scientific
Committee
The
Commonwealth
Scientific
Liaison
Offices
Commonwealth
Agricultural
Bureaux
Overseas
Development
Administration
The British
Council
The Commonwealth Scientific Committee (CSC) consisting of the heads of
the national research organisations of Commonwealth countries, formed in
1958 from the previous Standing Committee set up in 1946, meets biennially.
Operating under the CSC is a consultative sub-committee, membership of
which consists of officials responsible for scientific matters in the Common¬
wealth Missions in London, and representatives from British Government
departments, the research councils and the Royal Society. There are various
specialist committees. The secretariat for the Committee and its executive
sub-committee is provided by the Commonwealth Scientific Liaison Offices.
A British Commonwealth Scientific Conference held in 1946 recommended
the continuance and extension of the scientific collaboration of the war years
by the creation of the Commonwealth Scientific Liaison Offices, a group at
present consisting of the Scientific Liaison Offices in London of Australia,
Canada and New Zealand together with the International Scientific Relations
Division of the Department of Education and Science.
The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, financed by contributions from
all Commonwealth countries, comprise three Institutes and twelve Bureaux, all
of which except one Institute are in Britain and each of which is concerned
with a particular branch of agricultural science. They act as clearing houses
for the interchange of information of value to research workers in agricultural
science throughout the Commonwealth and increasingly throughout the world.
Seventeen Abstract Journals, one Primary Journal and an Index are published
periodically and have a combined annual circulation of about 29,000 copies.
The Institutes and Bureaux also issue monographs on their own particular
subjects and deal with enquiries received from research workers in all parts
of the Commonwealth.
The promotion by the Overseas Development Administration (ODA) of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office of scientific research in the interests of
developing countries covers specialist advice from Britain, advisory visits, con¬
ferences for exchange of information, training scientists from overseas in
universities and research institutions in Britain, recruiting scientific staff from
Britain, and providing support for existing research services and research
projects overseas, for example, in East Africa and the Caribbean. Some equip¬
ment is also given to encourage scientific training and applied research. The
Anti-Locust Research Centre in London, internationally recognised as a world
centre for locust research since 1931, is part of ODA and so is the Tropical
Products Institute in London, which aims at improving the economic viability
of the less-developed tropical countries, especially those within the Common¬
wealth, by research into new uses for tropical plant and animal products. The
ODA provides over £4-5 million a year for research for the benefit of developing
countries.
The principal aims of the British Council (see p. 164) in the sciences (including
agriculture, medicine and technology) are to foster co-operation between
British scientists and scientists of other countries, to promote among overseas
specialists a better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific
achievements, and, in the developing countries, to assist in curriculum reform
at school level and in the training of teachers of science and mathematics.
Overseas, a staff of 41 with science or science teaching qualifications, assist
in scientific and educational development and in scientific collaboration.
336
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Emphasis is placed on facilitating the interchange of scientists and teachers
and on the provision of library and information services related to advances in
science and science education in Britain. Overseas tours are arranged for
British specialists to advise, run courses or discuss matters of common interest,
and scientists are recruited or seconded to posts in overseas universities, teacher¬
training colleges, education authorities, schools or curriculum reform centres.
The Council invites senior overseas specialists to Britain, and makes awards
to postgraduate students; it also administers the programmes of a large number
of senior specialists and students who travel to Britain under the auspices of
the UN specialised agencies, or under various bilateral technical assistance
schemes, or as private individuals. The Council is also responsible for ad¬
ministering travel grants awarded under the Foreign and Commonwealth
University Interchange Schemes.
In Britain, advisory and information retrieval facilities are provided by
specialist departments (and libraries) for medicine and science including
science education. Publications include British Medicaljournal, British Medical
Book List, British Medical Index, Science Education Newsletter (see also Biblio¬
graphy, p. 479), and others listing facilities for education and training in
Britain.
15 FINANCE
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities (central Govern¬
ment, local authorities, nationalised industries and other public corporations)
finance their activities—how their expenditure is decided upon and how their
revenue is obtained.
Money administered by public authorities1 can be roughly divided into:
1. The funds of the Government raised mainly by taxation which are paid
into and out of the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the proposals of
the Government as approved by Parliament (principally the House of
Commons); and the Government funds raised by borrowing and paid into
the National Loans Fund set up under the National Loans Act 1968. Prior
to April 1968 the funds from both these sources were paid into the Ex¬
chequer. (The term ‘Exchequer’ comes from the ‘chess-board’, or table with
chequered cloth, round which the King’s financial officials sat for accounting
purposes in the twelfth century.)
There are also funds administered for special purposes by government
departments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts which do not
pass through the Consolidated Fund. The most important one is the
National Insurance Fund, administered by the Secretary of State for Social
Services and used for the payment of benefits under the National Insurance
Scheme.
2. The funds of local authorities, obtained from: rates (local taxes on dwelling-
houses and other real estate) and income from property and trading receipts;
grants and loans from the Government; and loans raised in the open market
(see p. 73).
3. Funds for the investment programmes of nationalised industries and other
public corporations. Such finance of their capital expenditure programmes
as cannot be met from internal sources is mainly provided in the form of
loans from the National Loans Fund, bank advances being used to cover
seasonal and other short-term fluctuations in working capital.
The following broad account of government finance is concerned mainly
with government taxation and borrowing, and only incidentally with local
government and other public funds.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law,
parliamentary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the
principle that taxation by the Crown required parliamentary consent was
gradually evolved. The principle was established at the end of the constitu¬
tional struggles of the Stuart period by the Bill of Rights 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once the
king was granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free to
spend it as he chose. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House of
Commons gradually developed the modern system of controlling expenditure
1 For an account of public finance in Northern Ireland and its relationship to that of the
United Kingdom, see p. 348.
338
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
through the device of Appropriation which was embodied in the Exchequer
and Audit Departments Act 1866. But by a Standing Order of the House of
Commons dating from the early eighteenth century the Crown’s consent is
required for all proposals involving new spending from the Consolidated Fund.
The House of Commons cannot, therefore, initiate expenditure, which must be
proposed by a Minister.
From the very early days of Parliament it was established that such financial
control as Parliament possessed should be exercised by the House of Com¬
mons. This control of taxation existed in the seventeenth century, but control
of expenditure was not effective until the nineteenth century. The controlling
power of the House of Commons is acknowledged today in the Speech from
the Throne at the opening of a new session of Parliament, which is addressed
to both Houses but contains a special paragraph on expenditure addressed to
the Commons alone.
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no power to
modify financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions; thus, to
minimise the chance of rejection, the practice was started in 1861 of embodying
the main financial provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill. Since the
passing of the Parliament Act 1911, however, if the Finance Bill is certified by
the Speaker to be a Money Bill, it may be presented to the Queen for the Royal
Assent and become law without the consent of the House of Lords if it has
not been passed by them within one month (see p. 38).
Today, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all
expenditure by the Government itself and for the raising of revenue by
taxation or borrowing. All government revenue, other than the proceeds of
borrowing and sums received by government departments in the course of
their normal activities (known as appropriations-in-aid), is paid into an account
with the Bank of England (known as ‘The Account of Her Majesty’s Ex¬
chequer’) which forms the Consolidated Fund. With certain exceptions (the
main ones being the service of the national debt, government loans and national
insurance benefits), all payments by the Government come out of this account.
The following sections outline the machinery by which expenditure and
revenue are authorised and controlled, the purposes on which public money
is spent and the sources from which revenue is obtained.
ESTIMATES AND
EXPENDITURE
Classification of
Expenditure
Central government expenditure falls into three main categories:
1. The largest part of government expenditure which is authorised by annual
Appropriation Acts and includes expenditure on the general administration
of the country, defence and on the social services. These are called the
Supply Services because the House of Commons, when voting money, is
granting to the Crown ‘such aids or supplies as are required to satisfy . . .
the pecuniary necessities of the Government’. It should be noted that some
of this expenditure may also depend on legislation, such as the National
Health Service Acts, which relates to a specific object of expenditure.
2. Expenditure which is specifically authorised by Acts of Parliament other
than annual Appropriation Acts. There are the Consolidated Fund Standing
Services which represent a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund, cover¬
ing: the residual cost of servicing the National Debt,1 the financial provision
1 The servicing of the National Debt is charged in the first instance to the National
Loans Fund. After taking account of certain receipts by the Fund, including interest
received on loans to nationalised industries and local authorities and the profits or the
Issue Department of the Bank of England, the residue is charged to the Consolidated
Fund.
FINANCE
339
Authorisation
of Expenditure
Scrutiny of
Expenditure
The Treasury
made for members of the royal family, and salaries and pensions of judges
and certain high officers, such as the Speaker of the House of Commons
and the Parliamentary Commissioner, whose independence of the Govern¬
ment is thought to be better guaranteed by permanent grant than by annual
vote. This group also includes expenditure from the National Insurance
Fund and similar special funds.
3. Government lending and service of debt, which under the National Loans
Act 1968 are channelled through the National Loans Fund. These transac¬
tions include most of the Government’s domestic lending to the nationalised
industries, local authorities and public corporations, principal repayments
of the Government’s own borrowing and the payment of interest and other
charges arising from the National Debt.
The Estimates for the Supply Services are considered by the House of
Commons during the 29 days (known as Supply days) which are allotted by
Standing Order of the House to consideration of Supply business in each
session. The choice of subject for debate on these days rests with the Opposi¬
tion. The House usually discusses general questions of policy relevant to the
Estimates, though any Estimate may be examined in detail if members wish
and if time allows (see p. 40).
Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginning on 1st April
are submitted to the Treasury by each department in the preceding December.
Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called ‘Votes’ which
are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of Commons
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed in
the Appropriation Act; this Act appropriates the money to specific Votes. No
department may spend money granted on one Vote for the purposes of another.
Within each Vote the spending of money on one subhead instead of on another
(virement) is permissible so far as Parliament is concerned, but only with
Treasury consent.
An insufficient Estimate, or a new service not covered by the Vote, or
virement of a magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should be
brought to the attention of Parliament, requires a Supplementary Estimate.
The Treasury exercises the same power of scrutiny over this as over the
ordinary Estimates.
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller
and Auditor General, and by the Public Accounts and Expenditure Committees
of the House of Commons.
The power of the Treasury to control expenditure derives from the responsi¬
bility of the Chancellor of the Exchequer for financial policy.
A central function of the Treasury is to present the Estimates to the House
of Commons. In considering the Estimates submitted by departments, the
Treasury has to examine the proposals for expenditure in relation to the results
of the public expenditure surveys and to eliminate any overlapping or un¬
economic expenditure that may have escaped the net of departmental financial
control. Apart from the scrutiny of Estimates, the Treasury exercises through¬
out the year general supervision of all departmental expenditure. The Treasury
also lays down general rules of financial and accounting procedure for de¬
partments and prescribes the principles on which departmental contracts shall
be made.
In 1961 the Plowden Committee on the Control of Public Expenditure
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
recommended in its report {Cmnd. 1432) that regular surveys should be made
of public expenditure in relation to prospective resources, and that decisions
involving future expenditure should be taken in the light of these surveys.
Surveys, therefore, are now made annually and have become an established
part of government procedure for the planning and control of public expendi¬
ture. Proposals for changes in the presentation and the procedures for con¬
sideration by Parliament of public expenditure estimates were published in
April 1969. These proposals were embodied in a White Paper on public
expenditure published in December 1969. The second in the series was
published in January 1971 {Public Expenditure 1969-JO to 1974-75).
These White Papers cover all public expenditure—the capital and current
expenditure of central and local government and the capital expenditure of the
nationalised industries and other public corporations. That of January 1971
gave expression to the Government’s policy that expenditure on public services
should grow at an annual average rate of 2-6 per cent. This rate is less than the
rates estimated in the previous White Paper (3 per cent for 1968-69 to 1971-72
and provisionally 3-5 per cent in 1972-73 and 1973-74) and rather less than
the rate of increase in productive potential in recent years.
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is
exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor General, which is a permanent
Crown appointment. Since 1866 he has had two functions: as Comptroller he
controls receipts and issues of public money to and from the Consolidated
Fund and the National Loans Fund, and as Auditor General he audits
departmental accounts and submits his report on the Appropriation Accounts
and other accounts, as required by statute, to Parliament. His statutory
function is to ensure that all expenditure is properly incurred, for example,
that no payments are made which go beyond any relevant statutory authority,
and that Treasury sanction has been obtained wherever necessary. In addition,
however, he has been encouraged by successive Public Accounts Committees
to examine departmental expenditure with a view to drawing attention to any
cases of apparent waste or extravagance.
The Public Accounts The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by
Committee the Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a select committee
called the Public Accounts Committee. This was first set up in 1861, on the
motion of Mr. Gladstone, for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was
properly incurred in accordance with the purpose for which it was voted and
with any relevant Acts of Parliament. The terms of reference of the committee
are to examine the accounts and these terms have been widely interpreted by
successive committees which have investigated whether full value has been
obtained for the sums spent by departments and have examined cases in which
the administration appears to have been faulty or negligent. The committee
has therefore become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and
inefficiency. It embodies its findings in reports which may be debated in the
House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the Treasury in
consultation with departments and put into effect, so far as they are accepted,
according to Treasury instructions. A reply to each report is submitted by the
Treasury to the committee of the following session and where the recommen¬
dations have been unacceptable to the Treasury the committee may either ac¬
cept the objections or return to the charge in subsequent reports.
34°
The Comptroller
and Auditor
General
The Expenditure The new Expenditure Committee of the House of Commons which replaces
Committee the former Estimates Committee was appointed on 21st January 1971.
FINANCE
341
THE BUDGET
The Committee’s functions are to consider any papers on public expendi¬
ture presented to the House of Commons and such of the estimates as may
seem appropriate to the committee. In particular it is to consider how, if at
all, the policies implied in the figures of expenditure and in the estimates may
be carried out more economically, and to examine the form of papers and of
the estimates presented to the Commons. In discharging its responsibilities it
can send for persons, papers and records, sit notwithstanding any adjournment
of the House, appoint people with technical knowledge either to supply
information which is not readily available or to elucidate matters of complexity
within its terms of reference. It can appoint sub-committees to assist it in its
work and unless the committee orders otherwise the public are admitted to its
meetings.
The sub-committees appointed by the Expenditure Committee are, in ad¬
dition to a steering sub-committee: Public Expenditure (General); Trade and
Industry; Employment and Social Services; Defence and External Affairs;
Education and Arts; and Environment and Home Office. Each has eight
members, including the chairman. According to the special report of the
Expenditure Committee, the titles of the sub-committees are not intended to
be restrictive, but are indicative of the general area of administration assigned
to each. Their work has involved, in the first instance, acquainting themselves
with the general practices of financial control and budgeting which are current
in the various government departments and the relevant policy decisions.
The Public Expenditure (General) Sub-Committee concerns itself mainly
with studying the central area of government financial control at Treasury
and Cabinet levels, and within the Civil Service Department. In this connec¬
tion it takes note of financial techniques employed outside government and
outside the United Kingdom.
‘Budget’ is an old word meaning a bag containing papers or accounts. The
use of the word in public finance originated in the expression ‘The Chancellor
of the Exchequer opened his Budget’, which is applied in Parliament to the
annual speech of the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining his proposals for
raising revenue.
The annual Budget speech is normally the main occasion of the year for
reviewing the central Government’s finances and the economic state of the
nation, and its formal basis is the Chancellor’s proposals for raising money by
taxation. In recent years it has become the practice for Chancellors to discuss
in the Budget speech the future prospects for the economy in some detail. By
the time the Budget is introduced usually in April, the Estimates of expenditure
under various headings will have been presented to Parliament and published,
and the expected total of government expenditure for the year will be known.
The Chancellor estimates the yield of the revenue on the basis of existing
taxation and proposes such changes in taxation as he considers desirable on
economic grounds. These proposals are later embodied in detail in a Finance
Bill. The interval between the Budget Statement and the Royal Assent to the
Finance Bill (usually given in July) is covered by legislation (mainly the Pro¬
visional Collection of Taxes Act 1968), whereby changes in income tax, cor¬
poration tax, purchase tax, selective employment tax and customs and excise
duties have statutory effect before the passing of the Finance Bill if adopted by
Resolution of the House of Commons.
Details of the Government lending for the years 1968-69 to 1971-72 were
given in a White Paper, Loans from the National Loan Fund 19JI-J2, issued on
Budget day. For 1971-72 it is estimated that nearly half of the net lending from
342
Budget Policy
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
this Fund would be loans to nationalised industries; more than 40 per cent
would be loans to local and harbour authorities; and the remainder loans to
other public corporations, the private sector, and certain advances within the
central Government.
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money
for government expenditure. From an early stage, however, it was appreciated
that taxation affected the distribution of income and property and the level of
expenditure on particular goods and services. At a later period it was realised
that taxation also affected the nation’s total expenditure and therefore the
general level of economic activity. Since the second world war, Budgets have
been designed to relate the total demand for goods and services to total
national output.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure and, therefore, the total
demand for goods and services in the following way: if there is an increase in
government expenditure without an increase in taxation then total demand for
goods and services will tend to rise; the same thing will happen if there is a
decrease in taxation without a decrease in government spending. On the other
hand, if there is an increase in taxation without an increase in government
expenditure, or a decrease in government expenditure without a decrease in
taxation then the total demand for goods and services will tend to fall. In this
way the Budget may be used to produce changes in the economy which the
Chancellor judges to be desirable in the light of the developing economic
situation.
The main objectives of British budgetary policy in recent years have been
to maintain a strong balance of payments and to guide the economy into in¬
creasing growth. With these objectives in view successive governments have
adopted a more flexible attitude towards fiscal policy and have not hesitated to
use budgetary measures between annual Budgets. In October 1970 the Chan¬
cellor of the Exchequer announced a wide range of measures to implement the
Government’s new policies for public spending. These measures included a
cut of 2-5 per cent in corporation tax and a cut from 41 -25 per cent to 38-75 per
cent, effective on 6th April i97I> standard rate of income tax.
The 1971 Budget heralded far-reaching changes in the structure of personal
taxation and in taxes on expenditure. The changes will constitute the most
comprehensive reform of the British tax system in this century. The present
system of income tax and surtax will be replaced by a single graduated personal
tax. Company taxation will be reformed so as to remove the discrimination
against distributed profits. As from April 1973 it is intended that both selective
employment tax (SET) and purchase tax will be abolished and that a value-
added tax (VAT) will become operative. The measures having more immediate
effect included proposals for reducing taxation by about £680 million in a full
year, with the intention of raising the rate of expansion of output to the rate of
growth of Britain’s productive potential. The principal measures included the
halving of SET, which became effective on 6th July 1971, a further reduction
of 2 • 5 per cent in the rate of corporation tax to 40 per cent and an increase of £40
in child allowances. Full details of the Budget proposals, and their economic
and financial background, were published in the Financial Stateme?it and Budget
Report and public discussion and comment have been encouraged by
the publication of government papers on Reform of Corporation Tax and
Value-Added Tax.
Reflationary measures were introduced by the Government in July 1971 to
strengthen the economy by stimulating consumer demand and industrial in-
FINANCE
343
Sources of
Revenue
1971-72
Income Tax
vestment. These measures, which could result in an increase in national out¬
put of 4-4-5 per cent between the first halves of 1971 and 1972, entailed an 18-2
per cent cut in purchase tax; the removal of hire purchase controls; a tem¬
porary increase from 60 to 80 per cent in the rate of first year allowance for
capital expenditure on plant and machinery; and the extension of free depre¬
ciation for immobile plant and machinery in use by service industries in the
development areas. The new tax changes brought total tax reductions an¬
nounced since the autumn of 1970 to about £ 1,100 million for 1971-72 and to
more than £1,400 million for 1972-73. The measures were taken in the con¬
text of Britain’s strong external position and of an initiative taken by the Con¬
federation of British Industry (CBI) which had proposed a period of voluntary
price restraint over the next 12 months. Also announced in July 1971 were new
measures to assist the development and intermediate areas by the expenditure
of a further £100 million over the period up to March 1973.
The three principal sources of revenue are first, taxes on income, which
include income tax, surtax and corporation tax; second, taxes on capital,
which include estate duty and capital gains tax; and third, taxes on expenditure
(including taxes on the ownership or use of certain assets)—these include not
only customs and excise duties and the purchase tax, but also the selective em¬
ployment tax, local rates, stamp duties and licence duties (for example, on
motor vehicles). Taxes on individual (but not corporate) incomes are progres¬
sive taxes in that larger incomes and estates bear a proportionately higher rate
of tax. The Board of Inland Revenue collects the taxes on income and capital
and the stamp duties; the Board of Customs and Excise collects the most im¬
portant taxes on expenditure, the customs and excise taxes and the purchase
tax, while a variety of authorities are responsible for the collection of the re¬
mainder, including the Department of Health and Social Security for the
selective employment tax.
Income tax is imposed at a standard rate for the year of assessment beginning
on 6th April, which is at present 38-75 per cent. The effective rate on earned
income, after taking two-ninths earned income relief into account, is approxi¬
mately 30 per cent. The tax imposed on an individual is graduated by means
of personal allowances and reliefs, and by the surtax. In the case of a married
couple the incomes of husband and wife are aggregated and are treated as one
income, but higher allowances are given than for a single person. A special
allowance is given against any earnings of a married woman.
A single person earning £1,000 a year pays £175 in income tax, while a
married man with the same earned income pays £121; if he has two children
under the age of 11, his tax (after taking into account the receipt of family
allowances) falls to £31; when the children are between the ages of 11 and 16,
the tax is £12; if the children are over 16 and receiving full-time education, no
income tax is paid. The range of tax payable by a single person varies from, for
example, £25 on an earned income of £500 a year to £1,409 on an earned
income of £5,000; if the income is from investment, tax liability on £500 will
be £36 and on £5,000 will be £2,324.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a PAYE (‘Pay as
You Earn’) scheme, under which tax is deducted at source, thus enabling them
to keep up to date on tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in the
United Kingdom and on all income arising abroad of persons (including
companies) resident in the United Kingdom. The main exceptions are that
344
Surtax
Company
Taxation
Estate Duty
Capital Gains
Tax
Customs and
Excise Duties
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interest on certain United Kingdom government securities belonging to
persons not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom is exempt; and income
from certain classes of possessions abroad is chargeable not on the amount of
income arising but on the amount of income remitted to the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom has entered into agreements with many countries
providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are not in
force unilateral relief is allowed.
The surtax, which is essentially an income tax at higher rates, is charged on
personal incomes exceeding £2,500 a year after deducting certain personal
allowances in excess of the single person’s basic allowance. In addition, the
same earned income relief as for income tax and a special earnings allowance
(not exceeding £2,000) are deductible from earned income only. Surtax is
imposed at rates which increase progressively until, on the portion of taxable
income above £15,000, the combined rate of income tax and surtax payable
in 1971-72 (being income tax for 1971-72 and surtax for 1970—71) reaches
88-75 percent.
Companies are liable to corporation tax on both their profits and their capital
gains. In addition, a company deducts income tax from dividends and other
distributions and pays it over to the Inland Revenue as a separate matter from
its own liability. The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the
Budget for the past financial year; for 197° ^ 4° Per cenk The tax is assessed
on the profits of accounting periods, the rate of tax being the rate for the
financial year in which the accounting period falls. The basic rule for the
calculation of income for corporation tax purposes is that, except for special
provisions, it is computed in accordance with income tax principles.
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of all property which passes at death.
The charge to duty is not limited to property owned by the deceased but may
extend to other property, for example, to trust funds from which the deceased
received income in his lifetime and to gifts made by the deceased within seven
years of his death (one year in the case of a gift for public or charitable pur¬
poses). Since the 1971 Budget estates not over £12,500 are exempt from duty,
but on estates of a higher value duty is chargeable by reference to rates ranging
from 25 per cent to 85 per cent applied to successive slices of the estate.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax
or, in the case of companies, to corporation tax. Where assets were acquired
before 6th April 1965, the charge is restricted to the part of any gain attribu¬
table to the period since 6th April 1965* The rate of tax for persons other than
companies is 30 per cent, but in the case of individuals may be less, depending
on their circumstances. Certain assets are exempt from tax including the
principal private residence, chattels worth less than £1,000 (and any chattels,
except those used for the purpose of a trade, with a predictable life of less than
50 years), private motor cars, and National Savings Certificates. The 1971
Budget also exempted from capital gains tax, an individual where the total
proceeds of disposals do not exceed £5°° in anY year- The distinction between
short- and long-term capital gains tax was removed by the 1971 Budget; thus
all gains are now subject to long-term capital gains tax whatever the length of
period of ownership except for gains on gilt-edged securities which continue
to be exempt from capital gains tax if held for more than 12 months.
The largest group of taxes on expenditure are those administered by the
Customs and Excise Department, namely, the duties on tobacco, hydrocarbon
FINANCE
Purchase Tax
Betting and
Gaming Duties
Motor Vehicle
Licence Taxes
Selective
Employment Tax
345
oil, alcoholic drinks, purchase tax, protective duties, betting and certain
miscellaneous items.1 In British usage the distinction between customs and
excise depends on whether the goods are imported (customs duties) or British
produced (excise duties). These taxes are sometimes known as indirect taxes
since they are normally paid by the importer, manufacturer, or wholesaler,
who adjusts the prices charged to customers accordingly. In 1971 the tax
burden was equivalent to about £0-22% on a gallon of petrol, £0*24 on a packet
of 20 standard plain cigarettes, £2-20 on a bottle of whisky, and 360*044 on a
pint of beer of average strength.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer has power to vary by Order by up to 10
per cent the rates of purchase tax and any of the other main groups of customs
and excise duties (that is, tobacco, alcoholic drinks, oil and the minor revenue
duties). This power, known as the ‘regulator’, requires annual renewal.
Purchase tax is charged on a wide range of goods, nearly all of them consumer
goods, at four rates, which are currently per cent, 18 per cent, 30 per cent
and 45 per cent of the wholesale value. Articles subject to revenue duties of
customs and excise are in general exempt from this tax; other goods free of
purchase tax include food (other than confectionery, soft drinks, ice cream
and crisps), fuel, books and newspapers, young children’s clothing and
footwear, certain non-proprietary drugs and medicines, and some household
appliances.
The principal betting duties are: the pool betting duty (which applies to
football pools and betting by coupon at fixed odds) charged at a rate of 334 per
cent of the stake money; and the general betting duty, which is charged at the
rate of 6 per cent of stake money except for on-course betting which is charged
at 5 per cent. Gaming is taxed at different rates mainly by licence fees.
Taxes on motor vehicles are collected by the local taxation authorities (the
county or county borough councils in England and Wales and the correspond¬
ing councils in Scotland); the proceeds are paid by the local authorities into
the Consolidated Fund. The licence duty on a private motor car is £2$ a year;
motor cycles and three-wheel vehicles, etc., pay 362*50, £$ or £10 a year
according to engine capacity.
The selective employment tax was introduced in the 1966 Finance Act. Its
rates were halved in the 1971 Budget when it was also announced that the
tax would be abolished as from April 1973. Following the 1971 Budget reduc¬
tion, which took effect on 5th July 1971, it is paid by all employers throughout
the United Kingdom at a rate per week of £1-20 for men, ^o*6o for women
and boys and 360-40 for girls. However, the tax is refunded to eligible employers
in manufacturing industries, most of transport and communications, agriculture
and the extractive industries. Most activities of the nationalised industries and
local authorities also receive repayment of the tax. Employers in construction,
distribution, insurance, banking and miscellaneous services pay the tax without
refund, except that two-thirds of the tax is refunded for all employees aged 65
and over and for part-time staff working fewer than 21 hours a week.
THE BUDGET After allowing for the Budget changes total expenditure for the financial year
1971-72 ending 3Ist March 1972 is estimated to reach 3614,446 million, including £575
million for Consolidated Fund Standing Services and 3613,871 million for
Supply Services. The estimate for total revenue is 3616,762 million of which
1 The duties other than purchase tax and protective duties are known as revenue duties.
346 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
,£16,217 million is receipts from taxation. A surplus of £2,316 million for
transfer to the National Loans Fund is therefore expected. Net lending from
the National Loans Fund (see p. 339) is estimated to reach £2,052 million.
Thus in 1971-72 after special transactions, there is likely to be a net repayment
of debt by the central Government of some £264 million.
Table 21 shows total revenue from taxation and other sources anticipated in
1970-71 and 1971-72. Table 22 gives a general functional analysis of expendi¬
ture in the Estimates.
TABLE 21
Taxation and
Miscellaneous
Receipts
1970- 71 AND
1971- 72
£ million
Taxation
Inland Revenue—
Income Tax
Surtax . .
Corporation Tax
Capital Gains Tax
Death Duties
Stamp Duties . .
Other
Total Inland Revenue
Customs and Excise—
Purchase Tax . .
Oil  
Tobacco
Spirits, Beer and Wine
Betting and Gaming
Other Revenue Duties
Protective Duties, etc. . .
Import Deposits
Total Customs and Excise
Motor Vehicle Duties
Selective Employment Tax
(gross)6 . .
Total Taxation
Miscellaneous Receipts
Broadcast Receiving
Licences
Interest and Dividends
Other
Total
1970-71
Budget
Estimate
5,653
277
1,900“
150
371
119
5
8,475
1,260
1,380
1,160
905
120
10
225
—425
4,635
430
2,042
15,582
102
100
340
16,124
Outturn
5,725
240
1,600
140
360
115
5
8,185
1,280
1,390
1,145
930
130
10
255
—420
4,720
423
1,985
15,313
101
97
330
15,841
1971-72 Estimate
Before
Budget
changes
6.675
360
1.675
170
385
110
1
9,376
1,495
1,460
1,100
1,000
145
10
265
—116
5,359
440
2,003
17,178
120
105
320
17,723
After Budget
changes
6,491
360
1,620
165
375
108
1
9,120
1,495
1,460
1,100
1,000
145
10
265
—116
5,359
440
1,298
16,217
120
105
320
16,762
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1971-72.
0 The effect of the reduction in the rate of Corporation Tax announced on 27th October
1970 was to reduce this estimate by £60 million.
6 Respective figures for net yield of selective employment tax from the private sector
and public corporations are (left to right) £588 million, £501 million, £509 million an
£219 million.
FINANCE
347
TABLE 22
Expenditure :
General
Functional
Analysis of the
Estimates 1969-70
to 1971-72
Summary
CAPITA!
PAYMENTS AND
RECEIPTS
Defence budget . .
Other military defence
Overseas aid
Other overseas services
Trade, industry and
employment
Civil Service pay
Research councils, etc.
Agriculture, fisheries and
forestry . .
Roads
Transport ..
Housing
Miscellaneous local
services ..
Law and Order
Arts
Education
Health and personal social
services ..
Social security
Financial administration
Common Services. .
Miscellaneous services
Selective employment tax
refunds (including refund
element of manufacturers’
premium)
Non-specific grants to local
authorities
1969-70
Outturn
% of
£m. total
2,216
87
219
134
18-5
0-7
1-8
M
1,145 9-5
98 0-8
346
337
185
187
40
258
17
355
1,458
1,350
245
213
46
2- 9
2-8
1- 5
1-6
0-3
2- 2
0-1
3- 0
12-2
11-3
2-0
1-8
0-4
1,088 9-1
1,971 16-4
1970-71
Budget
Estimates
% of
£m. total
2,375
89
218
135
1,159
46
110
421
373
165
250
49
283
21
378
1,527
1,432
272
264
50
18-4
0-7
1- 7
10
9 0
0-4
0-8
3-2
2- 9
1-3
1- 9
0-4
2- 2
0-2
2-9
11-8
1M
2-1
2-0
0-4
1,151 8-9
2,164 16-7
1970-71
Total
Estimates
% of
£m. total
2,499
97
229
142
18-3
0-7
1-7
10
1,231 9-0
113 0-8
415
429
170
250
51
304
22
420
1,701
1,492
287
278
52
3 0
3-1
1- 3
1-8
0-4
2- 2
0-2
3-1
12-4
10-9
2-1
2-0
0-4
1,201 8-8
2,297 16-8
1971-72
Estimates
% of
£m. total
2,545
98
246
131
392
403
163
294
57
336
28
1,790
1,580
316
295
69
180
0-7
1-7
0-9
1,174 8-3
125 0-9
2-8
2-8
1-2
2-1
0-4
2-4
0-2
444. 3-1
12-6
11-2
2-2
2-1
0-5
1,183 8-4
2,480 17-5
Total
11,995 100-0 12,932 100-0 13,680 100-0 14,149 100-0
Source: Estimates 1971-72 Memorandum by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
Capital expenditure consists chiefly of loans to the nationalised industries, the
local authorities and other public corporations, such as the New Towns
Development Corporations. These loans, less repayments, are financed from
the National Loans Fund by any surplus of revenue over expenditure,
by the proceeds of government borrowing including borrowing from extra-
budgetary funds, such as the National Insurance Fund, and by the sterling
receipts, if any, accruing to the Exchange Equalisation Account.
Central government borrowing may be in the form of borrowing from the
public either through the National Savings Movement (see p. 352) or by bor¬
rowing on the market by means of new issues of securities. New issues of
government securities are made from time to time for the purpose of refinan¬
cing maturing issues (conversion issues) or to raise new money (issues for
cash). The capital requirements of the nationalised industries are met by the
central Government while those of the local authorities are met partly through
the Public Works Loan Board (see p. 73) and partly by borrowing direct from
the public, although some nationalised industries and local authorities have
obtained statutory power enabling them to borrow, with Treasury consent, in
foreign currencies.
imunnBiU4mnm,.mt»uuMgmg
348
The National
Debt
PUBLIC FINANCE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Debt increased particularly rapidly during and immediately
after the first and second world wars. It rose from £650 million in 1914 to
£7,435 million at the end of the first world war, and from £7,131 million in
1939 to £23,637 million in 1946. On 31st March 1971 the total National Debt
(provisional) was £33,425 million, of which £2,148 million was repayable in
currencies other than sterling, mainly to the United States and Canadian
Governments. Of the £31,277 million of internal debt, £3,847 million was
short-term debt, mainly in the form of 91-day Treasury bills, while the long¬
term loans included a variety of stocks, bonds, loans and certificates carrying
fixed rates of interest (ranging from 2^ to 9 per cent) and with fixed or in¬
determinate dates of repayment.
The general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main
features, similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole, under
which public revenues, with a few minor exceptions, are paid into the Ex¬
chequer Account, from which no money can be withdrawn except on the
authority of Parliament. That authority is expressed in the case of Consolidated
Fund charges in permanent legislative form, and in the case of Supply Services
by annual Appropriation Acts based on estimates prepared by departments
and sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance.
The major sources of revenue flowing into the Northern Ireland Exchequer
are the main national taxes imposed by the United Kingdom Parliament over
the whole country and paid, in the first instance, into the United Kingdom
Consolidated Fund. These taxes, which are referred to in the Government of
Ireland Act 1920 as ‘reserved’ taxes (that is, reserved to the United Kingdom
Parliament), comprise the Inland Revenue group (income tax, surtax, corpora¬
tion tax and capital gains tax) and customs and excise duties on goods. After
the cost of collecting these taxes in Northern Ireland (and the cost of some
other reserved services) and an Imperial Contribution have been retained in
the United Kingdom Consolidated Fund, the balance, termed the ‘Residuary
Share of Reserved Taxes’, is paid to the Northern Ireland Exchequer where
it joins up with the ‘transferred’ taxes (that is, where taxation powers have been
transferred to the Northern Ireland Parliament) to form the public income.
Among items of Transferred Tax Revenue are estate duties, stamp duties,
betting duties, various excise licence duties, motor vehicle duties and selective
employment tax.
A joint Exchequer Board, representative of the Treasury and the Ministry
of Finance for Northern Ireland, constituted in accordance with the Govern¬
ment of Ireland Act 1920, determines the amount of Reserved Revenue and
the cost of Reserved Services attributable to Northern Ireland for each year, the
amount of the Imperial Contribution, and such other questions affecting the
financial relations of the two Governments as may be referred to it.
In the Northern Ireland Budget for 1971-72 (year ending 31st March), total
revenues were forecast at £419'1 million and expenditure at £4!9 milll°n’
After allowing for the Imperial Contribution, provisionally estimated at £1
million, there was a Budget surplus of £116,000.
The Public Debt of Northern Ireland, totalling £378-1 million on 31st
March 1971 is covered by repayable advances and investments held by the
Ministry of Finance.
Outside the Exchequer system in Northern Ireland, various funds have been
established, in addition to statutory Reserve and Sinking Funds, for specific
purposes. In general, these funds follow the United Kingdom pattern, the
principal funds being those relating to National Insurance and government
FINANCE
349
loans. The latter constitutes a pool of capital money available mainly for local
and public authority borrowings; on 31st March 1971 a sum of approximately
£284 million was outstanding against such borrowers.
THE CENTRAL BANK
The British banking system is long established and well integrated. It comprises
a central bank; commercial banks which carry on the usual main banking
services; the United Kingdom offices of banks whose main business is in other
countries; merchant banks and other specialised institutions.
The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and
Royal Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by
the Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. As the central bank,
the Bank acts as banker to the Government, to overseas central banks and to
commercial banks; it is the note-issuing authority and the registrar for some
200 government, nationalised industry, local authority, public board and
Commonwealth government stocks. As agent for the Government the Bank
administers exchange control and the voluntary arrangements to limit invest¬
ment in the more developed countries of the sterling area. On behalf of the
Treasury it manages the Exchange Equalisation Account (EEA), which holds
Britain’s official reserves of gold and foreign exchange; using the resources of
the EEA the Bank designs its interventions in the foreign exchange market
both to prevent undue fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling and to
conserve the means of making payments abroad.
As banker to the Government the Bank examines and seeks to anticipate
banking and financial problems and to undertake the appropriate operations
in the money, capital and the foreign exchange markets; consequently the Bank
has a major responsibility for advising the Government on the formulation of
monetary policy and for its subsequent execution.
In implementing monetary policy the Bank is ready to act daily in the money
market, by buying or selling Treasury bills, and similarly in the market for
government stocks. A prime concern is to maintain orderly conditions and,
when necessary, the Bank also exerts influence on interest rates; an important
instrument in this context is Bank Rate, which is the minimum rate at which
the Bank will discount approved bills of exchange for the members of the
London Discount Market or will normally lend to them; a wide range of other
short-term interest rates is related to it.
As the recognised channel of communication between the commercial banks
and other financial institutions of the City of London on the one hand, and
the Government on the other, the Bank has been called on in recent years to
administer direct control of credit. This has been achieved by means of ‘special
deposits’ which the London clearing banks and Scottish banks are called upon
to make with the Bank; through requests to the banks and other financial
institutions not to extend credit above stipulated quantitative ceilings; and by
general guidance to them on lending policy. In May 1971, following a govern¬
ment announcement that the authorities wished to explore with the banks and
finance houses the possible development of new techniques aimed at combin¬
ing effective control over credit conditions with greater scope for competition
and innovation, the Bank published proposals towards this end {Competition
and Credit Control, April 1971). They would involve a shift from existing
liquidity and quantitative lending controls to a system placing more reliance
on changes in interest rates supported by calls for special deposits on the
basis of a minimum reserve assets ratio across the whole of the banking system.
35°
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The minimum reserve is intended to provide the authorities with a known firm
base for the operation of monetary policy.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
bank notes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by
gold but by government securities and other assets. The Scottish and Northern
Ireland banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from an
amount specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by Bank
of England notes and by coin. The provision of coin for circulation is the
responsibility of the Royal Mint, a government department.
The Deposit
Banks
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The primary business of the deposit banks is the receipt, transfer and encash¬
ment of deposits. The principal deposit banks are the six London clearing
banks, three Scottish banks and two Northern Ireland banks. Recent mergers
have resulted in the formation of six banking groups, four based in London
and two in Scotland. The two Northern Ireland banks are owned by London
clearing banks, but two groups of banks based in the Republic of Ireland also
operate in Northern Ireland. .
At the end of 1970 current and deposit accounts with the deposit banks
operating in Britain amounted to over £12,768 million, and accounted for
nearly 40 per cent of the total deposits (in sterling and foreign currencies) of the
banking sector, which also includes the National Giro, the accepting houses,
overseas banks, other banks and the discount market. The deposit banks
provide full banking services throughout Britain, and operate through over
14,000 branches. Several of them have interests in British overseas and Com¬
monwealth banks, and in other banks which have been formed specially to
compete in international markets. They have also acquired substantial interests
in hire-purchase finance houses, and some have set up their own unit trusts.
Together with the Bank of England the London clearing banks make up the
membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House. In 1970 cheques, drafts,
bills and bankers’ effects passing through the clearing system averaged in value
£64,424 million monthly, while the average monthly value of the credit transfer
clearing was £1,199 million. ,, , ,
Current account balances with the deposit banks are repayable on demand
and no interest is paid on them, but on deposit account balances interest is paid
at a rate generally 2 per cent below Bank Rate. The London clearing banks
maintain a ratio of about 8 per cent between cash reserves and total deposits.
It is also a convention among the London clearing banks that at least 28 per
cent of deposits should be held in the form of liquid assets.
The banks’ profits are largely earned through their advances to customers
partly in the form of overdrafts and partly in the form of loans (with or
without collateral security); these are normally for a short term only unless
renewed. The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total deposits
declined from about 43 per cent in 1938 to 17 per cent at the end of the
second world war but it has since risen and in May 1971 it was around 53 per
cent. In recent years the banks have several times been asked to restrain the
growth of their lending and to ensure that, within the total priority is given
to finance for exports and for productive investment in manufacturing industry
and agriculture: this has involved the restriction of advances to the personal
sector. In the 1971 Budget, it was stated that the general guidance on the
direction of lending remained unchanged, and that the rate of growth o
FINANCE
351
Overseas
Banks
National Giro
The Merchant
Banks
restricted lending would still be limited. The banks’ ‘liquid’ assets, that is,
those that are quickly realisable comprise cash, balances at the Bank of
England, money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), and their holdings
of Treasury and commercial bills and certain export and shipbuilding credits
refinanceable with the Bank of England: they also hold a proportion of their
assets as portfolio (mainly British Government securities) or trade invest¬
ments.
The bank giro, originally introduced as the credit transfer scheme, and the
direct debiting system, by which a creditor with the prior approval of the
debtor may claim money due to him direct from the latter’s banking account,
have helped to improve the money transmission services. Another fairly
recent banking innovation has been the introduction by some banks of
automatic cash dispensing machines, which allow customers to obtain cash
at any time. Credit cards have become increasingly popular for the settlement
of accounts in retail shops. Cheque cards, which enable the card holder to
cash a cheque not exceeding £30 at any office of the major British and Irish
banks, are also becoming more widely used.
There are also some 37 British overseas and Commonwealth banks, many of
them having their headquarters in London. They provide a comprehensive
banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing of
trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between third
countries. There are also currently in London about 33 United States banks,
50 European banks, 11 Japanese banks and over 30 other foreign banks.
The Post Office National Giro was opened in October 1968 to provide a
low-cost current account banking and money transfer service which can be
operated through most post offices in Britain. All accounts and transactions
are maintained by means of a computer complex at the National Giro Centre
at Bootle, near Liverpool. Giro now has more than 350,000 accounts, one-
sixth of which are business accounts. In April 1970 a scheme was introduced
to make available personal loans from a finance company for credit-worthy
Giro customers. In May 1970 a scheme was begun to encourage the payment
of wages through Giro. In October 1970 Giro’s international transfer service
was extended to Japan. This service now provides British account holders with
direct money transfer facilities between themselves and some 14 million
overseas account holders in Europe and the Far East.
The merchant banks have helped to give London an international reputation
as a world financial centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. They
are of two kinds, and are known as accepting houses and issuing houses
according to whether they specialise predominantly in the work of acceptance
credit1 or in transactions involving the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf
of their customers. They arrange to issue and themselves underwrite long-
and short-term loans both to governments and to enterprises in overseas
countries in sterling (where permitted by exchange control regulations) or in
other currencies which have been deposited with them. They are also engaged
in the work of the gold and foreign exchange markets, and they have many
1 Acceptance credit has been defined as fundamentally a three-month operation finan¬
cing exports from and imports to Britain and to other markets. The expression is derived
from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are ‘accepted’ or guaran¬
teed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be discounted for
cash by a discount house.
352
The Discount
Market
The National
Savings
Movement
National Savings
Securities
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other functions in connection with the financing of trade, investment manage¬
ment and insurance.
The London discount or money market is a distinctive part of the British
banking system. It consists of 11 discount houses and its principal function
is to marry the needs of lenders of money for short periods with those of the
borrowers of such money.
The discount houses borrow ‘at call’ from banks and other financial
institutions at a relatively low rate of interest. To them the Bank of England
acts as a lender of last resort. The clearing banks do not borrow money
directly from the Bank of England; if they need to add to their cash resources
they call in part of their loans to the discount market. If, as a result, any
particular discount house is unable to cover its needs for cash elsewhere, it is
obliged to borrow from the Bank of England, normally at Bank Rate for
seven days, but the Bank may charge a higher rate and has also at times lent
overnight, or for short periods, at the rates of interest prevailing in the market.
An important part of the money borrowed by the discount houses is
invested in British Government Treasury bills. The discount houses accept as
an informal responsibility that they should cover the Government’s need to
borrow on Treasury bills, which are offered on tender each week. The clearing
banks do not buy Treasury bills at the weekly tenders except on behalf of
customers, but they purchase, from the discount market, bills which are of a
maturity required by them.
The discount houses provide a specialised market in commercial bills and
in short-dated Government bonds (that is, those with not more than five years
to run before repayment), local authority bonds, and certain other negotiable
instruments.
The National Savings Movement started in 1916 to help finance the war by
promoting savings. The present movement encourages the widespread invest¬
ment of savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the National Savings Bank
(see p. 354) and in National Savings securities. The movement is led by the
National Savings Committee for England and Wales and similar committees
for Scotland and Northern Ireland.1 The committees are bodies of independent
persons representing regional savings organisations and various national insti¬
tutions connected with such matters as finance, industry and education. They
are assisted by a salaried staff of civil servants. Voluntary local savings com¬
mittees, often assisted or promoted by local authorities, co-ordinate the work
of voluntary local savings groups.
The administration of the National Savings Bank and other forms of national
savings is carried out by the Department for National Savings. Four forms
of National Savings securities are currently on sale: the National Savings
Certificate, the British Savings Bond,2 and the Premium Savings Bond and
National Savings Stamps. National Savings Certificates, in units of £1,
are encashable at par at any time; interest, which is free of income tax, surtax
and capital gains tax is only paid on encashment; the limit on individual
holdings is 1,000 units of the current issue. British Savings Bonds, sold in units
1 The Northern Ireland Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration of
Ulster Savings, but the furtherance and organisation of the savings movement in
Northern Ireland is the concern of a central voluntary committee, which is assisted by
county and local committees and district groups.
2 These bonds, which were introduced in 1968, are similar to the earlier National
Development Bonds and the Defence Bonds.
FINANCE
353
Contractual
Savings
NATIONAL SAVINGS
Amounts outstanding at end-year in £ million
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£815
Premium Savings
Bonds £200
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments)
£345
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£1,057
Premium Savings
Bonds £797
Other
securities
on the Post
Office Register
£187
Total £6,439 1 958
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments) £1,469
Total: £8,592§ 1970
*Principal and accrued interest i lncludes investment accounts
J Includes the earlier National Development Bonds and Defence Bonds
§lncludes SAVE
of bear interest at 7 per cent and are repayable at par on one month’s notice.
There is a maximum holding of £10,000 on British Savings Bonds (First
Issue) which were on sale from April 1968 to May 1971 and a separate limit of
£10,000 on British Savings Bonds (Second Issue) introduced in May I971*
If the Bonds are held to maturity (five years from the date of purchase) they
are repaid with a bonus of £3 per cent tax free. Premium Savings Bonds are in
units of £1 and individual holdings are limited to £2,000. After a qualifying
period of three months the bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes
instead of receiving interest. There is now a weekly draw for a prize of £25,000
and a monthly draw for prizes ranging from £25 to £50,000. At the end of
March 1971, £805-1 million was invested in this form of savings. A selection
of British Government securities is held on the National Savings Register and
can also be bought or sold through the Bonds and Stock Office. Trustee
Savings Banks also deal in stock on the National Savings Register.
A contractual savings scheme, known as ‘Save as You Earn’ (SAYE),
enables savings to be made in regular monthly amounts within a minimum of
£1 and a maximum of £20 in deposits with the Department for National
Savings or Trustee Savings Banks by means of deductions from pay or by
other regular payments. At the end of five years, savings will qualify for a
bonus equivalent to one year’s savings free of tax. Completed savings which
are not withdrawn will qualify for a double bonus at the end of seven years,
that is, two years’ savings. For example, contributions totalling £60 payable
over five years at a rate of £1 per month will qualify for a bonus of £12 at the
end of that period, or £24 if left on deposit for a further two years. Savers who
wish to stop payments will be able to withdraw the total sum saved (but there
cannot be partial withdrawals). Tax-free compound interest will be paid at the
rate of 2% per cent on amounts withdrawn after the first but before the end of
the fifth year, or at 4^ per cent where the contributions cease but the savings
are left invested for the remainder of the five years or where the saver dies
before the contributions are completed. A separate ‘Save as You Earn’ scheme
(with the same maximum limit) is operated by the building societies.
354
National Savings
Bank
Trustee Savings
Banks
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Corporations
Finance
Corporation for
Industry Limited
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Savings Bank is the largest organisation of its kind in the world.
It provides a countrywide system for depositing and withdrawing small
savings and has over 22 million active accounts. Ordinary Accounts bear
interest at 3^ per cent and the first £21 of interest is tax-free. Up to fzo can
be withdrawn on demand at any savings bank post office, but a few days’ notice
is required for larger amounts. The moneys are lodged with the National Debt
Office and are invested in government securities. Deposits up to a limit of
^10,000 bearing a higher rate of interest may be made in Investment Accounts
where investors have a qualifying deposit of in an Ordinary Account. All
deposits carry a government guarantee; at the end of June 1971 sum °f the
two accounts totalled £1,794 million.
The Trustee Savings Banks, most of which were founded in the nineteenth
century, operate under their own trustees but are subject to statutory provi¬
sions and National Debt Office surveillance. There are 75 individual banks
with over 1,500 Trustee Offices and 12^ million accounts. Deposits can be
made either in the Ordinary Department, the Special Investment Depart¬
ments or the Current Account Department. Savings in the Ordinary Depart¬
ment earn interest at 3-2 per cent and the first £21 of interest is tax-free.
Withdrawals can usually be made on demand though notice is required for
large sums. Deposits are invested with the National Debt Commissioners and
both capital and interest are guaranteed by the Government. The Special
Investment Departments offer a higher rate of return, which is taxable.
Deposits are limited to £10,000, but are not government guaranteed. At
the end of June 1971 total sums in the Ordinary Departments of the Trustee
Savings Banks were £1,123 million and in the Special Investment Departments
£1,542 million. Most Trustee Savings Banks operate cheque services on
deposits in the Current Account Departments. In January 1968 the Trustee
Savings Banks set up their own unit trust (see p. 356).
At end-June 1971 National Savings totalled £8,872 million. The diagram
on p. 353 shows the distribution of National Savings between the different
outlets in 1958 and 1970.
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many
special financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities,
which are supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are
mainly provided through the savings banks, finance corporations, hire-
purchase finance companies, the stock exchanges, investment trusts, building
societies and the insurance market. The firms engaged in such activities are
in the main highly specialised, for example, discount and other finance houses,
stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers.
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited (FCI) and
the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited (ICFC), were
set up in 1945 to assist in dealing with the problems of post-war reconstruction
and development. The corporations are ordinary limited companies with no
official representation on their boards and no recourse to public funds.
Another corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Company
Limited (CDFC), was established in 1953 to assist development projects in
the Commonwealth.
The FCI was formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of
£200,000 and upwards) for the re-equipment and development of industry.
The FCI has an authorised and issued capital of £25 million and may
FINANCE
355
Industrial and
Commercial Finance
Corporation
Limited
Commonwealth
Development
Finance Company
Limited
The Stock
Exchanges
borrow up to four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of
£125 million. The share capital is held by insurance companies, by invest¬
ment trust companies and by the Bank of England. At 31st March 1971 the
capital called and paid up was 10 per cent (^2-5 million); the Bank of England
paid £5 million in advance of call in 1958. The liability of the shareholders
in respect of the uncalled capital represents security to the banks providing
loans for the corporation’s working capital. The value of its loans and invest¬
ments at 31st March 1971 was £70 million.
The main function of the ICFC is to invest long-term capital in British based
small- and medium-sized companies which are capable of using additional
resources profitably. In addition it provides a wide range of financial and
other specialist services. It has a number of subsidiaries, including Technical
Development Capital Ltd. established in 1962 to provide venture capital for
the commercial development of technological innovation. The shareholders
of ICFC are the Bank of England, the English Clearing and the Scottish
Banks. At 31st March 1971 the ICFC had nearly £150 million invested in
2,200 British companies.
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company was established in
1953. Its activities are no longer confined to the Commonwealth. It aims to
support business enterprise overseas by providing finance in the form of share
capital and loans on mutually acceptable terms. Its authorised share capital is
£30 million, of which about 14^ million ‘A’ ordinary shares of (£o-io paid)
are held by industrial, shipping, mining and banking interests in the United
Kingdom, and nf million ‘B’ ordinary shares of £1 (^0-50 paid) are held by
the Bank of England and certain central banks in the Commonwealth. At
31st March 1971 CDFC held investments worth nearly ^27 million spread
over a wide range of industries placed in more than 30 countries.
There are seven stock exchanges in the British Isles. In addition the Provincial
Brokers’ Stock Exchange operates in many cities and towns throughout Britain
and the Irish Republic. The Federation of Stock Exchanges in Great Britain
and Ireland, comprising with one exception all these organisations, was set up
in July 1965 to co-ordinate their work.
The London Stock Exchange is by far the most important of these stock
exchanges and is one of the world’s two foremost free markets in securities.
Some 9,000 securities are quoted on the London Stock Exchange; at the
end of March 1971 these had a total market value of £120,504 million. About
7,770 securities of companies are quoted, including a number of leading
overseas companies. Company issues represented more than four-fifths of the
securities at market valuation, the remainder being United Kingdom and over¬
seas government and corporation stocks.
The London Stock Exchange is linked by cable or telephone with stock
exchanges all over the world. Therefore, a quoted company, subject to any
limitations imposed by the exchange control regulations, has a world-wide
market for its issues. This is an important factor in the raising of new capital
by government and commercial borrowers. Arbitrage transactions by brokers
—the buying or selling of a particular security on one stock exchange with the
intention of reversing it on another—play an important part in equating
price differentials between different markets and maintaining a continual
flow of business between centres.
The stock exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains
are made between members reflect the interaction of supply and demand for
356 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the securities concerned. All the stock exchanges operate under strict rules of
conduct which they formulate themselves.
There has been substantial growth in demand in the post-war period for
ordinary (equity) shares, partly in expectation that such shares will maintain
their real value or increase in value in periods of rising prices. Insurance
companies and pension funds invest a larger proportion than formerly of their
assets in these shares, and the Trustee Investments Act 1961 permits trustees,
under certain conditions, to invest up to half the funds they hold in trust in
equity shares.
The ownership of securities on the London Stock Exchange is much more
widespread than formerly: it is estimated that there are about 2^ million
shareholders in the United Kingdom and that their shareholdings are widely
distributed.
Investment
Trusts and
Unit Trusts
Through investment trusts and unit trusts, investors may spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management.
The ordinary type of investment trust is constituted as a public company
registered under the Companies Acts with limited liability; its business is
to invest its capital in a range of stocks and shares. Like other companies,
it may issue several types of stocks or shares and may retain part of its profits
to build up reserves. Investment trusts grew to importance in the latter half
of the nineteenth century and have been prominent in directing capital
towards overseas investment.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the securities. Normally, the managers
sell units to the public and invest the proceeds in a fairly wide range of
Stock Exchange securities. The costs of running the trust are defrayed partly
by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit, and partly by a
semi-annual service charge which is taken usually out of the income of the
trust. The level of both charges is controlled by the Department of Trade and
Industry, whose authorisation is required before units can be offered to the
public; this is only granted if the trust deed is satisfactory to them.
The first British unit trust was formed in 1931 and by 1939 there were
98 trusts, with assets estimated at £80 million. This medium of saving has
grown considerably since 1957. At the end of April 1971 there were 2*38
million unit holdings. The value of the funds invested in authorised trusts has
risen from £60 million in 1958 to £1,593 million at the end of April 1971; it has
more than doubled since the end of 1966. There are now a wide variety of trusts,
both as to the range of investments covered and the ways in which they cater
for the differing needs of investors.
The Insurance
Market
Insurance
Companies
Although a certain amount of insurance is provided by friendly societies and
trade unions, most insurance services in Britain are in the hands of mutual or
joint stock companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
There are about 570 insurance companies incorporated in the United
Kingdom but most of the business is in the hands of about too companies.
This figure includes companies which became subject to the provisions of the
Insurance Companies Acts 1958-67 as a consequence of the extension of
those Acts to all classes of insurance business. Most British insurers write
several of the main classes of business although some specialise in one class,
particularly in life assurance, where about 100 companies write only that type
of business. A few specialise in re-insurance.
FINANCE
357
Lloyd's
Insurance Brokei's
International
Insurance Services
In addition about 170 overseas companies carry on business (and even more
companies are represented) in the United Kingdom, thus emphasising the
international nature of the London market. Some of the large British com¬
panies, however, have their administrative headquarters in the provinces.
In 1968 the total assets of the British insurance companies amounted to
about £14,832 million, the bulk of which is life assurance business.
There is no government control over the investment policy of insurance
funds at home and these represent one of the most important sources of funds
for investment in commerce and industry. Almost a half of the total assets
of British insurance companies is now invested in equity shares and debentures.
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of private insurers in London. The name
‘Lloyd’s’ is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established in the late
seventeenth century, where merchants with maritime and other interests
gathered to transact business. By the middle of the eighteenth century,
Lloyd’s coffee house had become the principal centre of underwriting
business and intelligence of shipping movements. Although in its earlier
history the activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the conduct of marine
insurance business, there has also been built up at Lloyd s a very considerable
world-wide market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business
in its non-marine, aviation and motor markets.
Lloyd’s is regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament starting in
1871; the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are adminis¬
tered by the Committee of Lloyd s, which does not itself transact insurance
business.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance, where business is
transacted by individual underwriters for their own account and risk and
in competition with each other. Insurance may only be placed through
Lloyd’s brokers, who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriters on behalf of the
insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd’s, who must transact
insurance with unlimited liability and who have met the most stringent
financial regulations laid down by the Committee of Lloyd s, are permitted to
transact business at Lloyd’s 5 these financial safeguards give a security behind
the Lloyd’s policy which is second to none. Since 1969 non-Commonwealth
underwriters have been admitted to membership of Lloyd’s, if they satisfy
the requirements. >
Today there are about 6,000 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped
into some 280 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents
who accept risks on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
In conjunction with its marine insurance business Lloyd’s has built up a
world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping intelli¬
gence.
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalf
of the insured; brokers are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a
valuable part of the company market. Many brokers specialise in re-insurance
business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between
companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as London repre¬
sentatives of the latter.
Two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine insurance business is carried on
overseas, partly by re-insurance on the London market and partly through
branches and agencies established in over 100 countries. The basic principle
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of this international business is that resources capable of meeting any potential
loss are instantly available for use in any part of the world.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the very
substantial assets of the companies, in addition to substantial reserves of
uncalled capital, and the deposits, underwriting trust funds and other re¬
sources of Lloyd’s underwriters.
The principal function of building societies is to supply long-term loans on
the security of private dwelling-houses purchased for owner-occupation,
though loans are occasionally made on the security of commercial and
industrial premises and farms. The funds of building societies are derived
mainly from the general public who invest in shares or deposits. The amount
of share capital is not fixed; shares, which have a fixed value, are not dealt
with on the Stock Exchange but may be withdrawn in cash if notice is given.
The Building Societies Act 1962, which consolidated a number of earlier Acts,
prescribes the general way in which societies must conduct their business.
The Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies has discretionary powers to stop
a society either advertising or accepting money from investors if he considers
that the way in which the society’s business is conducted is jeopardising
investors’ money. The rapid expansion of building society activity in the
twentieth century has been accompanied by a concentration of most of the
business in the hands of a few large societies. At the end of 1970, 481 societies
were in operation, with total assets of ,£10,819 million. Ten of the largest
societies, however, each with assets of over £250 million, account for well over
half of the total funds. The amount advanced on mortgage in 1970 was £1,954
million.
16
PATTERN OF
TRADE
Value and
Volume
Commodity
Composition
Imports
L 
TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
OVERSEAS TRADE
Although relatively small in area and accounting for less than 2 per cent of
the world’s population, the United Kingdom is the world’s third largest trading
nation, conducting over 11 per cent of international trade in 1970.
For well over a century international trade has been of vital importance to
Britain’s economy. Britain relies upon imports for about half its total con¬
sumption of foodstuffs and nearly all the raw materials needed for its industries.
Its exports of goods and services together represent about a fifth of the gross
national product. It is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aircraft, metal
manufactures, electrical apparatus, chemicals and textiles. It is the world’s
largest market for foodstuffs, and among the largest for metals and ores,
textile raw materials, petroleum and many other products.
Changes in value, volume, composition and geographical distribution of
imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
In 1970 Britain’s exports were valued at about £8,000 million (f.o.b., that is,
excluding the cost of freight and insurance outside the United Kingdom) and
imports at about £9,000 million (including the cost of freight and insurance to
the United Kingdom). Valued on the same basis (f.o.b.) as exports, imports in
1970 were also about £8,000 million. The value of both imports and exports
have approximately doubled since 1961, while the volume of trade (dis¬
counting price changes) is estimated to have increased by 57 per cent for
exports and 55 per cent in the case of imports.
The growth in trade has not, however, been even. There was a particularly
rapid expansion of imports in 1964 (14 per cent in value and n per cent in
volume) and again in 1968 (23 per cent in value and 10 per cent in volume)
after the devaluation of the pound. Exports increased steadily from 1961 to
1966, but in 1967 they declined slightly in value as well as in volume. Follow¬
ing devaluation in November 1967, they proceeded to rise rapidly—by 23 per
cent pound sterling in value or 6 per cent in volume in 1968; by 14 per cent
in value or 10 per cent in volume in 1969; and by 10 per cent in value or 3 per
cent in volume in 1970. From 1964 to 1967 there was a steady improvement in
Britain’s terms of trade, that is, export prices rose faster than import prices.
After devaluation, both export and import prices in pounds sterling at first
rose sharply and then more steadily and it was not until May 1970 that export
prices were higher in dollar terms than in 1967.
The value and volume of exports and imports in selected years from 1959
to 1970 are shown in Table 23.
The expansion of domestic agricultural production has reduced Britain’s
dependence on imported food supplies and the ratio of imported food¬
stuffs to total imports has fallen from 39 per cent in 1954 to 23 per cent in
1970 when imports of foodstuffs (including beverages and tobacco) were
36°
TABLE 23
Imports and
Exports :
Annual Figures
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
/2 0^2 million. There has been a similar downward trend in the proportion
accounted for by basic materials—from 30 per cent in 1954 to 15 per cent in
1970. One reason for this is the growing use of synthetic materials to replace
such imported natural materials as rubber, wool and cotton.
1959 1960 1967 1968 1969 1970
Value (£ million)
Imports0 c.i.f.b
Imports f.o.b.c/
Exports of U.K. produce and
manufactures, and
re-exports f.o.b.c d
Volume Index Nos. (1961 =100)
Imports
Exports
Unit Value Index Nos. (1961 =
100)
Imports
Exports
4,087
3,640
3,554
4,655 6,393
4,140 5,700
3,789
90 101
93 97
5,230
131
119
102
98
Terms of Trade* (1961 =100) .. 96
102 109
100 114
97 105
7,752
6,900
6,434
143
136
121
123
102
8,128
7,190
7,339
146
150
126
127
102
9,029
7,850
8,063
156
155
132
136
104
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
a The import figures are shown exclusive of purchases of United States military
Export/Impor^Bank'credit^^TheTffert o^the'seWansactlons7is3 shown in the balance
for under-recording of exports
i“ratifoTS^ index numbers; a fall indicates an adverse
”SVnT£aiance of payments basis, including payments for United States military
aircraft.
Imports of crude petroleum and lubricants are by far the biggest single
item by value—about to per cent of the total value of imports during the past
ten vears. In 1070 their value was £946 million. _ . „ . •
The most marked change in recent years has been the rlse’‘n
other industrial countries, in the proportion of unports of finished ma
factures, particularly capital goods and industrial components. Such import
rose from under 7 per cent of total imports in 1957 to 23 per cent in 197 ,
when three-quarters were of capital goods (including industrial components).
Imports of semi-manufactures have also been increasing steadily “d
i962 have formed a larger part of the total import bill than bas'c
partly because the countries producing the basic materials tend to embark
upon the subsequent stages of manufacture themselves. Imports
manufactured goods (including chemicals) totalled £2,509 million in 1970 and
accounted for 28 per cent of total imports. Manufactured goods impo
amounted to £2,070 million representing 23 per cent of the import bill.
More than five-sixths of Britain’s exports consist of manufactured goods.
Exports
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
361
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
COMMODITY COMPOSITION OF IMPORTS AND EXPORTS IN 1970
(Percentages of total values)
Textiles 4-9
Composition cf Food, Drink and
Composition of Engineering Products Exports
Tobacco Imports
Beverages 3-9
Fish and fish
preparations
3-6
Rawsugars
47
Machines for special industries 6 4
T ractors 3 4
Internal combustion
engines other than
aircraft 4-5
Other transport
equipment 10-3
Ships, aircraft and
aircraft engines 8-8
Scientific instruments 6 0
Commercial vehicles 5-5
By far the most important group are engineering products—in 1970 44 per
cent of total exports. Within this group, exports of many types of machinery,
electrical equipment, road vehicles, tractors and scientific instruments have
been increasing rapidly. The share of chemicals has grown fairly steadily,
reaching 97 per cent of total exports in 1970. The share of metals has been
fairly steady and was unchanged at 11*9 per cent in 1970. Textiles’ share fell
from over 18 per cent of the total in 1948 to 7 per cent in i960 and 4-9 per cent
in 1970. Exports of coal are now of minor significance (0-4 per cent), and those
of petroleum products constituted 2 per cent in 1970, a slight fall from their
level in the previous five years. The proportion accounted for by foodstuffs
which had fallen in 1969 recovered to its previous level of 6-4 per cent in 1970.
An analysis of the commodity composition of total imports and exports
and the composition of engineering exports and food imports is given in the
diagram above.
Trade between Britain and Western Europe has been increasing in recent
years, and conversely there has been a decline in the proportion of Britain’s
exports going to primary producing countries. In 1958, 27 per cent of exports
went to Western Europe, but in 1962, for the first time, these exports began
to exceed those to the sterling area and by 1970 they formed over 41 per cent
of the total. Exports to Western Europe increased by over 15 per cent in 1970,
following increases of about 19 per cent in 1968 and 1969. Exports to the
European Economic Community (EEC) increased by 15 per cent in 1970
compared with 18 per cent in 1969 and 24 per cent in 1968, and to the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) they increased by over 18 per cent compared
362
TABLE 24
Principal
British Markets
and Sources of
Supply, 1970
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AREA PATTERN OF TRADE IN 1970
(Percentages of total values)
IMPORTS
EXPORTS
with 22 per cent in 1969. Both rates of increase were higher than the average
over the past decade. . . .
Imports from Western Europe increased by 13 per cent in 1970 following a
rise of only 5 per cent in 1969, and formed about 38 per cent of total imports.
£ million
Imports from
United States and
dependencies
Canada
Federal Republic of Germany
Netherlands. .
Sweden
France
Irish Republic
Denmark, Faroes and Green¬
land
Australia
South Africa
Italy
Soviet Union
New Zealand
Western Europe
EEC  
EFTA“ 
Sterling Area
Developed Countries
Developing Countries . .
North America
Latin America
Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe
Rest of the World ..
Exports to
1,174-0
682-7
548-9
459-1
371-0
368-2
341-3
276-4
260-1
258-3
249-2
220-1
203-6
,411-7
,822-3
,405-9
1,459-8
,072-1
,387-7
,856-8
325-9
364-1
614-4
United States and
dependencies
Federal Republic of Germany
Irish Republic
Netherlands ..
Sweden
Australia
France
South Africa. .
Belgium-Luxembourg
Canada
Italy . .
Denmark, Faroes and Green¬
land .. • • • •
Switzerland—Liechtenstein . .
Western Europe
EEC
EFTA“ ..
Sterling Area
Developed Countries
Developing Countries
North America
Latin America
Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe
Rest of the World ..
942-9
502-9
381-2
377-8
364-1
346-1
339-2
332-9
294-3
288-1
239-7
221-2
209-3
3,313-1
1,753-8
1,276-7
2,217-7
1,198-8
1,018-9
1,231-0
283-2
258-5
722-3
Source: Department of Trade and Industry
Including Finland but excluding Iceland.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 363
Relatively, trade with other members of the Commonwealth and with the
sterling area as a whole has tended to decline. Exports to the sterling area
increased by 87 per cent in 1970 but as a proportion of total exports dropped
slightly to 27-5 per cent, compared with 30 per cent in 1967 and with 42 per
cent in 1958; there has been a similar relative fall in respect of imports.
Canada, Australia, South Africa and the Republic of Ireland, however, are
still among Britain’s most important trading partners, but since 1957 the
United States has been Britain’s largest single market and source of supply.
The proportion of total exports going to North America in 1970 was just under
16 per cent, slightly less than that of 1968 and 1969. Exports to Latin America
increased by 14 per cent in 1970 but imports from that source fell by 8 per cent.
Britain’s trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe though still small
in relation to its total trade has been growing rapidly over the past decade.
Trade with Japan continues to grow; exports rose by 31 per cent in 1969 and
15 per cent in 1970, while imports rose by 29 per cent in 1970 having fallen
by 9 per cent in 1969.
Invisible
Transactions
For nearly two centuries Britain has usually been able to earn a surplus from
its invisible overseas transactions, that is, transactions in services, including
the provision of finance. This has provided it with the means to pay for part
of its imports of goods and to finance the purchase of capital assets overseas.
Invisible transactions are divided for statistical purposes into six main
groups: government; transport (shipping and civil aviation); travel; other
TABLE 25
Britain’s
Invisible
Overseas
Transactions
1965-70
£ million
Invisible
Balance
Total Invisibles
Debits
Credits
Govern¬
ment®
(net)
Transport
Shipping
(net)
Civil
Aviation
(net)
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
+ 185
+ 156
+ 254
+ 355
+ 581
+ 576
2,684
2,797
2,983
3,439
3,713
4,284
2,869
2,953
3,237
3,794
4,294
4,860
-447
-470
-463
-466
-467
-486
+ 1
-10
+ 23
—20
—95
+28
+ 30
+27
+29
+41
+ 37
Travel
(net)
Other
Services
(net)
Interest,
profits and
dividends
(net)
Private
transfers
(net)
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
-97
-78
-38
+ 11
+ 35
+48
+272
+ 304
+ 396
+477
+ 546
+605
+435
+ 393
+ 385
+ 341
+ 501
+ 512
- 7
-23
-43
-60
-55
-45
Service and transfer expenditure.
Source: Balance of Payments 1971
3<H
Tourist Trade
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
services (which covers a variety of items including royalties, films and tele¬
vision transactions, financial services, and other commercial and miscellaneous
services); interest, profits and dividends; and private transfers (migrants
funds, legacies and private gifts). Table 25 shows the breakdown of the
figures from 1965 to 1970. Some of these figures are reliable (for instance, for
government transactions), others are only approximations. The total invisible
balance in 1970 was ^ million (in the five years to 1967 the annual surplus
averaged /306 million). Excluding government expenditure on services
transfers and interest, profits and dividends, the net balance was a surplus of
/i 062 million. Private invisible receipts in 1970 rose to M-741 million.
Earnings from invisibles were well over half the total from visible exports-
As shown in Table 25, in recent years there has been a considerable net
surplus on ‘other services’ and on interest, profits and dividends. About halt
of Britain’s receipts under this heading comes from investments m the sterling
area. There has also been a surplus on civil aviation services throughout the
past decade. Shipping transactions which had been roughly in balance between
1965 and 1968, were in deficit in 1969 and 1970. Travel credits exceeded debits
for the first time in 1968 and again in 1969 and 1970. Over half the net deficit
in respect of government expenditure relates to military expenditure overseas;
other substantial items of expenditure are grants to developing countries and
subscriptions to international organisations.
Tourism yields a substantial income from overseas; in the ten years 1961-70
overseas visitors spent nearly £2,600 million in Britain. For 1970 these travel
and tourist receipts, excluding fares, are estimated at about £433 mil ion.
United Kingdom residents on holiday, or travelling for business or other
purposes overseas, spent about £388 million (excluding fares) in the same
Year. Both receipts and expenditure in 1970 were some 20 per cent grea er
than in 1969. The continuing increase in both the average expenditure per
visitor and in the number of travellers visiting Britain caused travel credits to
exceed debits in 1968, 1969 and 1970. The estimated total number of visits to
the United Kingdom in 1969, including visitors from the Republic of Ireland,
was a record figure of nearly 6-5 million-more than twice the level of 1956
and an increase of 16 per cent over the 1969 level.
Britain’s national tourist organisation consists of four independent govern¬
ment-financed statutory bodies-the British Tourist Authority which is
responsible for the overseas promotion of tourism in Britain and for certa
general matters affecting the country as a whole, and the English, Scott
and Wales Tourist Boards which are responsible for encouraging the develop¬
ment and improvement of facilities and amenities for tourists in their respective
countries, and for tourist promotional work and publicity within Britain
Northern Ireland has its own statutory Tourist Board financed by t
Northern Ireland Government.
The English, Scottish and Wales Boards administered a scheme of incentives
for hotel investment until 1971 and now have powers to give financial assis¬
tance to selected tourist projects in Development Areas.
Britain’s prosperity depends on the prosperity of those who buy its exports
which in turn depends on how they sell their exports elsewhere. Thus Br ta
is a strong advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to trade and to this end
has taken a leading part in the setting up and subsequent activities of sue
organisations as thf International Monetary Fund (IMF), the General Agree¬
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Organisation for Economic
General Agree¬
ment on Tariffs
and Trade
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 365
Co-operation and Development (OECD). It has also played a full part at the
two plenary sessions of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment held in 1964 and 1968 and is a member of the Trade and Development
Board which acts on behalf of the Conference between sessions.
Customs duties on imports into Britain are divided into two broad cate¬
gories: revenue duties (to which there correspond excise revenue duties on
comparable British-produced goods) and protective duties. Purchase tax is
chargeable on imported as well as home-produced goods but in the main the
charge on imports is deferred until the goods are sold by a registered to a
non-registered trader. In the financial year 1970-71 revenue duties charged
on imported goods yielded about £2,720 million, by far the greater part of
which came from tobacco and hydrocarbon oils (petroleum products). The
yield from protective duties was £261 million, or about 2’6 per cent of the
value of all imports.
At the beginning of the twentieth century the only customs duties were
those imposed for revenue purposes on a small range of products. Certain
duties were imposed during the first world war (the McKenna Duties), in
1921 (for strategic reasons) and in 1925 (initially for revenue purposes) but it
was not until the Import Duties Act 1932 that any serious departure was made
from the principle of free trade. This measure provided a degree of protection
for British industry and, at the same time, a basis for negotiations with foreign
countries already in possession of a tariff structure. A series of bilateral trade
negotiations between 1932 and 1939 led to some modification in the level of
protection but in the next ten years, because of government purchase and
import controls introduced during and immediately after the second world
war, the tariff lost much of its importance. The substantial relaxation of
quantitative import controls from 1949 onwards re-established the tariff as
the main instrument of protection.
The Import Duties Act 1958 replaced existing legislation relating to the
protective tariff and brought it up to date in a single measure. The tariff was
recast into an internationally agreed form (the Brussels Nomenclature), which
came into use from 1st January 1959. Under the Customs Duties (Dumping
and Subsidies) Act 1969, the DTI is empowered to impose duties on imported
goods of any description which are being dumped or subsidised if it is satisfied
that this is causing or threatening material injury to a particular industry and
that such action would be in the national interest. The Act also empowers the
DTI to take provisional action where a prima facie case of dumping or subsi¬
disation and consequent material injury has been made out.
The United Kingdom’s protective tariff has been considerably modified in
recent years as a result of a series of international tariff negotiations held under
the auspices of the GATT, which seeks to increase the volume of world trade
by reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade, and by eliminating discrimina¬
tion in international commerce. Tariff reductions, and bindings against
increase, negotiated between countries under the GATT are applied equally
to all other GATT countries under the ‘most favoured nation’ clause.
As a result of the latest series of GATT tariff negotiations, the ‘Kennedy
Round’ (May 1964-June 1967), average reductions of over 30 per cent are
being made by the major trading countries in their tariffs on industrial goods.
The reduction to be made in the British tariffs on dutiable industrial goods
imported from the EEC, the United States and Japan will amount to about
37 per cent, 40 per cent and 34 per cent respectively. This is closely in line
with the reductions which these countries are making, which will affect well
366
Commonwealth
Preference
Preferences in
Developing
Countries
European
Economic
Integration
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
over 70 per cent of British exports of dutiable industrial goods to these coun¬
tries. Some reductions in the tariffs on agricultural goods are also being made.
The implementation of the British tariff reductions commenced on 1st July
1968 with the remainder scheduled for 1st January 1970, 1971 and 1972.
The principle of Imperial Preference was introduced into the United Kingdom
customs duties in 1919 and at the Ottawa Conference in 1932 agreements
were concluded with independent Commonwealth countries providing for
reciprocal preferential tariff treatment over a wide range of goods. The
Import Duties Act 1932 had already provided for the duty-free entry of goods
from the United Kingdom dependencies.
Most imports into Britain from the Commonwealth preference area (which
includes the Republic of South Africa, Burma and the Republic of Ireland)
enter free of duty although levies may be charged on imports of certain
foodstuffs from the Commonwealth. Some two-fifths of the value of imports
from the area enjoy a tariff preference of about 11 per cent (defined as the
difference between the full duty rate and the preferential rate—in this case
generally nil—expressed as a percentage of the import value). It is estimated
that approximately half of Britain’s exports to the Commonwealth preference
area enter free of duty and about the same proportion enjoy an average tariff
preference of 12 per cent.
In 1964 at the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) in Geneva, Britain declared itself prepared to extend tariff
preferences on a non-reciprocal and non-discriminatory basis to all the
developing countries if other major industrialised countries would do jhe
same, if the Commonwealth countries concerned would agree and provided
that preferences were not given in such a way as to impede the continuing
reduction of tariffs on a most-favoured-nation basis. The establishment of a
system of generalised preferences for manufactures and semi-manufactures
exported by developing countries was agreed in principle at the second
UNCTAD conference in New Delhi in 1968. The detailed arrangements are
nearing completion and many countries have already begun to introduce the
legislation necessary for the implementation of the scheme by early 1972.
Arrangements are being made to implement Britain’s offer, which provides for
duty-free entry from developing countries for practically all industrial goods
and raw materials other than wool textiles and goods subject to revenue
duties, as well as duty-free entry and tariff reductions on a range of processed
agricultural products.
The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) was set up under the Stock¬
holm Convention of January i960 by Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal,
Sweden, Switzerland and Britain, with the object of creating an industrial free
trade area between the members and of working towards a wider European
settlement. Under the Convention, protective tariffs and quotas on trade m
industrial products between members of EFTA were to be eliminated by
1st January 1970. The first tariff cuts were made in July i960, and duties were
finally removed (with certain minor exceptions) on 31st December 1966, three
years earlier than originally planned. Finland, which joined EFTA in 1961 as
an associate member, made its final cuts in December 19 7. was e
first completed free trade area in the world and forms a single market of almost
100 million people. Since 1959 intra-EFTA trade has nearly treblef .^hl ®
trade between EFTA and non-member countries has doubled. Iceland joined
EFTA as a full member on 1st March 1970.
Methods of
Trading
CONTROLS ON
TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 367
A free trade agreement between the United Kingdom and the Republic of
Ireland came into operation on ist July 1966. On that date the United
Kingdom removed all protective import duties on goods of Republic of
Ireland origin imported from that country. After ist July 1975, with certain
exceptions, the Republic of Ireland will not apply any protective duties on
goods of United Kingdom origin.
In August 1961 the British Government applied formally to join the Euro¬
pean Communities but negotiations were suspended in January 1963. A
renewed application for membership was made in May 1967. At the meeting
of the Council of Ministers in December 1967 five of the member states favoured
the opening of negotiations with Britain, but the French Government did not
agree, and the request for accession remained on the Council’s agenda.
At a Community summit meeting at The Hague in December 1969 the
heads of state or government of the Community nations reached agreement and
in a joint communique set out guidelines for the future development of the
Community envisaging its enlargement. Negotiations between the Council of
Ministers and the applicant states, Britain, the Republic of Ireland, Denmark
and Norway were formally opened in Luxembourg on 30th June 1970. By
mid-1971 acceptable solutions had been found to the major questions in the
negotiations with Britain including those of participation in the Community
institutions, transitional arrangements for industry and agriculture, Britain’s
contribution to the Community budget, safeguards for the interests of Com¬
monwealth countries notably the Commonwealth sugar producers and New
Zealand’s dairy and lamb exports, the future of sterling, capital movements and
the arrangements for accession to the European Coal and Steel Community and
Euratom.
In July 1971 the British Government issued The United Kingdom and the
European Communities setting out the main terms of entry and advocating
British membership. Given an affirmative vote in Parliament in the autumn of
1971 the Government foresees a timetable leading to British accession to the
Communities on ist January 1973. Negotiations are continuing with Britain
over certain outstanding matters including the question of fisheries, and
between the Community and the other applicants.
The export trade and virtually all the import trade of the United Kingdom are
conducted by private firms.
Methods of export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the
industry, the product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export
trade, especially of the smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through
export merchants in the United Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to
importers and consumers abroad through their own agents or resident repre¬
sentatives in the countries concerned; in other cases, sales are made through
a firm’s own branch offices, distributing organisations or subsidiary companies
established in overseas markets.
Similarly, in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or
domestic trade buy directly from overseas suppliers, while smaller firms may
find it more convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export
houses, commission agents, and the representatives of overseas firms.
Most of the restrictions imposed on the movement of goods and services
during and immediately after the second world war have been progressively
abolished.
368
Exchange
Control
Import and
Export Control
Import Licensing
Export Controls
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
Exchange control is confined mainly to transactions between residents of the
United Kingdom and residents of countries outside the sterling area. The
latter may settle transactions between themselves in sterling, and to comply
with Britain’s obligations to the IMF regarding freedom of current inter¬
national transactions, any sterling held on an external account is freely
convertible into other currencies, including dollars.1
The remaining important restrictions relate to the movement of capital
from the United Kingdom to non-sterling area countries. Because of the
balance of payments deficits, exchange control requirements for investments
outside the sterling area have, since 1961, been revised and made more
stringent although the improving balance of payments position made some
relaxations possible early in 1971. Exports of goods to destinations outside the
sterling area are subject to exchange control and, in general, have to be paid
for within six months in any foreign currency (except Rhodesian currency)
or by sterling from an external account. Control is also exercised over imports
to ensure that currency authorised for their payment is used for that purpose.
There are certain restrictions on dealings in gold bullion and on the use of
gold for manufacturing and industrial purposes. The buying, selling and
holding of gold coins does not require Exchange Control permission, althoug
their export remains controlled.
Exchange control policy is the responsibility of the Treasury, but the
detailed administration is delegated to the Bank of England as agent of the
Treasury; in turn, the Bank of England has delegated to the commercial banks
a wide variety of powers to deal with applications.
Under the Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act 1939 the
Department of Trade and Industry is empowered to prohibit or regulate the
import or export of goods.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GAT1 and the
IMF the United Kingdom Government has progressively removed quanti¬
tative restrictions from almost all its imports from the countries of the free
world. There has also been a continuing substantial relaxation of quantitative
controls on imports from the Soviet Zone. The very short list of goods on
which controls remain includes some items of special difficulty and a few
where restrictions are recognised internationally, such as arms, ammunition
and radioactive materials. They require a specific import licence and quotas
have been set up for many of them. Some quotas refer specifically to individual
countries and are usually shared out among exporters by the authorities of the
countries concerned. Others are accorded on an overall or global basis, and
are generally allocated by the United Kingdom authorities to United Kingdom
importers, usually on the basis of their share of the trade in the commodity
in the past. Apart from these quantitative controls, some further restrictions
or prohibitions are applied on health grounds (for example, on animals, plants
and drugs). There is also a general import restriction on goods from Rhodesia.
Except for the control necessary to ensure that exports to destinations outsi e
the sterling area are paid for in the proper manner most United Kingdom
exports are not subject to any government control or direction. 1 he few
controls that are in operation are imposed to supervise exports of military
and strategic importance; to conserve materials which may be in short
1 Following the dollar crisis of August 1971, certain special exchange control measures
were taken to discourage speculative inflows of foreign currencies into the United
Kingdom.
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
TO OVERSEAS
TRADE
Information
and Advice to
Exporters
Export Credit
Insurance
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 369
supply; to assist exchange control operations in preventing the export of
capital in the form of valuable goods; to ensure the humane treatment of
cattle, sheep and pigs; and to prevent the export of antiques (including
works of art) on grounds of national importance. Normally, individual licences
are required for specific consignments of goods subject to export licensing
control. Goods controlled for strategic reasons, not included in the category
of atomic energy materials and appliances, arms and ammunition, may, with
certain exceptions, be exported to the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic,
the Republic of South Africa and the United States of America without
licence. There is also a general export restriction on goods to Rhodesia.
The British Government1 assists exporters by its efforts to create conditions
favourable to the export trade and by providing credit insurance facilities and
information and advice about opportunities for trade in other countries.
Facilities exist for the repayment of protective duties paid on goods which
have been imported for export trade purposes.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult DTI offices throughout
Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts of Her Majesty’s
Diplomatic Service overseas. There are over 200 posts located in all the
principal cities and trade centres abroad and they supply the DTI with
information of every kind affecting trade with their territories.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial
conditions, pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities,
and generally assist the exporter to overcome any difficulties he encounters
in trade with the country in question, particularly those arising out of govern¬
mental regulations. These officers investigate potential markets for British
products, advise about methods of trading with particular areas, and seek out
and pass on opportunities for export business and enquiries for British goods.
Assistance is also given to United Kingdom exporters in appointing agents
and locating potential importers. From records kept up to date in London by
reports from its overseas commercial officers, the Export Services Division of
the DTI can provide information concerning any country on the prospects
for exports and requirements of particular markets, government regulations
affecting trade (including import restrictions and tariffs and duties on particu¬
lar commodities), methods of trading, local tastes and preferences in design,
and the commercial standing of firms with which an exporter contemplates
business relations.
The Government’s official information services overseas are used exten¬
sively to promote Britain’s export trade.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) is a government
department, responsible to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry,
which provides insurance for exporters against the main risks in selling over¬
seas, and guarantees to banks providing finance for export credit. It covers
more than a third of the country’s export trade. The ECGD is required to
carry on its business on a self-supporting basis and is therefore not a charge
on the taxpayer.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer,
1 Export promotion is also assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry)
and the Development Corporation for Wales. In Northern Ireland, the Ministry of
Commerce provides a liaison service with the DTI Export Services Division and the
overseas posts.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
governmental action which blocks or delays transfer of payment to the
United Kingdom exporter, imposition of new import licensing restrictions
in the buyer’s country, war between the buyer’s country and the United
Kingdom, cancellation or non-renewal of a United Kingdom export licence,
additional handling, transport or insurance charges incurred after shipment
through interruption or diversion of voyage or ‘any other cause of loss occur¬
ring outside the United Kingdom and not within the control of the exporter
or the buyer, and not normally insurable with commercial insurers’. Cover
may commence from the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the
date of shipment. . .
Policies may be comprehensive, covering all export business in all markets
(or in an agreed group of markets) on goods sold on six months’ to five years’
credit, or specific, covering large, single capital transactions sold on credit
terms of five years or more.
Trade Fairs
British
Export
Board
Over 300 exhibitions, of which about 100 were major trade fairs, were held in
Britain in 1970. Some of the shows attracting the general public, such as the
Boat Show and the Motor Show, are also attended by many trade buyers from
overseas. These exhibitions provide an important means of advertising and
selling British goods. . . .
United Kingdom products are shown at most of the large international
trade fairs throughout the world and United Kingdom manufacturers have
been prominent at the many specialised fairs held in Europe and North
America. Special displays of British consumer goods have also been presented
in hotels in North America and elsewhere.
Participation in trade fairs, ‘British weeks’ and store promotions overseas is
a form of export promotion for which the Government provides information,
financial assistance and, in certain cases, free facilities. (‘British weeks’ differ
from trade fairs and exhibitions in that they are primarily designed to promote
sales of consumer goods in shops overseas.) In 1970 the DTI assisted 6,000
British firms at 286 specialised and general trade fairs in 37 countries; and gave
practical help to 3 ‘British Shopping Weeks’, and to some 57 overseas store
promotions. The amount allocated to the DTI for these purposes has risen
from £60,000 in 1955-56 to £475 million in 1970-71.
A British Export Board has been set up to take over at the beginning of 1972
the full range of export promotional activities formerly divided between the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and the British National Export
Council and its 12 area committees.
The board will direct export intelligence work, the work on trade lairs and
other promotional activity overseas, the schemes for financial support for
firms to participate in missions overseas and for inward commercial visits to
Britain. The board will consist of businessmen and DTI and Foreign and
Commonwealth Office representatives. It will operate under the general
authority of the Minister for Trade who will be the President.
FINANCING OF In the nineteenth century, the rapid growth of British industry, commerce
INTERNATIONAL and shipping under the stimulus of the industrial revolution made Britain
TRADE the market as well as the workshop of the world. It became the site for the
chief world markets in raw materials (see below), freight, insurance and
precious metals. A sound commercial banking system and a flexible system
of central bank control have been built up, while specialised institutions such
as discount houses, merchant banks, accepting houses, the stock exchanges,
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
371
Commodity
Markets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
The Sterling
System
investment trusts and finance corporations have evolved to satisfy particular
needs for short-term or long-term finance. The facilities provided by merchant
banks and accepting houses, for example, have long been used to finance
shipments of goods not only to and from Britain, but also between other
overseas countries.
At the same time, the banks which were already engaged in financing trade
were able to assist in raising finance for longer-term ventures. British capital
invested in overseas countries has furthered their development, increased
their output and exports, and provided markets for manufactured goods. A
number of specialised institutions help in providing financial services for
overseas countries.
Britain is the traditional centre for marketing many of the world’s basic
commodities. Among the more important are the Baltic Exchange (the market
for shipping and air transport, grain, seeds and vegetable oils), the London
Commodity Exchange (cocoa, coffee, copra, hides and skins, rubber and
sugar), the London Wool Exchange, the London Metal Exchange, the
Liverpool Cotton Exchange and the Liverpool Corn Exchange. A soya bean
oil futures market opened in London in 1967 and a coconut oil futures
market in 1969. These markets not only cater for the import of goods for
home consumption but do much business in effecting transactions between
buyers and sellers in other countries. In addition to these formal markets,
there is scarcely any product which cannot be traded through an intermediary
in Britain. For example, London is the world’s most important philatelic
market and also the leading international centre for the sale of works of art.
The market consists of approximately 195 authorised banks and nine firms
of foreign exchange brokers all linked together by telephone in the United
Kingdom, and by telephone, telex and cable with overseas centres. The
turnover of the market has increased progressively since the introduction in
December 1958 of external convertibility for the principal European currencies.
The Foreign Exchange Market is subject to United Kingdom exchange control
regulations governing the purchase and sale of foreign currencies.
The London Gold Market, which had remained closed from the outbreak of
war in 1939, was reopened in March 1954, under the general supervision
of the Bank of England. All authorised banks may deal in gold but, in practice,
dealings are largely concentrated in the hands of the five members of the gold
market. The five members meet twice daily to fix a price for all transactions
which customers ask to have executed at the fixing.
A gold pool was set up in 1961 to co-ordinate the gold operations in London
(including supplying gold to private buyers) of certain European central banks
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Following heavy world-wide
speculation in gold at the end of 1967 and the beginning of 1968, the gold pool
was terminated in March 1968. Officially held gold is now used only to effect
transfers between monetary authorities where these are not replacing gold
sold in private markets.
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, several
countries tended not only to use sterling as their natural currency for inter¬
national transactions, but also to maintain central currency reserves in
Britain. When Britain abandoned the gold standard in 1931 these countries,
which came to be known as the ‘sterling bloc’ and later as the ‘sterling area’,
372
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
did likewise, and pegged their currency exchange rates to the pound sterling.
In 1939, after the outbreak of war, the pound sterling was no longer tree y
convertible into other currencies and the sterling area became more formally
defined as a currency area for exchange control purposes. The United
Kingdom imposes no exchange control on transactions with residents of other
sterling area countries though there is a system of voluntary restraint on
capital investment in Australia, New Zealand, the Republic of Ireland and
South Africa. Sterling became convertible again in December 1958 but there
is still exchange control on transactions, effectively capital transactions, wit
the non-sterling area. , \ -
All the Commonwealth countries (except Canada and Rhodesia), together
with Iceland, the Republic of Ireland, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, the Republic o
South Africa, South West Africa, the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen,
and certain States in the Persian Gulf, are members of the sterling area. The
main features of the sterling area are that much of the overseas trade of mem er
countries is financed in sterling, while much of their foreign reserves is he
in sterling. Member countries sell their foreign currency earnings in London
in exchange for sterling and purchase for sterling the foreign currency they
Within the total of the sterling balances there have been considerable
changes in ownership since the second world war, and there have also been
some sizeable fluctuations. Thus the balances of the non-sterling area have
fallen, while the balances of sterling area governments also dropped sigm -
cantly in 1968. This drop led to the series of agreements concluded between
the United Kingdom and the countries of the sterling area in September 19
bv which each country undertook to maintain an agreed proportion ot its
official reserves in sterling, and the United Kingdom undertook to provide
a dollar-value guarantee of the bulk of official sterling holdings.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Estimates of Britain’s balance of payments and its main constituent items are
given in summary since 1964 in Table 26 and in greater detail since 1968 in
Tables 27 and 28. The balance of payments statistics emphasise two indica¬
tors of particular importance. The first is the balance on current account,
covering both visible (exports and imports of goods) and invisible (trade in
services, investment income and transfers) transactions, which provides a
measure of how far Britain is paying its way abroad and thus adding to or using
up overseas assets. (Since 1945 Britain has usually had a deficit on visible trade
and a surplus on invisible earnings.) The second is the total currency flow
This is the net result of all external flows, that is the current account, investment
and other capital flows (including official long-term capital transactions, invest¬
ment flows, trade credit, changes in United Kingdom external banking and
money market liabilities in sterling) and other flows which are unidentified
transactions reflected in the balancing item. The total currency flow shows e
impact of all external flows on the reserves and debt position, that is how muc
is available to add to the reserves and to repay any official borrowing in the case
of a net inflow or how much must be financed by drawing on the reserves or y
borrowing if there is an outflow. Allocation of the IMF Special Drawing
Rights (SDR) and gold subscriptions to the IMF are shown separate y.
Table 28 gives details of the current account since 1968. Both exports and im¬
ports have risen strongly since the devaluation of sterling at the end of 19 7-
In 1968 the value of exports rose strongly but that of imports rose at about the
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
373
£ million
TABLE 26
United Kingdom
Balance of
Payments
1964-70
Current
balance
Total
currency
flow
Gold sub¬
scription
to IMF
SDR al¬
location
Total
Official
borrowing®
Official
reserves6
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
-376
-52
+ 83
-298
-288
+440
+ 579
-695
-353
-547
-671
-1,410
+743
+ 1,287
-44
+ 133
-695
-353
-591
-671
-1,410
+ 743
+ 1,420
+ 573
+ 599
+ 625
+ 556
+ 1,296
-699
-1,295
+ 122
-246
-34
+ 115
+ 114
-44
-125
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1971
“Drawings (+)/ repayments (—).
6Drawings on ( + )/ additions to (—).
TABLE 27
Current Account
1968-70
£ million
1968
1969
1970
Visible trade
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Visible balance
Invisibles
Government services and transfers (net)
Other invisibles
Private services and transfers (net) . .
Interest, profits and dividends
Private sector
Public sector
Invisible balance . .
Current balance . .
6,273
6,916
-643
-466
+ 480
+ 576
-235
+ 355
-288
7,061
7,202
-141
-467
+ 547
+ 832
-331
+ 581
+440
7,885
7,882
+ 3
-486
+ 550
+ 772
-260
+ 576
+ 579
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1971
same rate, while there was a 5 per cent deterioration in the terms of trade as an
immediate result of devaluation, and the balance of visible trade remained in
heavy deficit. In 1969 exports rose faster than imports, and there was a marked
improvement in the balance of visible trade, while net invisible earnings rose
by about 65 per cent with a sharp increase in interest, profits and dividends.
The result was a large surplus on invisibles, a small deficit on visibles, and
thus a substantial surplus on current account transactions as a whole. In 1970
exports continued to rise in value faster than imports and there was, for the
first time for many years, a small surplus on visible trade. There was also a
very substantial surplus on invisibles, producing a record surplus on the cur¬
rent account as a whole. This high level of current surplus continued in the
first half of 1971.
374
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£ million
TABLE 28
Analysis of
Total
Currency
Flow and
Official
Financing
1968-70
Current balance.
1968
Investment and other capital flows.
Official long-term capital . . . •
Overseas investment in UK. public
sector
Overseas investment in UK private
sector
UK private investment overseas
Foreign currency borrowing (net) by
UK banks to finance UK investment
overseas .. • •
Other foreign currency borrowing or
lending (net) by UK banks ..
Exchange reserves in sterling:
British government stocks . . • •
Banking and money market liabilities
Other external banking and money
market liabilities in sterling ..
Import credit . .
Export credit
Other short-term flows. .
Total investment and other capital flows. .
Balancing item 
EEA loss on forwards
Total currency flow 
Allocation of Special Drawing Rights ..
Gold subscription to IMF
Total
Official financing
Net transactions with overseas monetary
authorities
IMF
Other monetary authorities
Transfer from dollar portfolio to reserves
Drawings on (+)/ additions to (—) official
reserves ..
Total official financing
-288
+ 17
+ 16
+ 567
-727
+ 155
-124
-22
-158
-128
+ 83
-331
-102
1969
+440
-754
-117
-251
-1,410
-1,410
•98
+673
-667
+72
-108
+ 237
+ 77
-53
+ 156
-328
-33
-72
+ 375
+743
+743
+ 506
+790
+ 114
-30
-669
-44
+ 1,410
-743
1970
+ 579
-204
-10
+727
-714
+ 184
+295
+ 59
+ 125
+ 250
+ 23
-234
+ 114
+ 615
+93
+ 1,287
+ 171
-38
+ 1,420
-134
-1,161
-125
-1,420
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1971
The total currency flow was outward in each of the years 1963-68 and in¬
ward in 1969 and 1970. In the period 1963-68, there was an outward flow of
/3 778 million (including a gold subscription of £44 nulhon ^ the )
financed mainly by official borrowing totalling £3+34 million, but also by
transfers to the reserves of the dollar portfolio totalling £520 million; and a
reduction of £124 million in the reserves. Approximately one-quarter o
outflow stemmed from current account deficits. In 1969 there was a reversal o
the currency flow, and a rapidly increasing currency inflow reached conside
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES
External
Liabilities
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 375
able proportions in 1970. This inflow continued in the first half of 1971. During
these two and a half years almost all short- and medium-term official borrow¬
ing was repaid, and there was a substantial increase in the reserves.
Britain’s official reserves fluctuated during the 1960s, but stayed on the
whole a little above £1,000 million. In 1970 they began to rise, and in the first
seven months of 1971 rose strongly. By the end of July the reserves had reached
the record level in terms of sterling of £1,613 million which, in dollar terms,
was the highest level since 1945.
Britain is a participant in the Special Drawing Rights scheme which came
into effect in 1970 and which is estimated to have added so far some 5 per cent
to world reserves. Special Drawing Rights are reserve assets created and
distributed by decision of the members of the IMF. Any member of the IMF
may join the scheme, and its share is based on its IMF quota. Participants in
the scheme accept an obligation to provide convertible currency, when desig¬
nated by the IMF to do so, to another participant in exchange for SDRs up to
a total amount equal to twice the net amount of their own allocation of SDRs.
Only those countries with a sufficiently strong balance of payments are so
designated by the IMF. SDRs may also be used in certain direct payments be¬
tween participants in the scheme and for payments of various kinds to the IMF.
In recent years the United Kingdom has incurred short- and medium-term
debt to cushion the reserves against currency outflows. Britain has drawing
rights in the IMF based on its IMF quota which was raised at the end of 1970
to $2,800 million (£1,166 million). Britain is able to make drawings, subject to
certain conditions, up to 125 per cent of the value of its quota, and has made
such drawings on several occasions.
Britain has also taken part since 1961 in the international network of re¬
ciprocal credit (swap) facilities arranged between central banks. Facilities
available to the United Kingdom include one of $2,000 million (£833 million)
with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Under these arrangements each
central bank is able to exchange on request its own currency for the currency
of another country up to a maximum agreed for a limited period. It agrees to
reverse the transaction at a specified date at the same rate of exchange. The
currencies so obtained can be retained in the reserves or used in exchange
operations.
United Kingdom official short- and medium-term debt outstanding at the
end of August 1971 was £417 million all of which represented outstanding
drawings from the IMF. Thus, by August, the short- and medium-teim debt
had been reduced by £2,946 million from the peak of £3,363 million reached
at the end of December 1968.
The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and
liabilities1 is limited because a variety of claims and obligations are included
that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and in method of valua¬
tion. The inventory for the end of 1970 shows that Britain had a substantial
net creditor position estimated at some £3,600 million.
Identified external liabilities at the end of 1970 totalled some £16,970 million,
against assets of about £20,525 million. Total official short- and medium-term
liabilities to the IMF and other monetary authorities were £1,369 million.
Inter-governmental loans to the United Kingdom and other official liabilities,
1 Figures at the end of 1970, and for earlier years are published in the 1971 United
Kingdom Balance of Payments, produced by the Central Statistical Office (see Biblio¬
graphy, p. 481).
376
Inward Private
Investment
Outward
Private
Investment
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mainly a consequence of the second world war and its aftermath, totalled
£2,165 million. Of this sum £1,709 million was owed to the United States and
£353 million to Canada. Other public sector liabilities of £2,557 million com¬
prised overseas holdings of United Kingdom government and public corpora¬
tions sterling securities, holdings of Treasury bills and notes, local authority
mortgages and stocks, and foreign currency borrowing by United Kingdom
public corporations and local authorities. United Kingdom banking and com¬
mercial liabilities including liabilities in sterling, and in foreign currencies,
totalled £3,892 million.1 Liabilities in the form of overseas investment in the
United Kingdom private sector totalled £7,185 million.
Liabilities in sterling comprise both public sector and banking and money-
market liabilities within the totals above. Sterling held in the United Kingdom
by foreigners in the form of bank deposits, deposits with local authorities and
hire purchase companies, Treasury Bills and British Government securities
(where these were held by central monetary institutions and international
organisations other than the IMF) totalled £4,289 million at the end of March
1971. Of this, £679 million was held by residents of the non-sterling area and
£3,610 million by residents of the sterling area. The total of these liabilities
(excluding the counterpart of borrowing) has remained broadly constant since
the end of the second world war. They reflect the international trading and
reserve role of sterling and in part the financial services of the City.
Overseas liabilities arising from investment in the private sector of the British
economy rose from £3,165 million in 1962 to £7,185 million at the end of 1970.
Overseas investors in Britain are free to repatriate the proceeds of the sale
of their investments, including any capital gains that they may have accrued.
Earnings and dividends are transferable irrespective of their size. In 1970
the inflow of direct, portfolio and other private investment, including oil,
amounted to £727 million.
The value of overseas investment in the United Kingdom private sector at
the end of 1970 comprised: the book value of direct investment in Britain by
companies incorporated abroad—£3,300 million (excluding oil, banking, and
insurance); portfolio holdings of British securities—£2,100 million; the book
value of the net assets in Britain of overseas oil companies—£1,350 million;
and the balance of £435 million which included borrowing by United King¬
dom companies overseas and identified investment in real estate and in the
insurance industry in Britain.
About three-quarters of the direct investment of £3,300 million came from
North America and about one-fifth from Western Europe. Of the £317 million
inflow of direct investment into Britain in 1970 £303 million originated in the
non-sterling area and £14 million from the overseas sterling area. Foreign
investment inflow presents British industry with many opportunities to match
new competitive standards which in turn will strengthen the economy and its
balance of payments position.
Private investment abroad may take several forms: portfolio investment, that
is, investment in overseas securities including the loans raised by overseas
countries on the London capital market; or direct investment by the establish¬
ment of subsidiary companies abroad; or by acquiring an interest in an over¬
seas enterprise.
1 This sector covers the London banks operations in the Eurocurrency markets in which
very large non-sterling currency liabilities are broadly matched by non-sterling assets.
Only net liabilities of £786 million are included in the figure above; they represent the
difference between assets of £14,156 million and liabilities of £14,942 million.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
377
External Assets
BRITISH
GOVERNMENT
AID TO
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Although investment in the developing countries of the sterling area is in
general free from control, proposals to invest in Australia, South Africa, New
Zealand and the Republic of Ireland are, under the voluntary programme, dis¬
cussed with the Bank of England. Approval is readily given for financing pro¬
jects both in these countries and in the non-sterling area by borrowing abroad on
appropriate terms, and for financing from Britain where the project is expected
to yield substantial and continuing benefits to the United Kingdom balance
of payments. There is also considerable scope for the investment of retained
profits of subsidiary companies overseas and in recent years more than 60 per
cent of net direct investment outflow has been financed in this way from un¬
remitted profits.
Estimates prepared by the Department of Trade and Industry show that
direct investment outflow, excluding oil, was £547 million in 1969, ^311
million of this being placed in the overseas sterling area and £236 million in
non-sterling countries. Within the latter figure the flow to the EEC area was
^105 million, to EFTA ^14 million and to Latin America £21 million. In the
same year the flow to Western Europe of £139 million was more than twice the
flow to North America of £54 million. Direct investment outflow (excluding oil)
in 1970 was below the 1969 level, although still substantial at £486 million.
With the inclusion of oil, portfolio and other investment aggregate private
investment outflow in 1970 totalled ^714 million.
Britain’s assets arising from private investment overseas are estimated to have
been £14,400 million at the end of 1970. This compares with a figure of
£8,070 million at the end of 1962. Direct investment, including oil, accounted
for £8,950 million of the £14,400 million figure, the balance consisting of
£5,450 million of portfolio investment.
United Kingdom banking and commercial claims at the end of 1970 totalled
£3,607 million. Within this total banking claims in sterling and overseas
sterling area currencies were £1,905 million; suppliers’ export credit to un¬
related firms was £1,303 million. With the increase in recent years in British
aid to developing countries, inter-governmental loans of £874 million form the
largest item among official external assets, which at the end of 1970 were
£1,341 million. The latter figure, together with official reserves of £1,178
million, £3,607 million in banking and commercial claims and private invest¬
ment overseas of £14,400 million resulted in aggregate identified external
assets at the end of 1970 of £20,525 million.
Britain’s aid programme to the developing countries consists of loans and
grants for economic and social development, technical assistance, budget
support and contributions to multilateral agencies providing financial aid and
technical assistance to these countries. In addition to this official aid pro¬
gramme, an important contribution is made to economic development by
private investment and by private voluntary organisations engaged in relief,
development and educational work.
Since 1945 total official aid disbursements have amounted to nearly £3,000
million. The average gross annual disbursement over the four years 1967-70
was about £212 million (see Table 29). In 1970 the total was nearly £219
million, of which bilateral aid accounted for £199 million including £46
million technical assistance; assistance provided through multilateral agencies
was £20 million. Repayments of capital and payments of interest during the
year on loans made previously totalled about £59 million. The strategy for the
Second UN Development Decade, adopted in 1970, included a recommenda-
378
TABLE 29
Total Official
Flows to
Developing
Countries,
1967-70
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tion that each developed country should devote 1 per cent of its GNP at
market prices to total net financial flows to developing countries by 1972, or
1975 at the latest. Britain has undertaken to do its best to reach this target by
1975. In fact British flows to developing countries exceeded 1 per cent of
GNP in 1969 and, provisionally, in 1970. The Government does not accept the
need for a separate target for official aid, though it has announced its intention
to maintain official aid as a substantial part of total flows. Private investment is
also expected to play a major part.
£ million
1967
Bilateral
Commonwealth countries (including
dependent territories)
Grants
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Other countries
Grants
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Contributions to multilateral agencies
Total ..
Total, net of amortisation (as used for
UNCTAD 1 per cent target)
Interest receipts
189-4
168-4
56-4
29-6
82-3
21 -1
7-2
3-9
10-0
19-0
208-4
179-0
28-2
1968
1969
192-0 178-7
171-2
47-8
34-4
89-0
20-8
4-3
7-0
9-5
18-7
178-5
27-7
156-9
39-8
34-9
82-2
21-7
3-5
8- 7
9- 6
31-8
210-6 210-5
178-5
28-4
1970
198-9
176-2
36-6
35-5
104-1
22-8
3-8
10-1
8-9
19-8
218-6
189-1
29-3
Source: British Aid Statistics.
Columns may not total because of rounding.
Total net British official and private flows in 1970 amounted to 1-03 per cent
of gross national product; official flows were 0-37 per cent. Public expenditure
on economic aid is to be progressively raised from £245 million in 1971-72 to
^340 million in i974~75* This represents gross official flows only, the volume
of private flows, although influenced by government policies, is not determined
by the Government and is difficult to predict, as also is the future level of the
gross national product.
Bilateral Bilateral financial aid in 197° totalled ^199 million; over 43 per cent was in
Financial Aid grants and the rest in loans. Budgetary aid, £$ million in 1970, is provided in
the form of grants. Development aid is in grants or loans, depending on the
economic and constitutional circumstances of the recipient countries; the
greater part of it is in loans. The terms of new development loans from Britain
have been progressively softened since 1958 and a policy of making interest-
free loans to lighten the repayment burdens of the poorer developing countries
was introduced in June 1965* *97® ^*e total value of loan commitments
entered into by the British Government, excluding investments by the
Commonwealth Development Corporation (see below), was ^94 million and
of this over 94 per cent was on interest-free terms. The recipients included
India, Pakistan, Mauritius, Ghana, Turkey, Guyana, Ceylon and Indonesia.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
379
Commonwealth
Countries
Technical
Assistance
Where loans bear interest it is at fixed concessionary rates ranging from 2
per cent to 7^ per cent, and both kinds of loan may carry grace periods during
which repayments of capital are not made. Of all loans committed in 1970,
99 per cent by value carried grace periods averaging 6 years for capital repay¬
ments while the weighted average maturity of loans was 25 years. Britain more
than fulfils the recommendations of the Development Assistance Committee
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
made in February 1969, on easing the terms of financial aid.
Loans and grants are tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and services
from Britain, although there may be a limited element for local costs and for
procurement from third countries in appropriate cases. Between 1958 and the
end of 1970, 307 loans were negotiated involving a commitment of £910
million, of which £768 million has been disbursed. The recipients of the
largest amounts have been India and Pakistan. During the same period
bilateral grants amounted to around £975 million.
Historically, Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its
responsibilities towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis
remains on Commonwealth countries. In 1970 £176 million (89 per cent) of
the bilateral programme was disbursed to Commonwealth countries and
dependencies.
In the past, development aid to the dependent territories was given under
the Colonial Development and Welfare (CD & W) Acts, largely in the form
of grants but also in loans. When CD & W legislation terminated on 31st
March 1970, the total amount committed under it was nearly £486 million.
The aid requirements of the remaining dependencies, which are regarded
as a first charge on aid funds, will be provided under the authority of the
Overseas Aid Act 1966. In 1970 the territories received £18 million in
bilateral financial aid and technical assistance (9 per cent of the bilateral
programme), including about £9 million under the CD & W Acts.
An important role in development assistance is played by the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation (CDC), set up by the British Government
in 1948, which provides finance and management for development projects
in Commonwealth countries and dependencies, often in partnership with
governments or private enterprise. In 1970 the CDC’s borrowing powers
were increased and the area of its operations was extended to non-Common-
wealth countries. By the end of 1970 some £138 million had been invested
out of a total commitment of ^172 million. Of the latter, £30 million was in
the Far East, £41 million in the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder
in Africa. New investment approved in 1970 totalled over £17 million.
Expenditure on bilateral technical assistance (the provision of skilled person¬
nel, advice and training) has increased in recent years and was £46 million,
21 per cent of total aid, in 1970. The largest component of expenditure (£23-8
million in 1970) was on sending or maintaining experts, including volunteers;
the next largest was for students and trainees in Britain (£8-4 million).
Under the Overseas Service Aid Scheme (OSAS) and associated schemes
Britain meets the additional costs of employing experienced expatriate British
personnel in the public services of developing countries. The schemes cost
£15 million in 1970.
At the end of 1970, of the 11,621 British persons other than volunteers who
were working in developing countries and financed by the British Govern¬
ment, some 4,929 were engaged in the field of education, 2,536 in public
380
Multilateral
Contributions
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
works and communications, 1,284 in public administration, 956 in agri¬
culture and allied fields, and 990 in health services.
In addition, the British Volunteer Programme has continued to expand (the
first volunteers were sent overseas in 1958) and in 1970 there were 2,130
volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in developing
countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by a number of voluntary bodies; 75 per cent of the
British costs (£0-9 million in 1970) are met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 12,056 were financed in Britain in 197° under regional
programmes of technical assistance, by awards under the Commonwealth
Education Co-operation Scholarships and Bursary Schemes, and under the
various schemes of the British Council.
Britain is the second largest contributor (after the United States) to the
World Bank group of institutions—the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the International Finance Corporation and the Inter¬
national Development Association (IDA). The British commitment to IDA
in the three years 1968-70 was nearly £65 million; the proposed contribution
for the three years 1971-73 is nearly £130 million. Britain has contributed, or
has agreed to contribute, to the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American
Development Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the African
Development Bank. Britain has contributed £52 million to the United Nations
Development Programme since its inception in 1950 and has provided more
experts and training places under multilateral schemes than any other country.
Some 1,321 British nationals were serving in developing countries under the
United Nations and its specialised agencies in 1970. Other contributions
include those to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA), the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
INTERNAL TRADE
Britain’s internal trade can be divided into two broad categories: trade in raw
materials, capital goods and intermediate products (for example, vehicle
components) and trade in consumer goods, involving the network of distribu¬
tive trades by which home produced or imported goods reach the consumer.
(For the pattern of consumers’ expenditure, see p. 199.)
The latest estimates of the value of trade flows at current prices, to inter¬
mediate as well as final customers, show total sales of goods and services to
intermediate buyers amounting to -£26,616 million and total sales to final
buyers of £47,154 million, divided between private consumption (£23,129
million), public authorities’ current expenditure (£7,373 million), gross
domestic capital formation (£7,928 million) and exports (£8,723 million).
The metals, metal goods, mining and chemical industries sold predominantly to
intermediate buyers. The engineering industries sold mainly components to
intermediate buyers and capital goods to final buyers. About 70 per cent of the
output of the textile industries was divided almost equally between inter¬
mediate buyers and private consumption, while over a quarter went to exports.
Agricultural output was divided equally between intermediate buyers and
final buyers (mainly private consumption), while the food and clothing
industries sold predominantly for private consumption.
There have been a number of official statistical enquiries into the distributive
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
WHOLESALE
TRADES
RETAIL TRADE
Types of
Retailers
38i
trades. The latest censuses taken in Great Britain refer to the wholesale trades
in 1965 and the retail trades and certain service trades in 1966. Sample
monthly and annual enquiries are also undertaken, covering such aspects of
the distributive trades as turnover, stocks and capital expenditure. Most of the
figures given in the following pages derive from either the last published
censuses or the sample enquiries. A full census of distribution is to be taken in
1972 for the year 1971.
The first census of retail distribution and other services to be taken in
Northern Ireland relates to 1965 (see p. 384).
Only a proportion of the trade in consumer goods passes through wholesalers:
sales are also made to consumers through producers’ own selling organisations
(including their own retail outlets and mail order businesses); and other sales
are made directly by producers to retailers. The 1965 enquiry showed that a
total of 23,643 business units were engaged in wholesale distribution in Great
Britain; 3,435 dealt in clothing, footwear and textiles, 2,007 in grocery and
provisions, 2,630 in vegetables and fruit, and 3,469 in other food and in drink.
In addition, there were 8,282 dealers (wholesale or retail) in coal, builders’
materials, grain or agricultural supplies, and 9,117 dealers in other industrial
materials and machinery. The value of stocks held by wholesalers and dealers
at the end of 1970 is estimated at £1,670 million; expenditure on capital assets
during the year was about £124 million.
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according to the type of merchandise
handled. Fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to port wholesalers (who
sell to inland wholesalers at the main distribution centres) or, increasingly, is
sold by contract to fryers and processors, or direct to retailers. Fruit and
vegetables may be sold by growers to commission agents (who dispose of the
produce either to wholesalers or direct to retailers) or the grower may deal
only with wholesale firms. The sale of some agricultural products is regulated
by statutory marketing boards (see p. 273).
London’s wholesale markets play a leading part in the distribution of
foodstuffs, particularly imported supplies. Every year Covent Garden (see
p. 277) handles about i*2 million tons of fruit and vegetables, and over
340,000 tons of meat and poultry pass through Smithfield market; Billingsgate
is the principal distributing centre for fish. Others in London include Leaden-
hall Market (poultry) and Spitalfields Market (fruit and vegetables).
The co-operative movement in Britain has established its own wholesale
societies, the two largest being the Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd.
(CWS) and the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd. (SOWS), to
serve the needs of retail societies, membership being restricted to incorporated
co-operative organisations. The CWS had sales of £535 million in 1970 and
the SCWS had sales of some £82 million.
Since the early 1950s, many wholesalers have joined, either singly or in
groups, with numbers of retailers to form voluntary groups to help to preserve
the existence of retail outlets for the wholesaler and to give to retailers the
advantages of the lower costs of large-scale trading without significant loss of
independence. The 1966 Census of Distribution showed that about 27 per
cent of the turnover of independent grocers was attributable to wholesaler-
sponsored voluntary groups and chains.
Retail businesses in Britain may be classified under four headings: (1) multiple
traders with ten or more branches; (2) retail co-operative societies (see below);
(3) independent retail businesses, including for this purpose the small multiple
stores (that is, chains of stores with nine or fewer branches) and (4) department
382
Multiples and
Large Establish¬
ments
Retail
Co-operative
Societies
Independent Shops
Department Stores
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
stores. Other retail outlets include gas and electricity showrooms owned by the
area gas and electricity boards, and mail order houses (see p. 383).
The findings of the 1966 Census of Distribution (Table 30) show that, in
comparison with 1961, a larger volume of trade had been handled by rather
fewer shops. A notable feature is the continuing expansion of large multiple
firms relative to other types of shop. Independent shops, however, still account
for over half of Britain’s retail trade.
A very wide range is covered in the size of retailing establishments. Four
shops had sales in 1966 exceeding £10 million (equivalent to takings of more
than £4,000 an hour) at the other extreme there were more than 16,000 shops
with sales of less than £200 a week. In addition there were market and street
traders, whose volume of business may be very small.
According to the Census of Distribution there were nearly 74,000 shops
owned by multiples (including multiple department stores) in 1966 with
a total turnover of nearly £4,000 million. This form of organisation showed the
largest rise in numbers between 1961 and 1966 and their share in total sales
went up from 29 per cent to 34 per cent. Their turnover increased faster than
that of independent businesses between 1966 and 1970, and in 1970 their
share of total sales rose to over 36 per cent.
The share in total retail trade of co-operative stores dropped from 11 to 9 per
cent between 1961 and 1966 which was rather less than the relative decrease in
the number of stores. Between 1966 and 1970 their turnover increased slightly.
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisations controlled
by their members. Membership is open to anyone paying a small deposit
on a minimum share, which entitles the member to an equal voice with other
members in the society. Share investment by individual members is limited
to £1,000 (less in some societies) and only a low rate of interest is normally
paid on the shares.
In the past the trading surplus, after allocation to reserves and common
activities, has been paid out periodically to members in the form of a dividend
in proportion to their purchases. Some societies have used a system of
differential dividends by reducing prices in some departments such as food¬
stuffs. More recently a large number of societies, accounting for four-fifths of
total co-operative sales, have introduced dividend stamps redeemable for cash,
other goods, or credit to a share account, at different redemption rates.
At the end of 1970 there were about 400 retail co-operative societies.
Amalgamations are rapidly diminishing the number of societies (the total in
1958 was 1,015). The largest single society in Britain is the London Co¬
operative Society with 1-15 million members and a turnover of £90 million in
1970. Total sales of the retail co-operative societies in 1970 amounted to over
£1,100 million and accounted for 7-5 per cent of total retail trade compared
with 11 per cent in 1961.
Independent shops have been giving ground gradually in the face of increased
competition from the larger undertakings. The proprietors of many of the
smaller shops often have other means of livelihood. Average turnover per shop
has continued to increase, though by less than for the retail trade as a whole.
None the less, even allowing for a 15 per cent increase in prices, the average
independent shop sold more goods in 1966 than in 1961.
There were 760 department stores in Britain in 1966 with a turnover of
£653 million; 214 were owned by multiples and 308 by independents.
Department stores were defined for the purposes of the census as having 25 or
Recent Trends
in Retail Trade
TABLE 30
Retail Trades by
Kind of Business
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
more persons engaged in selling a wide range of commodities notably clothing
and household goods. Co-operative societies owned a further 238 department
stores in 1966, with a turnover of ^118 million.
Out of a total of over 500,000 establishments recorded by the 1966 Census
of Distribution, and shown in Table 30, grocery and other food retailing
groups numbered over 227,000 establishments, and the clothing and foot¬
wear group over 83,000.
Though the total value of retail trade in Great Britain (inclusive of electricity
and gas showrooms and mail order business) rose by a quarter between 1961
and 1966, rates of growth (measured in turnover) varied appreciably between
different types of trade although, because of the mixed nature of some of the
businesses, this does not necessarily reflect the growth of the sales of com¬
modities in which these shops specialise. The slowest growth was in general
stores, in the food and clothing sectors, and department stores. The fastest
growth was in radio and television hire, mail order business, gas and electricity
showroom sales of durable goods, sports and leisure equipment, chemists
and photographic goods and sales of automatic vending machines.
Type of trade
Grocers and provision dealers
Other food retailers
Confectioners, tobacconists, news
agents
Clothing and footwear shops
Household goods shops . .
Other non-food retailers . .
General stores
Total. .
Electricity and gas showrooms
Mail order houses6
Automatic vending
machine operators6
Establishments
Percent-
Number age
1966 change
1961-66
123,385
104,359
63,333
83,199
69,761
57,540
2,835
-15-9
-9-0
-9-7
-3-9
+ 5-7
+ 5-6
-24-4
504,412
-7-0
3,012
495
56
+ 7-9
-110
f 115-4
Turnover
£ million
1966
2,908
2,081
1,046
1,741
1,327
988
1,041
11,132
186
429
11
Percent¬
age
change
1961-66“
+ 23-7
+ 20-4
+ 31-0
+ 27-4
+ 34-5
+47-8
+ 11-9
+ 26-1
+ 50-3c
+ 89-2
+ 167-3
“ Adjusted for the exclusion of certain market traders and mobile shops in 1966.
6 Number of organisations.
c Excluding installation, maintenance and repair receipts.
However, the actual trends are blurred by the introduction into specialised
shops of other specialities, for example, clothing multiples opening food
sections, and vice versa. Though gas and electricity showroom business was
buoyant between 1961 and 1966, their combined turnover is relatively small,
amounting in 1966 to £186 million.
The real expansion in the volume of sales in Great Britain between 1961 and
1966, taking into account the exclusion of market traders (included in the 1961
Census) and a general increase in prices of 15 per cent, was about 9-6 per cent,
or an average of 1 -9 per cent a year. Sales by all kinds of retail business
384
Development
in Methods
of Retailing
Supermarkets
Automatic Vending
Machines
Mobile Shops
'Out of Town'
Stores
‘ Cash and
Carry'
Promotional
Offers
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
increased in real terms by 4*2 per cent between 1966 and 1970, when they were
valued at some £14,000 million.
The Northern Ireland 1965 Census of Retail Distribution and Other
Services shows total spending of £385 million through 22,000 establishments.
The value increased by 20 per cent between 1965 and 1970.
The development of self-service trading has been a feature of the last two
decades. In 1969 there were some 23,000 stores operating wholly or partly
on self-service lines, compared with about 9,500 towards the end of 1961 and
less than 500 in 1950. This development has been accompanied by a trend to
larger shops in terms of both staff and floor space.
Supermarkets may be defined as self-service shops with a minimum selling
area of 2,000 square feet. There were about 870 supermarkets in 1961, accord¬
ing to the Census of Distribution, of which 524 were owned by multiples,
308 by co-operative societies and 38 by independents. It has been estimated
that by the end of 1969 over 3,300 had been opened and were handling some
25 per cent of Britain’s retail grocery trade.
New forms of automatic vending machines have come to the fore since 1955.
Over 400,000 machines are in use. Sales from automatic vending machines
totalled nearly £170 million in 1970; about £100 million was accounted for by
sales from cigarette machines. Machines now sell not only cigarettes, sweets
and stamps but also hot and cold beverages (about £35 million), prepared
foodstuffs, stockings, paper-back books and other commodities, including
various types of fuel. Another form is the self-service petrol pump. Organisa¬
tions selling automatic vending machines (not otherwise engaged in retail
trade) numbered 56 in 1966, with sales of nearly £11 million.
Some 11,700 mobile shops1 were reported in the Census of Distribution for
1961, with sales amounting to £93 million. Nearly a quarter of this turnover
was concentrated in Scotland (where the density of population is lower than
in England) compared with a tenth of all retail sales. Co-operative societies
accounted for 39 per cent of sales through mobile food shops, against 16 per
cent in ordinary food shops. For the most part, mobile shops were concerned
with food sales; about 42 per cent were travelling grocers, and over 28 per cent
and 21 per cent respectively were greengrocers and butchers. Only a very
small proportion (about 6 per cent) were non-food shops, and these specialised
mainly in paraffin supplies and hardware.
A number of large ‘out of town’ stores are being opened, providing a range
of goods under one roof, associated with extensive car parking facilities, away
from established central shopping areas.
‘Cash and Carry’ shops represent a combination of retail supermarkets and
wholesale warehouses covering practically every form of retail trade. By bulk
purchasing and little spending on attractive surroundings or credit facilities
they can offer large price discounts to retail customers. The numbers of this
type of store have grown rapidly from 400 in 1967 to an estimated 550 in May
1971, with a turnover of some £500 million a year.
All forms of consumer sales promotion have been expanding, including
reduced price offers, competitions, gift schemes, and stamp trading. The
1 Excluding roundsmen and vans selling ice-cream.
1 Credit Cards'
Mail Order
Sales and
Direct Selling
Service Trades
Catering
Laundries and
Dry Cleaning
Motor Trades
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 385
stamps can be exchanged for goods but, by law, have to be marked with their
cash value and redeemed for cash on request.
A facility which is spreading in Britain is the ‘credit card’. Users are issued
with a card on production of which their signature is accepted on bills in
participating shops, hotels and restaurants. The issuers then meet the bills and
recover from the card-holder through a single account presented periodically.
Users of certain cards are also required to pay a regular subscription.
Mail order trading has been one of the most rapidly growing forms of selling
in Britain in recent years. The 1966 Census of Distribution showed that the
sales of retail mail order businesses had almost doubled in five years from
£227 million to £429 million. Turnover continued to rise steadily between
1966 and 1970. Between 1950 (when sales totalled £46 million) and 1970 their
share of total trade rose from 1 per cent to 4 per cent.
Sales by manufacturers direct to the public totalled ^144 million in 1961,
compared with £70 million in 1950. Mail order sales accounted for 24 per
cent of the former total, sales to employees for 11 per cent, and charges for
work done for 9 per cent. Other direct sales, including sales by door-to-door
salesmen, accounted for the balance. Included in these sales were items as
various as carpets, washing machines, brushes, books and soft drinks.
The Direct Sales and Service Association consists of 18 companies which
sell all their products directly to the consumers. Sales by members of the
association amounted to about £300 million in 1970.
Closely connected with the distributive trades are those which offer a service
directly to the public, notably catering and hotel trades, laundries and dry
cleaners, garage and motor repair trades, hairdressers and boot and shoe
repairers.
In 1964 there were 149,000 establishments primarily concerned with catering
(defined to cover public houses, canteens and fish and chip shops, as well as
licensed hotels and restaurants, etc.) with a total turnover in that year of nearly
£2,000 million. Hotels and holiday camps (excluding boarding houses and
unlicensed hotels) had receipts of about £286 million, of which £124 million
was from residential accommodation; in addition over £100 million was spent
on accommodation in unlicensed hotels and boarding houses. Nearly half the
total turnover of the catering trades was from the sale of alcoholic drinks.
Between 1964 and 1970 the catering trades’ turnover increased by 36 per cent,
rising by 8 per cent in 1970 alone. In addition coin-operated machines are
being widely installed in factories—some 60,000 beverage and snack machines
are estimated to have been provided in industrial sites—and in commercial
premises as well as in normal retail outlets.
There were about 5,600 commercial laundries, launderettes, linen and overalls
hire businesses and dry cleaning businesses with an annual turnover of £170
million in 1966. Between 1961 and 1966 turnover increased by 53 per cent
with particularly marked growth in launderettes and linen and overalls hire.
Between 1966 and 1970 turnover of this group, other than launderettes and
coin-operated dry cleaning establishments, rose by only 4 per cent.
There were nearly 43,000 businesses in the motor trades in Britain in 1967
with 51,000 establishments. Total turnover amounted to £4,198 million.
Traders classified as new vehicle dealers had nearly 14,000 establishments
and accounted for over two-thirds of total turnover. By 1970 there were some
386
Hairdressing
Shoe Repairs
Other
Packaging
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
23,000 motor repair and service traders, many of whom also supplied petrol,
oil and accessories. Between 1967 and 1970 the motor trades turnover has
increased by about 26 per cent. Sales during 1970 rose by 13-5 per cent to some
£5,300 million, of which sales of new vehicles accounted for some 34 per cent,
sales of second-hand vehicles for 16 per cent and other sales (including an
estimated £600 million for servicing and repair work) for the remainder.
Takings in hairdressing establishments increased very rapidly between 1950
(£38 million) and 1961 (£97 million), and between 1961 and 1966 to £136
million but between 1966 and 1970 they rose by only 5 per cent. In 1966 there
were about 48,000 hairdressing establishments.
There are some 8,700 establishments specialising in boot and shoe repairs
(excluding repairs handled through footwear shops); they had takings of £26
million in 1966.
Other establishments found in shopping areas and offering a service to the
public include those of radio and television rental companies (over 3,800
shops), about 15,500 licensed betting offices and over 3,500 funeral under¬
taking businesses.
British industry’s expenditure on packaging in 1970 has been estimated at
about £900 million, a rise of some 12 per cent over the 1969 level. The expan¬
sion of self-service shops, the spread of branded and standardised products,
and developments in partly prepared foods, for example, ready-washed vege¬
tables and ready-made cake mixes, have been major factors in the great changes
which have taken place in packaging methods. Paper packaging, including
cartons and boxes, remains the most extensively used (turnover of some £346
million a year), the fastest growing sector being paper sacks. Paper and board
account for about 38 per cent of packaging material sales, followed by tinplate
(20 per cent), plastics (13 per cent), glass (9 per cent), cellulose film (4 per cent)
and aluminium foil (3 per cent). New uses are being found for tinplate (output,
8,000 million cans in 1970), especially in sales of soft drinks and beer. Output
of aerosols rose by 20 per cent to 304 million units in 1970. Glass, aluminium
foil and plastics packaging account for about £83 million, £30 million and £120
million a year respectively. The use of plastics continues to develop; output of
plastics films is some 72,000 tons per year and that of polypropylene, and other
film, about 12,500 tons, while some 25,000 tons of low-density polythene
are used for bottles.
Hire-purchase The rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such
Sales as cars, furniture, washing machines, television sets, refrigerators and cookers,
has been greatly helped by instalment purchase. Instalment credit debt
outstanding to the main providers amounted to £1,356 million1 at the end of
March 1971; nearly three-quarters was owed to finance companies and the
remainder to durable goods shops and department stores. A few finance
companies which operate on a national scale account for a high proportion of
the total business.
The DTI has powers to regulate the terms of hire-purchase, credit sales
and rental agreements in order to restrain the expansion of consumer credit.
In July 1971 all restrictions on terms were removed.
1 Not included in this total is the debt of £203 million outstanding to certain other
instalment credit retailers.
Advertising
Public Relations
Consumer
Protection
Consumer
Associations
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 387
Hire-purchase in Northern Ireland directly financed by the major finance
houses operating from offices in Northern Ireland amounted in 1970 to
^22-1 million.
About £525 million is estimated to have been spent on all forms of advertising
in 1970; as a proportion of the gross national product (1 *2 per cent) and of con¬
sumer expenditure (17 per cent), it has fallen slightly over the last ten years.
About £365 million was expended on press advertising and £125 million
(including tax) was spent on television advertising. The remainder was divided
between posters, films, and radio. Most of the advertising is carried out by
advertising agencies, which, in some cases, also provide marketing, consumer
research and other services; their representative organisation is the Institute of
Practitioners in Advertising. The trade association for the industry as a whole,
including agencies, advertisers and owners of advertising media, is the Advertis¬
ing Association. It was responsible for the setting up of the Advertising
Standards Authority, an independent body whose objective is the promotion
and enforcement of the highest standards of advertising, in particular through
the British Code of Advertising Practice.
Industry and commerce have in recent years paid increasing attention to
improving public understanding of their work and objectives. Public relations
consultancy firms and the public relations departments of advertising agencies
provide general services, apart from the increasing employment by industrial
organisations and trade associations of staff specialists in public relations.
Their professional body, founded in 1948, is the Institute of Public Relations;
not only commerce and industry, but the professions, national associations,
central and local government are represented within the Institute.
Various legislative measures exist in the United Kingdom to protect the
consumer against specific abuses. The most important are the Weights and
Measures Act 1963 and the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 (dealing with mis¬
description of goods and services) both of which are enforced by local weights
and measures authorities; the Food and Drugs Acts 1955 and 1956 which
control the purity, hygiene and description of food and are enforced by local
food and drugs authorities; and the Consumer Protection Act 1961 which
empowers the Government to make regulations to ensure the safety of any
class of goods.
The Hire-Purchase Act 1965 and the Hire-Purchase (Scotland) Act 1965
provide safeguards to the consumer who buys goods on hire-purchase or
credit sale terms. The protection extends to agreements up to £2,000 although
most of the safeguards do not apply to credit sale agreements for less than ^30.
Similar legislation operates in Northern Ireland. As a precaution against
fraud, virtually every hire-purchase agreement on a car is registered with
H.P. Information Ltd., a non-profit-making company whose members are car
dealers or finance companies concerned with car sales; dealers and finance
houses can check with it in confidence.
The British Standards Institution (see p. 211) has established a number of
standards for consumer goods, and the Council of Industrial Design (see
p. 211) helps to foster improvements in the design of consumer goods.
A number of private organisations exist to further the consumer’s interests.
The largest is the Consumers’ Association (CA) with a membership of over
600,000. CA pursues problems of general consumer interest and conducts an
388
Resale Price
Maintenance
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
extensive programme of comparative testing of goods bought on the open
market. The association’s views and test reports are published in its monthly
bulletin Which?, issued to members.
Work of this kind is also carried out by some 80 local consumer groups,
whose representative body is the National Federation of Consumer Groups.
Other private consumer organisations include the Housewife’s Trust and
the Research Institute for Consumer Affairs. A general advisory service
dealing with individual consumers’ problems is provided by the Citizens’
Advice Bureaux (see p. 124).
The practice of resale price maintenance and its enforcement by cutting off
supplies was made unlawful under the Resale Prices Act 1964; some limited
exemptions for certain classes of goods (notably pharmaceuticals) have been
granted by the Restrictive Practices Court (see p. 202).
17 LABOUR
Less than 200 years ago, government concern with all aspects of employment
was at a minimum. State intervention came first in the sphere of safety, health
and welfare. The first factory legislation was enacted in 1802. The first
effective Factory Act was that of 1833 which set up a national system of
inspection to enforce its provisions. Trade unions—forbidden in the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries as a threat to civil peace and individual liberty
-—ceased in 1824 to be ‘actionable conspiracies in restraint of trade’. During
the nineteenth century new unions of skilled and semi-skilled workers grew
up, more soundly organised than their forerunners and more acceptable to the
public because their ambitions were more restricted. A number of employers’
associations, mainly local, were formed; unions and employers learned to
bargain together; and procedures for conciliation and arbitration began to be
agreed. Legislation passed in the 1870s clarified and regularised the legal
status of trade unions. In 1910, the first employment exchanges were intro¬
duced to provide a national service for putting employers in touch with
workers and vice versa. In 1917 the exchanges were transferred to the newly
created Ministry of Labour, which also became responsible for arranging or
providing certain conciliation and arbitration services on request. The
factory inspectorate was added to its responsibilities in 1940. This department
became the principal instrument of the Government’s labour policies in
Great Britain; it was re-named Department of Employment and Productivity
in 1968 and the Department of Employment (DE) in 1970; it is principally
responsible for industrial relations, pay policy, employment, training and
related manpower questions (see p. 51). In Northern Ireland employment
matters are among the responsibilities of the Ministry of Health and Social
Services.
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at the middle of June 1970 was
about 25 million, about 46 per cent of the total population, and included
about 73 per cent of persons of normal working age (15 to 59 years for women,
15 to 64 years for men). About 91 per cent of the men of working age are
today in or seeking gainful work. The remaining 9 per cent consist mainly of
those continuing their education, of the severely disabled and of some persons
of private means. The proportion of women of working age in or seeking
gainful work is much lower, about 53 per cent, as many housewives either do
not wish or cannot manage to take employment outside the home. Nearly 62
per cent of the women at work are married. Besides those of normal working
age, there are over a million older men and women still at work. The great
majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but about 1 *7
million are employers or self-employed.
Northern Ireland, which has 27 per cent of the total population of the
United Kingdom, has 2*3 per cent of its working population. The ratio of
working to total population in Northern Ireland is about 39 per cent, and
39°
Growth in
Working
Population
Deployment of
Labour
TABLE 31
Manpower
Position in
Great Britain
1961-70*
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
farmers and smallholders working their own holdings account for about
one-twelfth of the working population.
The working population increased slowly until 1966, and has since fallen
mainly because of the lower pressure of demand for labour and the increased
numbers in full-time education. Because of demographic factors and the
rising demands for higher education, the working population is unlikely to
increase much above the 1966 levels before the mid-1970s, even if the pressure
of demand for labour were as high as in 1966. The raising of the minimum
school-leaving age in 1972-73 is expected to result in a sharp fall in the working
population during the following year.
Though successful development policies in the less-prosperous regions may
raise the numbers above the levels forecast, it is clear that increasing demand
for labour must be met by better deployment of manpower and improved
productivity. Married women form the only substantial reserve and the
Government is studying the nature of the obstacles to employing those who
are willing to work and how they may be overcome.
The industrial distribution of employees in civil employment is shown in
Table 31. Of all employees about 41 per cent are employed in the mining and
manufacturing industries and only about 2 per cent in agriculture and
fisheries. Over 57 per cent of those in manufacturing are in the metal, en¬
gineering, vehicles and chemicals groups of industries.
Thousands'1
Year
Numbers in
civil
employment
Registered
wholly
unemployed
H.M.
Forces*
Total
working
population*
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
24,044
24,232
24,250
24,527
24,770
24,913
24,509
24,326
24,344
24,148
255
372
461
317
270
253
466
506
483
524
474
442
427
424
423
417
417
400
380
372
24,773
25,046
25,138
25,268
25,463
25,583
25,391
25,233
25,207
25,044
Source: Department of Employment.
a Discrepancies between totals and their constituent parts are due to rounding.
6 All figures are on comparable basis and relate to June: part-time workers counted
as units. , .
c The working population figures and the Forces figures include ex-Service personnel
on leave after completing their service.
Most industries employ women as well as men though not always for the
same types of work, for example, few women are managers and few personal
secretaries are men. It is illegal to employ women in certain jobs, such as
underground work in coal mines. The industrial groups in which women are
chiefly employed are: the metal-using industries; the manufacture of textiles
and clothing; the food, drink and tobacco industries; the distributive trades;
and professional and miscellaneous services.
LABOUR
Manpower
Research Unit
Unemployment
TABLE 32
Analysis of Civil
Employment in
Great Britain
mid-1970
39i
The numbers given in Table 32 as working in any industry or service
include those engaged on administrative, technical and clerical work, so that
the totals given for the production industries are greater than the numbers on
productive processes. It is estimated that in April 1971 in manufacturing
industries in Great Britain 27-1 per cent were administrative, technical and
clerical employees (the ratio ranged according to industry from 12-8 per cent
in clothing to 40 per cent in chemicals and allied industries).
The DE has a Manpower Research Unit (MRU) set up to examine the problems
of forecasting manpower resources and requirements by occupation over a
period of 5 to 10 years ahead for both the whole economy and for some parti¬
cular industries and occupations.
The MRU also co-operates with industry training boards on technical
problems of forecasting. Its forecasts are designed to help with industrial and
manpower planning, recruitment, training and careers advice.
The general unemployment rate in Britain as a whole in the last 25 years has
been among the lowest in the world—usually between 1 and 2 per cent—but
Thousands'1
Industry or Service
Males
Females
Total
Employees6
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing industries:
Chemicals and allied industries
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing and footwear
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures
Total: manufacturing industries
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Professional, financial, scientific and
miscellaneous services
National government service
Local government service
Total: employees
Employers and self-employed persons (all
industries and services) . .
Total in Civil Employment
298-4
397-0
333-0
3,494-0
348-9
123-6
497-6
1,227-2
6,024-2
1,235
321
1,287
1,150
2,179
347
590
13,831-6
1,383-0
15,214-6
72-0
18-0
139-5
1,009-9
318-7
350-9
364-1
519-4
370-4
415-0
472-5
4,503-8
667-6
474-4
861-7
1,746-6
2,702-4
86-3
60-9
279-7
1,500-2
3,400-0
201-2
251-7
8,726-5
1,321-8
382-2
1,566-8
2,650-7
5,579-1
548-5
842-4
8,572-6
361-0
22,404-1
1,744-0
8,933-6
24,148-1
Source: Department of Employment.
a Discrepancies between totals and their constituent parts are due to rounding.
6 The figures of employees include those temporarily not working but still on
employers’ pay-rolls and those unable to work because of short-term sickness but
exclude those registered as wholly unemployed. Part-time workers are counted as
full units.
392
Northern
Ireland
Placement and
Counselling
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
has been rising since 1966. It has been relatively low in the south-east and
Midlands of England, and consistently higher in those parts of the country
which have the greatest dependence on shipbuilding, coalmining, and certain
branches of the heavy engineering and metal manufacturing industries,
notably parts of Scotland and Wales, and north-east England and Merseyside.
These areas have been the subject of a series of measures of selective assistance
to stimulate industrial expansion; and counter-measures have been taken to
limit expansion in areas of manpower shortage (see p. 213)- The general un¬
employment rate in Great Britain in August 1971 was 3*7 Per cen^) areas
with the highest rates were northern England, Wales and Scotland.
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed but excluding certain unpaid helpers—was about 591,000 in
December 1970 (388,000 males and 203,000 females). The number of insured
employees was 516,000. The largest productive industries are agriculture,
engineering, textiles and clothing. Most of the agricultural work in Northern
Ireland is done without hired help.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in
other parts of the United Kingdom. In June 1971 it was 7-3 per cent of insured
employees. The Ministry of Commerce of the Northern Ireland Government
has wide powers (similar to those in Great Britain) to assist the development
and diversification of industry. It is using these powers vigorously in an attempt
to improve the situation.
EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING AND PRODUCTIVITY SERVICES
The main government employment services are provided in Great Britain
through the country-wide network of 1,100 local offices including nearly 900
employment exchanges of the Department of Employment (DE). The services
in Northern Ireland are run on similar lines by the Ministry of Health and
Social Services but there are some variations related to the much smaller area
of administration.
The employment exchanges provide a free and confidential service for
employers needing staff and for workpeople, whether or not already in
employment, seeking jobs. Information and advice on any employment
problem is available to all. Use of the service is voluntary. Employers and em¬
ployees alike remain free to use general or specialised fee-charging private
employment agencies and direct recruitment by advertisement or personal
introduction. Exchanges, including the specialist placing services described
below, handle the full range of occupations and deal with full-time, part-time
and temporary vacancies. Details of unfilled vacancies (or of people seeking
jobs) can be circulated quickly in the ‘travel to work’ area, or more widely if
necessary. Local employment committees, on which employers, workers and
other local interests are represented, are attached to the employment exchanges
as advisory bodies to secure the full benefit of local knowledge and the close
co-operation of employers and workers. . .
The employment exchanges offer a wide range of specialised services. Over
40 of the larger exchanges hold a Professional and Executive Register con¬
cerned with senior posts in industry, commerce, and the professions both at
home and overseas. The Register is also able to give information about the
professions and allied occupations to young men and women considering a
career and to older people seeking a new one.
LABOUR
Occupational
Guidance
Service
Youth
Employment
Service
Disablement
Resettlement
Service
393
A special commercial employment service (office and shop work) is avail¬
able at all employment exchanges and also at a number of small commercial
employment offices. In the hotel and catering industry a specialist service is
based on the Hotel and Catering Trades Exchange in London.
The Regular Forces Resettlement Service, in which the DE collaborates
with the Ministry of Defence and the voluntary organisations concerned with
ex-regulars, helps members of the Forces to achieve a satisfactory transition
to civilian life. Nearly all those leaving the Services are successful in securing
satisfactory resettlement.
In areas where there are large groups of hospitals, there are officers specially
trained to deal with the employment problems of nurses, midwives and those
in related occupations or who wish to enter those professions. Elsewhere
nursing employment work is done as part of the general employment service.
The Occupational Guidance Service has over 40 units in the main centres of
population. The service is available free of charge to anybody over the age of
18 who has left school and who wishes to take expert advice before choosing
or changing his occupation. A person needing help in finding employment is
referred to the placing service.
The Youth Employment Service in Great Britain is available to all young
people up to the age of 18, or older if they are still at school. Its main functions
are: to work with careers teachers in schools in providing young people and
their parents with information on educational and employment opportunities;
to give vocational guidance to young people in their later years at school; to
help young people to find suitable employment and employers to find suitable
workers; and to follow up the progress of young people in employment and
give them any further help or advice they may need. The Secretary of State for
Employment has responsibility for the service and is advised by a National
Youth Employment Council. Central administration is the responsibility of
the Central Youth Employment Executive which consists of senior officers of
the DE and the education departments.
The service, set up under the Employment and Training Act 1958, gives
local education authorities the option of operating the service in their own
areas. Where an authority provides an approved scheme, 75 per cent of its
expenses is reimbursed from state funds. Some 143 local authorities covering
approximately 80 per cent of the school population operate the service based
on their own careers offices. In the remaining parts of the country the service
is provided from careers offices of the DE.
In Northern Ireland the functions of the Youth Employment Service are
similar to those in Great Britain but its organisation is different in that parlia¬
mentary responsibility rests with the Minister of Education and the service is
operated by a statutory board composed of representatives of local education
authorities and other educational and industrial interests.
The Disablement Resettlement Service is designed to help disabled persons
to get and keep suitable work. It is available to anyone over school-leaving age
who is substantially handicapped as a result of injury, disease or congenital
deformity in obtaining or keeping employment. The DE is responsible for the
administration of the Service and is assisted by the National Advisory Council
on the Employment of the Disabled.
The help given falls under five main headings:
394
Vocational
Guidance
BRITAIN 1972'. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vocational guidance is given at local offices by specialised disablement resettle¬
ment officers (DROs) in consultation, as necessary, with the local disablement
advisory committees, hospital resettlement clinics and medical interviewing
committees, and also in the industrial rehabilitation units.
Placing in Ordinary Having regard to a disabled person’s qualifications and aptitude and to medical
Employment guidance, the DRO endeavours to find the work most suited to him, and where
necessary arranges for a course of industrial rehabilitation or training or both.
A Register of Disabled Persons is maintained, and in mid-April 1971 the
number registered was about 621,000; registration is voluntary. All employers
of 20 or more persons are required to employ a quota (at present 3 per cent for
all industries, except shipping in respect of the manning of ships) of registered
disabled persons. The number of registered disabled persons unemployed in
mid-April 1971 was 80,172.
There are 30 specialised Blind Persons Resettlement Officers (BPROs)
attached to offices of the DE.
Industrial Industrial rehabilitation is provided at 25 units (including one combined
Rehabilitation medical/industrial rehabilitation unit) run by the DE. Their aim is to provide
the final link between sickness and employment by enabling men and women
to adjust themselves gradually to normal working conditions and to receive
vocational guidance based on skilled assessment of their aptitudes in a practical
workshop situation. Attendance at a unit is voluntary and maintenance
allowances are paid. They also provide special short assessment courses for
young people finding it difficult to enter suitable employment and at some there
are work preparation classes for handicapped school leavers (run in co-opera¬
tion with local education authorities). The staff includes a doctor, occupational
psychologist, social worker, DRO, industrially experienced workshop super¬
visors, and sometimes a remedial gymnast, all under the general leadership o a
rehabilitation officer.
The Department of Employment gives financial assistance to two centres
conducted by voluntary organisations which provide similar facilities for the
blind, to four schemes by other bodies for the rehabilitation of patients with
mental handicaps, and to two centres for spastics.
Vocational Training There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government Training
Centres (see p. 396), educational institutions and employers establishments.
For the more seriously disabled there are special residential training colleges
run by voluntary organisations with the financial assistance and technical help
of the DE. There are also arrangements for the training of special categories
such as the blind, and for providing grants to disabled persons qualified to
undertake study or training for professional or comparable employment.
Sheltered
Employment
Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making company, provides sheltered employment
for registered severely disabled people who are unlikely to obtain work except
under special conditions. About 7,500 severely disabled men and women are
employed in 86 factories. Its board is appointed by the Secretary of State;
loans and grants for capital development and to meet operational costs are
provided from public funds. . .
The DE also gives financial assistance to local authorities and voluntary
organisations towards the cost of providing facilities for sheltered employment
for over 2,600 severely disabled sighted workers and for about 2,700 blind
workers.
LABOUR
Manpower and
Productivity
Service
Mobility of
Labour
Immigrant
Workers
Industrial
Training
395
The Manpower and Productivity Service of the DE, set up in 1968, offers
advice and guidance to firms seeking to improve their industrial relations. In
addition to conciliation in industrial disputes, it advises on the efficient use of
manpower, labour productivity, labour turnover and absenteeism, payment
systems and personnel practices. There are some 125 manpower advisers,
organised on a regional basis, with central consultancy and information
services.
As part of the policy of assisting geographical mobility of labour within
Britain to balance resources and demands, the Department of Employment
makes grants and allowances to help with costs of fares, temporary lodging
and acquisition of and removal to the new home, in specified instances. They
are available to unemployed workers moving to new employment, and there¬
fore settling, in another area; to key workers transferred by a firm into a develop¬
ment or intermediate area to inaugurate a new plant; and to local unemployed
workers recruited to new plants in areas of high unemployment and sent to the
parent works for preliminary training.
The Immigration Act 1971 placed Commonwealth citizens and foreign
nationals under a single system of immigration control. In general, people
coming to Britain for employment (including Commonwealth citizens who do
not have a right of abode, see p. 12) need a work permit issued by the DE.
This must be obtained by the prospective employer and issued for a specific
job for a fixed initial period, normally 12 months. People admitted may change
their jobs with the approval of the DE and normally their stay is extended if
they remain in approved employment. After four years’ residence conditions
of admission are cancelled and a worker’s stay is no longer subject to a time
limit and he is able to change employment without restriction. In addition,
Commonwealth citizens may be admitted for a limited period as trainees in
certain professions and types of employment, and foreign nationals may enter
Britain as student employees on a short-term basis to enable them to improve
their knowledge of English and widen their business or industrial experience.
Overseas doctors and dentists coming to take up professional appointments
may enter Britain without work permits for a limited period. The number of
work permits issued is controlled by the DE in the light of economic conditions
in Britain.
In Northern Ireland employment permits are required under the Safe¬
guarding of Employment Act (Northern Ireland) 1947 for non-Northern
Ireland workers. The Act defines Northern Ireland workers and subsequent
regulations make certain occupations exempt.
Under previous legislation nearly 4,000 Commonwealth citizens entered
Britain for employment in i97°* They consisted of people with special skills
and qualifications, such as doctors, dentists and science graduates, or people
with specific jobs to go to, for example, in the manufacturing, catering and
transport industries. About 19,000 foreign nationals entered Great Britain in
1970 to work in industry and commerce, 21,600 in the hotel and catering in¬
dustry, 9,700 for domestic work and 6,700 as student employees.
Britain, as a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, participates with 13 European countries in the arrangements
for assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain employment in
other member countries.
The framework of training in industry and commerce is mainly based on the
Industrial Training Act 1964. Under this Act industrial training boards are
q6 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
appointed to be responsible for the quantity and quality of industrial training
in the industry concerned; up to June 1971, 28 boards had been set up covering
over 15 million employees or about 85 per cent of those in industry and com¬
merce to whom the Act applies. Each board covers as wide a sector of industry
as possible to reduce costs of administration and simplify problems of co¬
operation between boards. It can provide its own training courses or arrange
for other organisations to provide training. It raises a levy from employers and
makes grants to those whose training it approves. The Secretary of State meets
the initial administrative costs of each board and makes grants towards cer¬
tain other expenditure: for example, for capital expenditure on new semi¬
skilled training places in development and intermediate areas. To advise the
Secretary of State on the administration of the Act and on industrial training
questions generally, a Central Training Council (CTC) consisting of employer
and trade union members, representatives of nationalised industries, educa¬
tionists, selected chairmen of training boards and others with a special interest
in industrial training has been set up. It also advises on the running of the
Industrial Training Service (ITS), an independent non-profit-making body
sponsored by the DE and the CTC. The ITS provides companies, employers’
associations and industrial training boards in any industry with help in the
identification of training needs, the formulation of training policy, job analysis
for any occupational categories, training programme design and assessing the
effectiveness of training.
Government The Government Vocational Training Scheme, administered by the DE, is
Vocational intended to supplement what industry is doing to overcome shortages of
Training skilled workers in industries of national importance as well as helping persons
in special need, such as the disabled (see p. 394) an^ ex-Forces men and
women, to fit themselves for suitable employment. Training is provided for
suitable persons over 18 years of age who are unskilled or whose prospects of
work in their existing trade are poor. (Employed persons as well as the un¬
employed are accepted for training.) Most of it is done at Government Training
Centres (GTCs), which are within easy reach of the main industrial centres
of the country, and between them offer courses in some 50 different trades,
with emphasis on those in which there is a shortage of skilled labour. In June
1971 there were 52 GTCs (to be increased to 54 by the end of 1972). Schemes
of training for particular trades are agreed with representatives of the em¬
ployers and workers concerned.
For the disabled and for ex-Regular Service men and women and the un¬
employed training in trades and commercial work is also available under the
scheme at technical and commercial colleges and private training establish¬
ments or by means of individual courses at employers’ establishments. For
severely disabled persons training is provided at four residential training
colleges run by voluntary organisations with government financial assistance.
During training, trainees are paid good allowances to maintain themselves
and their dependants. During 1970 nearly 14,500 people were trained under
the scheme and over 90 per cent of them were subsequently employed in the
trade for which they had been trained.
The expansion of GTCs has made it possible to use their facilities with
increasing flexibility, including, for instance, the provision of free training for
sponsored employees. Under this scheme employers can nominate selected
employees for courses to upgrade or broaden their existing skills. The DE
also arranges special six-week business training courses for Regulars and ex-
Regulars (mainly ex-officers) at commercial and technical colleges; four-week
LABOUR
397
Special DE
Services
Legislation and
Conventions
courses in industrial supervision are provided at a centre in London for non¬
technical warrant officers and senior NCOs (or other Service equivalent ranks).
In addition to full courses for a civilian trade, refresher courses and conversion
courses required by ex-Service men and women can be arranged under the
Vocational Training Scheme.
The DE also provides assistance with training for firms moving into a
development or intermediate area or expanding an existing business there.
The assistance includes grants for training carried out by the employer and
direct training of employees on the firm’s premises by staff loaned by the
DE. Grants are also available to employers in development and intermediate
areas who take on and train men and women over the age of 45 who have been
unemployed for more than 8 weeks. Another scheme of government grants
administered by the industrial training boards has been introduced to promote
craft and technician training in development or intermediate areas. Grants are
available to employers in these areas who provide additional off-the-job
training facilities for apprentices and technicians, or otherwise increase the
numbers of such trainees.
A special service to industry is the Department of Employment’s Training
Within Industry for Supervisors (TWI) scheme. Its object is to develop the
skill of supervisors in instructing and communicating in human relations, in
improving methods and in preventing accidents (there are separate programmes
for each of these) in the shortest possible time. There are special versions of
TWI, usually in courses of a week’s duration, for supervisors employed in
offices, retail distribution and hospitals, and also an in-plant training develop¬
ment service to aid selection and further the training of operatives as instruc¬
tors. Training Officers of the DE either give these courses or train employers’
nominees to enable them to run TWI courses in their own concerns. A clerical
training course to aid selection and further the training of clerks as instructors
associates management and supervisory staff with the training of students.
The E)E also has an intensive course for training clerical staff in export offices
in basic export procedures.
In addition, two-week courses in industrial instructional techniques for the
training of instructors are available to outside firms (as well as GTC staff)
at the DE s two Instructor Training Colleges (one in England and one in
Scotland), and at six Instructor Training Units attached to GTCs. A one-
week advanced course is available for instructors likely to benefit.
Vocational training services at GTCs, TWI courses, and courses at In¬
structor Training Colleges are available to trainees from overseas under
approved schemes (for instance, those of the International Labour Organisation
or technical assistance provided jointly by the DE and the Overseas Develop¬
ment Administration of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office).
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS
Though Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation
for the safety, health and welfare of employees and in providing certain legal
immunities for trade unions (see p. 389)5 until recently there were relatively
few legal restrictions on the right of an employer to hire an employee on any
terms which he would accept and to dismiss him at will. The employee in
general looked to his trade union to protect him. The determination by
statute of minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay was in principle confined
to those trades and industries where the organisation of employers or workers.
398
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
or both, was inadequate to negotiate collective agreement and to ensure their
observance. However, both the 1971 Industrial Relations Act (see below) and
other recent legislation provide considerable safeguards for the employee in
his terms of employment as well as working conditions. The Terms and
Conditions of Employment Act 1959, as amended under the 1971 Industrial
Relations Act, provides machinery for enforcing on an employer the observ¬
ance of terms or conditions established by collective agreement in his industry.
The Contracts of Employment Act 1963, again as amended by the 1971
Industrial Relations Act, requires an employer to give an employee com¬
prehensive information on terms and conditions of employment, including
information about his right to choose whether to belong to a trade union and
the procedure available to him where he has a grievance about his employ¬
ment; it also lays down the right of both employers and employees to minimum
periods of notice when employment is to be terminated. Under the Redun¬
dancy Payments Acts 1965 and 1969 employees with a minimum period of
service of two years are entitled to lump sum payments if their jobs cease to
exist (for example, because of technological improvements or because of a
fall in demand) and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the
cost being partly met from a fund subscribed to by industry as a whole. The
1971 Industrial Relations Act will give protection against unfair dismissal by
providing machinery under which an employee may bring an action against an
employer for unfair dismissal, and seek compensation. The 1971 Industrial
Relations Act will also give new legal support to the right to trade union organisa¬
tion by requiring an employer to recognise a trade union where that is the wish
of his workers, expressed in a ballot and after investigation by the Commission
on Industrial Relations and by making it an unfair industrial practice (see
p. 407) to refuse to employ a person because he is a trade union member. 1 he
Act also lays down that written collective agreements between trade unions or
other organisations of workers on the one hand, and employers or organisa¬
tions of employers on the other, are to be considered legally binding unless they
contain express provisions to the contrary. The Race Relations Act 1968 (see
p. 148) makes it illegal for an employer to discriminate on the grounds of race
colour or national origin in the engagement, dismissal or employment of
Other legislation prescribes minimum standards of safety, health and
welfare in most places of employment. 1 However, it is recognised that the causes
of many accidents are not amenable to statutory control. Therefore, volun ary
action taken by employer organisations, often in association with trade unions,
The further considerations which affect workers’ satisfaction with their
jobs and promote harmony between employers and employed, which can be
summed up as ‘good human relations’ between management and individual
employees, are hardly susceptible to codification; they have been recognised
for some time and are receiving increasing attention from managements an
from voluntary and official organisations.
Wage Rates
and Earnings
inimum or standard time rates for the lowest-rated manual workers, as
termined by agreements or by statutory orders vary between £0'1 25*^
D-52i an hour for men and between £o-20 and £0-46^ for women. Actual
1 A Committee on Safety and Health at Work is examining existing provisions and
practices, and is expected to submit its findings some time in 1972.
LABOUR
399
A = April 0=October
earnings are usually higher. Higher rates are often paid, and piece rates,1
shift rates and overtime rates raise the level of average earnings.
On the basis of the latest survey in a series conducted regularly by the DE
into earnings and hours of work in manufacturing industries and some non¬
manufacturing industries throughout Britain, the average earnings of full¬
time male adult manual workers in October 1970 were ^o-6i^ an hour and
£28-05 a week. Full-time women manual workers at the same date earned an
average of ^0-37 an hour and ^13’99 a week.
Minimum time rates for women manual workers tend to be lower than the
corresponding male rate, though the gap is gradually closing. Women’s
earnings are markedly lower than those of men, partly because on average they
work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates, but also because
a smaller proportion of women do skilled work. The Equal Pay Act 1970
provides that from 29th December 1975 a woman doing the same or broadly
equivalent work to a man qualifies for equal pay and conditions of employ¬
ment.
Earnings in coalmining and in railway work not covered by the regular
survey are somewhat above the average and below the average in agriculture.
1 Piece rates are of declining importance in manufacturing industries, where methods
of production tend to dictate the output of a worker, not his or her own skill or energy.
400
Salaries and
Fees
Hours of Work
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Between end-1957 and October 1970 average weekly wage rates increased by
89 per cent and average weekly earnings of manual workers by 125 per cent.
Part of the increase has been offset by a rise in prices of about 57 per cent.
The trends of manual workers’ earnings, wage rates, retail prices, wages and
salaries from 1958 to 1970 are shown in the diagram above.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary, often on a scale carrying annual increases, and such careers
generally afford opportunities for promotion to posts with higher remunera¬
tion. Starting salaries may be in the range of ^800-^1,000 (lower for trainees
in their teens and higher for some graduates entering industry). The average
weekly earnings of male administrative, technical and clerical employees in
October 1970 were found by a Department of Employment survey to be £36 • 12.
The average weekly figure for females was ^19-59.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
are in the range of £2,750 to ,£7,000 a year. The posts with salaries in the
range of £8,000 to ,£15,000 a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, top-
ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in government depart¬
ments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers,
some persons outstanding in their professions and in the higher managerial
posts in industry, commerce and banking. A few persons in business draw
still higher salaries, while the earnings of star entertainers and certain other
very successful people exceed £20,000 a year.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices,
administrative posts and professions. They are paid the same salary for
doing the same work in journalism, broadcasting and architecture, and as
Ministers of the Crown, Members of Parliament, salaried magistrates and
solicitors. Women in independent professions are not expected to charge
lower fees than men. The principle of equal pay for men and women applies
generally for non-manual work in the public sector, but is still exceptional in
the private sector. The Equal Pay Act 197® will enforce the principle in all
occupations from the end of 1975.
The average earnings of all salaried employees increased by 151-6 per cent
between 1955 and 1970.
In October 1970 the number of hours actually worked by manual workers
averaged 45 -7 for full-time men and 37-9 for women on full-time work. Agreed
weekly hours are in the range 40 to 42 and are generally worked as either
a five-day or a five-and-a-half-day week according to the industry and the
rule of the particular establishment. Hours actually worked by men are
somewhat longer owing to overtime working.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for
women and younger persons in a number of industries or trades the maximum
permitted, with limited exceptions, being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a
day (9 hours a day for 6-day-week workers) in premises covered by the
Factories Act (see p. 401) for adult women over 18 and young people between
16 and 18; young people under 16 are limited to 44 hours a week. The
employment of women and young people at night is prohibited in industrial
undertakings, except that in certain continuous process industries young men
over 16 may, subject to certain conditions, be so employed. The DE can make
exemptions from these restrictions on grounds of public interest. In general
the hours of work of adult men are not restricted by statute.
LABOUR
Holidays with
Pay and Bank
Holidays
‘Fringe*
Benefits
Office of
Manpower
Economics
SAFETY
Factories,
Offices, Shops
and Railway
Premises
401
With a few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in indus¬
tries covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays
of at least 12 days or two weeks. Over half of the number of manual workers
are now entitled to paid annual holidays of three weeks. Moreover, payment is
made for public holidays, which are as follows: in addition to Good Friday
and Christmas Day there are public holidays in England and Wales on Easter
Monday, the last Monday in May or first in June, the last Monday in August
or first in September and the first weekday after Christmas (Boxing Day); and
in Scotland on New Year’s Day, the last Monday in May or first in June and
the last Monday in August or first in September.1 Northern Ireland observes
all the English holidays and, in addition, has a holiday on St. Patrick’s Day,
17th March, and on 12th July (commemorating the Battle of the Boyne, 1690);
the Tuesday after Easter is also a customary holiday for industry and trade.
Many agreements provide that payments should also be made for specially
proclaimed holidays.
In some industries agreements provide for extended holidays related to
length of service, work status, or both.
A variety of additional benefits in monetary form exist in varying degree. It
has been estimated that in 1970 15-7 million employees were covered by
occupational sick pay schemes, and about 11-5 million by occupational pension
schemes (additional or complementary to the State schemes, see p. 129). A
smaller number are covered by schemes for redundancy payments above the
statutory minimum (see p. 398). Such ‘fringe’ benefits are rather more usual
among clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary than
among manual workers with a chance to earn overtime and other additions
to their pay. The former also tend to get longer holidays. Senior members
of firms may use a company car. Some firms provide for profit-sharing.
The Office of Manpower Economics was established in April 1971 as an
independent non-statutory body, with three functions, namely, acting as
secretariat for the three review bodies set up to advise on the remuneration of
certain groups in the public sector for which negotiating machinery is not
appropriate, such as, Members of Parliament, the Judiciary, the Armed
Forces, and doctors and dentists; servicing enquiries on particular pay
structures and related problems; and carrying out research on more general
matters affecting pay and manpower, either at the request or with the approval
of ministers.
Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their
employees and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a
duty of care towards each other. In addition, minimum required standards
of safety in certain kinds of workplaces or work are laid down under a number
of statutes; some of these also deal with health and welfare.
About 207,000 industrial premises (factories, warehouses, shipyards and
docks) come under the Factories Act 1961 (consolidating earlier legislation),
which is administered by the DE and enforced by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate
of Factories, which forms part of the DE. About 750,000 premises come under
the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, which is also administered by
the DE; enforcement is shared by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Factories and
1 The appointed dates for the spring and autumn public holidays in 1972 are 29th
May and 28th August.
402
Other Work
Premises
Prevention
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
local authorities. Under these Acts, anyone intending to employ other people
in industrial or commercial premises to which the Acts apply has to notify the
enforcing authority of his intention before he begins to employ people^ and
every fatal accident and every accident causing more than three days’ in¬
capacity must be reported; under the Factories Act provision is also made for
compulsory notification and for investigation of certain dangerous occur-
rences.
The Acts are designed to secure the health, safety and welfare of employed
persons, and a wide range of provisions in the Acts and in regulations,
according to the nature of the premises, deal with such matters as the fencing
of machinery; precautions against fire and special risks; the safe condition of
the premises, cleanliness, lighting, temperature and ventilation. The Factories
Act also includes provisions for precautions against dangerous substances and
about the employment of women and young persons.
Comparable provision with appropriate variations covers mines and
quarries under the Mines and Quarries Act 1954; two statutes are concerned
with agriculture—the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act 1952 and the
Agriculture (Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions) Act 1956; and specialised
statutes and delegated legislation are concerned with transport—the Railway
Employment (Prevention of Accidents) Act 1900, the Merchant Shipping
Acts, the Road Traffic Acts and the Air Navigation Order and Regulations.
As with the Factories Act these other provisions are, with some exceptions,
enforced through inspectorates—the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate (part
of the Department of Trade and Industry, which is responsible for safety in
mines and quarries), the Agricultural Inspectorate of the agricultural depart¬
ments, and, for railways, the Railway Employment Inspectorate of the
Department of the Environment. The Department of Trade and Industry is
responsible for administering the Merchant Shipping Acts and for safety in air
transport (most of the powers in respect of air worthiness are delegated to the
Air Registration Board, see p. 313), and the Department of the Environment is
responsible for road and rail transport safety matters.
Safety requirements in hotels, places of entertainment or educational establish¬
ments are covered by the 1971 Fire Precautions Act or (in respect of their
offices and shops) by the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act. The DE
has no statutory responsibility in regard to safety in workshops or laboratories
in educational establishments, though it keeps in touch with university authori¬
ties and the education departments. Employers, however, are bound by their
common law obligation to provide a safe system of work, and employers and
educational authorities may voluntarily seek the advice and help of the Factory
Inspectorate, which is given freely on request.
The voluntary accident prevention movement is strongly supported by the
Factory Inspectorate. Inspectors enquire into notified accidents and safety
aspects of machine design and specification, circulate expert advice by personal
exhortation, lectures and literature, and encourage the appointment of safety
officers and the formation of works safety committees. The Factory Inspector¬
ate maintains an industrial health and safety centre in London, at which
various types of machinery demonstrating the effectiveness of guards are
displayed, as well as a wide range of protective clothing and equipment. The
DE also actively encourages the development of voluntary central organisa¬
tion within each industry at national level for the consideration of safety
matters and the formulation of policy and accident prevention.
LABOUR
Advisory Bodies
Training for
Safety
Other Measures
4°3
Organisations in industry are now concerning themselves to an increasing
extent with the promotion of safety at work and the provision of information
and advisory services to their members. They participate also in joint standing
and advisory committees appointed by the Secretary of State. Representatives
of the Trades Union Congress, the Confederation of British Industry, the
nationalised industries and other interests meet on the Industrial Safety
Advisory Council under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State.
Training for safety is an important facet of the accident prevention effort and,
to help in this work, the DE provides a safety course in its TWI scheme (see
p. 397) and the Industrial Training Boards (see p. 395) include specific
provisions for safety training in their general training recommendations.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) and the British
Safety Council are the major national voluntary bodies concerned with
industrial accident prevention. RoSPA provides a variety of safety courses
for special needs mainly at its Industrial Safety Training Centre in Birmingham
and also helps the accident prevention movement by providing publicity and
organising conferences; its regional industrial safety officers work to promote
safety activity among top-level managers. The British Safety Council is
mainly concerned with industrial safety, provides publicity and offers safety
training courses. Other courses are organised by local accident prevention
groups and organisations such as the Federation of Civil Engineering Con¬
tractors. A number of the local accident prevention groups are affiliated to
either RoSPA or to the British Safety Council. These groups serve as forums
where questions of industrial safety can be examined and knowledge of
accident prevention exchanged.
A substantial amount of research is being done by industry, universities
and other academic bodies, and government research organisations into
problems of guarding machines, ergonomics, safe handling, electrical hazards,
protective personal equipment, construction methods, fires and explosions,
psychological factors and causes of accidents, both generally and in particular
sectors of industry. A register of research into industrial health and safety
matters has been compiled by the DE to give an indication of the scale and
nature of research being undertaken. Industrial research associations include
amongst their more purely economic research projects the improvement of
working conditions and the reduction of hazards.
The National Coal Board has its own safety organisation—a Standing
Committee on Safety, a chief safety engineer, and safety engineers at divisions,
areas and the largest collieries. It conducts courses of safety training for
workmen and officials and is constantly on the alert for new methods of
reducing risks. Its research programme includes a number of projects with a
direct bearing on safety.
The Department of Trade and Industry has a statutory responsibility for
research concerning the safety and health of coal miners. This responsibility
is largely exercised through its Safety in Mines Research Establishment.
To safeguard the many interests which might be adversely affected by the
use of chemicals in agriculture and food storage, a voluntary scheme is
operated by the Government with the help of an advisory committee and with
the full co-operation of the chemical industry.
Transport operators and ministries concerned with road and air travel give
high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every
endeavour is made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic
densities by improving the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment,
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by traffic regulation and control of standards of maintenance and by training
crews in competency and safety awareness.
HEALTH AND Local authorities have power, under the Public Health Acts, to regulate the
WELFARE provision of suitable sanitary accommodation in houses and at places of work
and to treat workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded
as nuisances the abatement of which can be enforced. Factories, certain other
industrial premises, offices, shops and railway premises must comply with the
health and welfare requirements of the Factories Act or the Offices, Shops and
Railway Premises Act. These include: the cleanliness of workrooms, adequate
ventilation and suitable temperature and lighting, the avoidance of over¬
crowding and the provision of sanitary accommodation, and the protection
of workers against inhaling harmful dust or fumes; and the provision of
washing facilities, lockers or other accommodation for outdoor clothing,
drinking water, first aid and seats. Legislation concerning safety in other types
of work, for example, agriculture, also prescribes appropriate measures.
The laws restricting the employment of children, young persons and women
form an important part of protective legislation. National legislation, besides
forbidding employment of children under 13 years of age, forbids the employ¬
ment of children who have not reached the statutory minimum school¬
leaving age (see p. 154) in any industrial undertaking; of women and young
persons underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations
(for example, certain processes connected with lead manufacture); and of
women in factories and workshops within four weeks after childbirth. It also
limits and defines the permissible hours of employment for women and young
persons (see p. 400). Local authorities, moreover, have wide powers under the
Children and Young Persons Acts 1933-63 as well as the Education Acts
1944-48, to regulate hours and conditions of employment of children under
1 c years within their areas within the limits of national legislation. _
There are some 1,500 appointed factory doctors appointed for districts
whose duties include the initial and periodic medical examination of all young
people entering industry, and certain other medical examinations required
under the Factories Act for workers in particular hazardous trades. There are
also some 800 works medical officers appointed to the factories in which they
are employed. Legislation is under consideration to provide for the replace¬
ment of the appointed factory doctor service by a more expert medical advisory
service, with wider duties. . 1 ir
These are the main legislative provisions relating to health and welrare at
work, but it is essential to note that employers frequently achieve standards
considerably higher than those prescribed by law. They are helped to do this
by the inspectorates, by government departments and agencies, by employers
associations and trade unions and by expert voluntary bodies. _
In 1970 a Medical Services Division for the medical activities or the
Department of Employment was set up. Its responsibilities include the work
of the former medical inspectors of factories (renamed medical advisers), the
regional medical advisers and the doctors in government training centres and
industrial rehabilitation units. Close liaison with the work of the appointed
factory doctors is maintained. The Division maintains a medical laboratory
which provides routine service for the investigation of industrial hazards and
undertakes research and development work.
Industrial
Health Services
A number of employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their
employees over and above the statutory requirements. It is estimated that
LABOUR
Other
Amenities
SAFETY, HEALTH
AND WELFARE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
HUMAN
RELATIONS
4°5
there are about 650 factories with doctors providing full-time medical cover
and about 4,300 factories with part-time medical cover. In addition several
thousand nurses are employed in industry.
The big employers, including the State and the boards of nationalised
industries, have naturally taken the lead but a number of smaller factories
also provide medical services and in a few cases have joined together in group
medical services. The Secretary of State is advised on measures to further
the development of industrial health services in workplaces covered by the
Factories Act by the Industrial Health Advisory Committee which includes
members nominated by the Confederation of British Industry, the Trades
Union Congress, the nationalised industries, the British Medical Association,
the Royal College of Nursing and other organisations closely concerned with
the promotion of industrial health.
Occupational hygiene services can give valuable assistance in securing
healthy working conditions in industry. Her Majesty’s Factory Inspectors
give advice on occupational hygiene problems as part of their normal duties
and an industrial hygiene unit, with laboratory facilities, has been set up
within the inspectorate. In addition there are some six centres in Great
Britain (including the TUC’s Institute of Occupational Health) which under¬
take studies of particular problems or health risks and also carry out routine
physical, chemical and biological tests for industry.
Research facilities are provided by government agencies such as the
Medical Research Council; by university faculties of industrial health and
social medicine; and by the research departments of various industries and
large industrial concerns. Field investigations are carried out by the Factory
Inspectorate, which has specialised technical branches; the Medical Service of
the DE arranges epidemiological surveys.
Other types of amenity vary considerably from one firm to another. The
requirements of a factory, office or shop where the work is light, and where
many employees are women or young persons, are different from those of an
iron foundry or steelworks, where much of the work is arduous and is under¬
taken by men. Progressive firms are careful to find out what their employees
want, and welfare policy is often decided in consultation with the workers,
through regular consultative machinery or by other means. An increasing
number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facilities. Some have
their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes. The provision
of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become usual in large
undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops
which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted
luncheon voucher schemes.
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been
the subject of legislation which, with some exceptions, is similar to that in
Great Britain and is embodied in the Factories Act (Northern Ireland) 1965
and the Office and Shop Premises Act (Northern Ireland) 1966. Many firms
voluntarily employ safety officers, and an Industrial Safety Group for the area,
supported by representatives of industry, trade unions, insurance companies
and public authorities, makes a valuable contribution in the field of industrial
accident prevention on similar lines to what is done in Great Britain.
Practically all large industrial firms and many small ones now have a personnel
department staffed by one or more specialist officers. While the form of
406
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
organisation of personnel departments varies, personnel officers are generally
responsible for advising all levels of management on every aspect of labour
relations. They also have particular duties with regard to recruitment,
selection, education and training, transfer of labour, the application of wage
agreements, the promotion of good communication and consultation and the
supervision of working conditions and employees’ amenities.
Recruitment and promotion policies are matters which each undertaking
decides for itself, although in some industries the decisions may be limited
by collective agreements or by trade practices. Great importance has recently
been attached to selection, and courses for training personnel officers in
modern interviewing techniques, including the use of test procedures, are
now well attended. ,
The Manpower and Productivity Service of the DE (see p. 395) is available
to give advice on personnel policies, personnel management techniques and
problems of human relations at the workplace. It also assists the creation and
support of machinery for negotiation and settlement of disputes.
Both official and voluntary organisations are concerned with promoting
better human relationships in industry. The Government has sought to
extend by research the available knowledge of the factors influencing human
relations in industry and human efficiency. Such research is sponsored or
conducted by the Social Science Research Council (see p. 332) and the Medica
Research Council (see p. 327)- Voluntary organisations include bodies which
deal with management problems and provide a service to subscribing Arms,
professional associations, linking individuals with a common interest in
particular functions of management; and bodies providing specialist services,
usually on a fee-paying basis.
The structure of labour relations in Britain has been established mainly on
a voluntary basis, and the extensive changes enacted in 1971 are designed
to retain the voluntary principle while modernising the conditions in which
it operates. The system will still rest on the organisation of employers and
workers into employers’ associations and trade unions. These organisations
discuss and negotiate terms and conditions of employment and other matters
affecting the workpeople at their work. In the past the emphasis has been
on detailed industry-wide agreements supplemented as necessary by m or-
mal agreements in firms or factories, but in a major reform of attitudes and
structure emphasis is now being placed on formal agreements at firm and
factory level. In some industries, firms and factories negotiations are con¬
ducted simply by ad hoc meetings of employers’ and employees’ representatives,
which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary joint councils or com¬
mittees have been established on a permanent basis. The scope of the various
joint bodies—from the National Joint Industrial Councils for whole in¬
dustries to the Works Councils and Committees in individual workplaces
varies widely. Some of them only negotiate. Others discuss a wide range
of topics. But the scope of the bodies is tending in genera to widen and the
distinction between discussion and negotiation to become blurred Normally
these arrangements for collective bargaining suffice to settle all questions
which are raised, but provision is sometimes made for matters not so settled
to be referred for settlement to independent arbitration; nowadays t is
provision is not often used. Standing arrangements exist for consultation at
national level between the Government, the Confederation of British Industry
(CBI) (see p. 408), the Trades Union Congress (TUC) (see p. 4°9) and the
nationalised industries through the National Joint Advisory Council, set up in
New Legal
Framework
Wages Councils
LABOUR 407
1939 to advise the Government on matters in which employers and workers
have a common interest. It meets under the chairmanship of the Secretary of
State.
The Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’
Associations (Cmnd 3623) published in June 1968 analysed the industrial
relations system in Britain and made recommendations. In March 1969, the
Commission on Industrial Relations was established (see p. 412), on lines sug¬
gested by the Royal Commission, to form a focus for the improvement of collec¬
tive bargaining machinery. Another recommendation of the Royal Commission
was implemented when early in 1969 companies with 5,000 or more employees
were invited to register with the Manpower and Productivity Service of the
Department of Employment their procedure agreements, that is, all agreements
about the machinery for the determination of the terms and conditions of
employment, the settlement of grievances and disputes and other matters which
are generally the subject of consultation between management and unions.
In August 1971 a newT Industrial Relations Act became law. The Act provides
a new legal framework for industrial relations. The main provisions of the
Act include the right of an individual to join or not to join a trade union;
increased protection against unfair dismissal; the presumption that written
collective agreements are legally binding unless otherwise specified; the
granting of new and existing legal privileges, including the right to recognition
by employers, to those trade unions and employers’ associations whose rules
and conduct meet the standards laid down by legislation and supervised by the
Registrar of Trade Unions and Employers’ Associations; the setting-up of a
new system of expert and informal industrial relations courts to hear complaints
about and adjudicate on unfair industrial practices, and be empowered to
award compensation and to make restraining orders; the enlarging of the
functions of the Commission on Industrial Relations (see p. 412), particularly
in disputes over procedure agreements and bargaining agents; and the creation
of new emergency powers which enable the Government to impose a 60-day
cooling-off period or to order a secret ballot of workers in disputes where strike
action threatens the national economy. In addition, the Government is
required to draw up a Code of Industrial Relations Practice which will give
practical guidance on the conduct of industrial relations. The Code will not
be enforceable, but compliance or non-compliance with it may be taken into
account in any proceedings under the Act. A consultative document, which will
be the basis for the Code, has been issued on which comments have been invited
from trade unions, employers’ representatives and other interested parties.
The Code will be subject to the approval of Parliament.
In a small and decreasing number of industries and trades where the organisa¬
tion of employers or employees or both is not strong enough to provide a
basis for successful voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regula¬
ting bodies, known as Wages Councils. These are composed of equal numbers
of representatives of employers and workers in the respective sectors of
industry, with, in addition, a small number of independent members. Wages
Councils may submit proposals for fixing minimum remuneration and
holidays with pay to the Secretary of State who must then make orders giving
statutory force to such proposals, subject only to his right to return them as a
whole for further consideration. The DE’s Wages Inspectorate helps em¬
ployers and workers to interpret the provisions of wage regulation orders and
sees that they are complied with.
408
Employers’
Associations
The Confederation
of British
Industry
Trade Unions
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agricultural Wages Boards (there are separate Boards for England and
Wales and for Scotland) perform similar functions in relation to employment
in agriculture.
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ organisations
wholly or partly concerned with labour questions. The primary aims of such
organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of em¬
ployment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety,
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the
efficient use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes
which may arise. Different employers’ organisations vary in the emphasis
which they put upon these different aims and in the means by which they try
to achieve them. Although the negotiation of wages and working conditions
and the settlement of disputes remain their essential function, the majority
of the organisations provide help and advice on many aspects of industrial
relations, with the aim of developing positive employment policies and
PrTherenfsPd,ivereity'of structure as well as function. Generally, however,
employers’ organisations are organised on an industry basis rather than a
product basis. A few are purely local in character or deal with a section of
an industry; others are national in scope and are concerned with the whole
of a particular industry. In some of the chief industries there are loca or
regional organisations combined into national federations, while in others
within which different firms are engaged in making different principal
products, there is a complex structure with national and regional federations
for these different sections of the industry as well as for the industry as a
whole. Although there are some 1,400 employers’ organisations dealing with
labour matters, most of these are federated to national orgamsations. There
are about 85 of these, most of which are in membership of the CBI and these
are the ones that negotiate the important national collective agreements with
trade unions. . . , •
The final authority of a local or small national organisation may be a meeting
where all member firms are directly represented; but in larger organisations
some form of indirect representation is necessary, either through local
organisations or through regions or sections into which these ar<Lgr(™pe ‘
The representatives thus chosen, together with a number of office holders,
form a general council or central committee, which meets perhaps once a
quarter, mainly to make major policy decisions, to elect committees and to
ratify their work. A paid staff under a director or secretary carries out t e
organisation’s day-to-day work. There is usually a small working group
consisting of senior officials and committee chairmen, which meets to deal
with urgent questions and co-ordinate the work of committees.
The central body of employers is the CBI, which deals with all matters (not
only labour relations) affecting the interests of organised employers and
represents them nationally to the Government and the public and also
internationally, for instance, in the International Labour Organisation. The
majority of national employers’ organisations, nationalised industries and a
large number of individual companies are affiliated to the CBI. Its represen a-
tives sit on various government advisory committees, on other statutory
bodies and on voluntary bodies concerned with labour matters.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
Trade Union
Congress
LABOUR 409
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over a great many years and, consequently, their
form and organisation vary considerably as do their traditions and attitudes,
for example, their degree of concern with political movements. Trade unions
started more than two hundred years ago among the skilled craftsmen and
spread later to the general labouring and unskilled classes. More recently trade
unionism has increased among clerical, supervisory, technical and adminis¬
trative workers. A number of associations of professional workers, formed
primarily for the preservation and improvement of professional standards,
have also come to exercise many of the functions of trade unions, including
negotiations on salary and fee scales, and are legally trade unions. The
qualification for membership of some unions is occupational (for instance,
they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed), while in others the
qualification is industrial (that is, they seek to recruit all persons in an industry,
whatever their occupation). In a number of unions recruitment is based on a
combination of these principles.
At the end of 1969 the total membership of British trade unions was about
10-3 million. There were 503 unions, but over 70 per cent of all trade unionists
were in the 24 largest unions, while more than half were in the nine unions
with a membership of over 250,000. The number of trade unionists has
increased during the last decade but the number of unions has gone down
owing to amalgamations.
The basic unit of organisation in most British trade unions is the local
branch. Every member of the union belongs to a branch. He may attend its
meetings, make suggestions about terms and conditions of employment,
discuss the work of the union, and take part in the election of the union’s
officers. The branch takes action on certain matters considered to be entirely,
or mainly, of local interest and forwards its views on wider issues for action by
the union’s national or regional bodies. The branch draws its members from
the locality and in only a few unions is it based on the place of work. Many
unions have shop stewards or other representatives at the place of work to
undertake organisation there. Where two or more unions have members in the
same workplace, shop stewards committees may be formed to discuss matters
of common concern.
In most large unions the central organisation is along the following lines:
elected officials, including a general secretary assisted by specialist and clerical
staff, are in charge of the work of the head office and are responsible to an
elected national executive council or committee which may be part-time or
full-time, and which is responsible to annual or biennial conferences of
delegates from the branches. Executive committees or councils play an
important part in the government of the unions; between conferences they
are the highest authorities and carry out policy decisions made by delegates.
Most unions also have some regional, district or area organisation.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the TUC, which
celebrated its centenary in June 1968. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of the workers. Its membership comprises 145 organisations,
some of which are themselves federations of smaller organisations. Together
they represent about 9*5 million workpeople. The TUC deals with all general
questions which concern trade unions both nationally and internationally and
gives assistance on questions relating to particular trades or industries.
The Congress, which constitutes the TUC proper, meets for a week every
410
Scottish Trades
Union Congress
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
year to discuss matters of general interest to trade unionists and to employees
generally. It elects annually a General Council which represents it during the
remaining 51 weeks of the year. This is responsible for carrying out Congress
decisions, for watching economic and social developments, for providing
educational and advisory services to unions, and for presenting to the Govern¬
ment the trade union viewpoint on economic, social and industrial issues. It is
also empowered to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain circumstances
and its activities in this sphere were enlarged following a special Congress in
June 1969 and subsequent agreement with the Government. The General
Council undertook to use its authority to deal with unauthorised and un¬
constitutional stoppages of work, as well as the inter-union and official disputes
with which it had dealt previously.
The TUC is a non-political body but under the Trade Union Act 1913
individual trade unions can, by a ballot vote of members, decide to set up a
political fund, financed by a separate levy, which any member can refuse to
pay without loss of his normal union rights and benefits. About 100 separate
trade union organisations, including most of the largest trade unions, have
such a fund and, in most cases, it is used to support the Labour Party.
Both the TUC and many unions conduct extensive educational services for
members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade unionism and
industrial relations principles and practice. In 1969, the first ever television
training series was organised by the BBC and TUC.
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local
trades council, which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common
interest and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year
There are just over 495 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped
together in 22 federations.
Affiliation to the TUC is open to all trade unions anywhere in the United
Kingdom, but Scottish trade unionists have their own national centre, the
Scottish Trades Union Congress, similar within its objects to the TUC. The
Scottish TUC, to which trade unions may affiliate in respect of their member¬
ship in Scotland (a number of unions are affiliated to both bodies), also accepts
affiliation from trades councils and has an affiliated membership of about
840,000. It holds an annual congress and has consultations with the Govern¬
ment on issues affecting Scottish trade unionists.
State Provision
for Conciliation,
Arbitration and
Investigation
Matters which prove difficult to settle by negotiation are sometimes referred
by agreement to independent conciliators or arbitrators, and one way in which
the parties can find such persons is by invoking the help of the Secretary of
State. Under authority derived from the Conciliation Act 1896, and the
Industrial Courts Act 1919, the Secretary of State has certain powers to assist
industry to settle disputes which it is not found possible to resolve through an
industry’s own machinery and procedure. These powers are all intended to
supplement and not to supersede the industry’s own machinery. There is no
legal obligation on the parties to a dispute to notify the dispute to the Secretary
of State nor to place the question before a conciliator.
The DE assists with conciliation in industry through its Industrial Relations
Division and the field staff of the Manpower and Productivity Service (see p.
•mO who keep in touch with the course of relations between employers and
workers at national, district and, in some cases, factory level and assist them, if
requested, to settle their problems by joint discussion and negotiation. Con¬
ciliators have no legal powers.
LABOUR
Industrial
Disputes
Labour
Relations of
Public
Authorities
Central and Local
Government
411
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both
parties, be referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, by
an ad hoc Board of Arbitration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent
tribunal established under the Industrial Courts Act. The court normally
consists of three members—the president, one member experienced in
representing employers and one in representing workpeople.
Like collective agreements, arbitration awards are not in themselves en¬
forceable at law, but, under the Terms and Conditions of Employment Act
1959, reports that a particular employer is not observing the recognised terms
or conditions of employment in his trade or industry may be made to the
Secretary of State by organisations which are parties to the relevant agreement
or award. If the matter is not otherwise settled, the Secretary of State must
refer it to the Industrial Court which, after hearing the case, may issue an
award requiring the employer to observe the recognised terms or conditions.
Such an award becomes an implied term of the contract of employment of
individual employees.
The Secretary of State is also empowered to appoint a Court of Inquiry or
Committee of Investigation into a dispute, whether existing or apprehended.
These procedures are primarily means of informing public opinion of the
facts of a dispute (the report of a Court of Inquiry has to be laid before
Parliament). Although the recommendations contained in the reports of such
bodies are not binding on the parties, they often provide the basis for further
negotiations leading to a settlement.
Over the past 10 years the number of working days lost each year through
stoppages of work arising from industrial disputes has been on an average
about 4I million which, taking the working population as a whole, works out
at approximately i£ hours per worker a year. The time lost through industrial
stoppages is very much less than that lost on account of sickness, accidents and
absenteeism and Britain’s record over the past ten years compares well with
that of most other industrial countries.
Nevertheless Government, industry and trade unions have expressed
concern both at the number of strikes which take place without the backing of
trade union headquarters and without exhausting the agreed or customary
procedures in the industry or workplace, and at the concentration of a high
proportion of these strikes in a limited number of important industries and it is
partly with the intention of improving relations in industry generally and so of
reducing the incidence of strikes that the Government introduced the Industrial
Relations Act.
While labour relations in government service and in the nationalised indus¬
tries are, in general, organised on the same principle as in private industry,
there are some special features.
Non-industrial employees in central Government service, where salaries and
conditions of service are dealt with by the Civil Service Department (see p.
48), are permitted and encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service staff
associations (trade unions) and there is a highly developed system of negotia¬
tion and joint consultation by means of the National and Departmental
Whitley Councils (see p. 65). If there is failure to reach agreement by negotia¬
tion a department or association may, subject to certain limitations, report the
dispute to the Secretary of State for reference to the Civil Service Arbitration
Tribunal, an independent body appointed by the Secretary of State by
412
BRITAIN 1972*. AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
powers under the Industrial Courts Act 1919. Government industrial
employees are similarly encouraged to belong to trade unions and machinery
exists for joint consultation. There are four Trades Joint Councils on which
representatives of the Government and the trade unions sit to consider pay and
conditions of employment affecting individual grades and certain other limited
matters. A Joint Co-ordinating Committee, on which the Government and
Trades Joint Councils are represented, deals with national pay negotiations,
conditions of service and other matters of general application. In the main
employing departments there are departmental Joint Councils for the discus¬
sion of domestic matters. Disputes on wages or conditions of employment that
cannot be resolved by the existing machinery can be referred to the Industrial
Court for arbitration. , T . ~ r
In local government service there are separate National Joint Councils for
the main grades of employees (such as manual, clerical and technical em¬
ployees) which deal with wages and conditions of service as well as other
matters. There are corresponding regional and district councils.
Nationalised
Industries
In the nationalised industries, the main corporations, though not subject to
detailed governmental control, have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory
arrangements for collective bargaining in their industries and for joint con¬
sultation with their employees; but in carrying out these duties they are free to
choose suitable arrangements. The main difference from private industry is
that the corporations are not usually members of employers associations
(although the majority are ‘public sector members of the CBI). In some
industries they are sole or main employers, but even where part of the industry
is in private hands, as for example in road transport, the corporations are
separately and directly represented on wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally
settled by negotiation between representatives of managements and tra e
unions at the national level; in most cases there are also regional and local
bodies, similarly representative, to deal with local implications but not norm¬
ally to negotiate separate local agreements. Most of the industries use e
facilities for arbitration offered to industry generally by the DE, but coa -
mining and rail transport have their own special arrangements. Consultations
at all levels, including the workplace level, have been arranged in a e
nationalised industries according to the traditions and needs of each industry.
Some of the nationalised industries have felt that joint consultation was
best carried out by their negotiating bodies; others have established separate
and specially constituted joint committees at all levels.
Commission on
Industrial
Relations
The Commission on Industrial Relations (CIR) was set up as a Royal Com¬
mission in March 1969 to examine such matters as might be referred to 1 y
the Secretary of State for Employment concerning the functioning and
devekfpment^of institutions and procedures for the conduct of mdustrral
relations; to promote improvements in such institutions, Pr°“dures and
relations; and to report. Under the 1971 Industrial Relations Act the CIR
will become a statutory body and its functions will be extended (see p. 407)-
Northern
Ireland
rthern Ireland has its own system of mdustr'al/e^atlonS,^ndernJnh;irth
tain powers and responsibilities devolve upon the Labour Affairs Depart-
;nt of :he Ministry of Health and Social Services. Some 90 per cent of trade
ionists in Northern Ireland are members of unions with headquarters in
eat Britain.
18 ENCOURAGEMENT
OF THE ARTS
Artistic activities in Britain receive financial and other support from many
sources. Though some of the arts continue to flourish without outside help, in
recent years many have become more and more reliant on it. Valuable assist¬
ance comes from such private sources as voluntary trusts and commercial
concerns, but since 1945 the Government and local authorities have played an
increasingly important part in encouraging the arts. The Government is con¬
cerned with the preservation of the country’s cultural heritage, the promotion
of education in the arts, the dissemination of the arts to a wider public and the
encouragement of high standards in the performing and creative arts.
In Great Britain special responsibility for the arts is borne by the Pay¬
master General (see p. 55) who works in close co-operation with the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science and the Welsh and Scottish Offices. In
Northern Ireland responsibility lies largely with the Minister of Finance.
In 1971-72 estimated government expenditure on the arts was £30-3 million in
Great Britain and £440,000 in Northern Ireland.
The Government aids the preservation of Britain’s cultural heritage by
means of grants which largely finance most of the national museums and gal¬
leries ; through the Department of the Environment which is responsible for
the upkeep of ancient monuments and historic buildings; and through
financial help to independent bodies concerned with preservation, such as the
National Trust. In 1971-72 the Government allocated £ii*i million towards
the running costs of national museums and galleries, and nearly £3-5 million
towards preserving ancient monuments and historic buildings.
The main educational functions concerning the arts are carried out in
England and Wales through the Department of Education and Science and
the Welsh Office (see p. 57), in Scotland through the Scottish Education
Department and in Northern Ireland through the Ministry of Education.
They are concerned, in partnership with local education authorities and
voluntary bodies, with art education in schools, colleges of further education,
evening institutes and community centres, and with the public library service.
The Department of Education and Science finances the Arts Council of Great
Britain (see below) and has direct responsibility for the Victoria and Albert
Museum; the Scottish Education Department is responsible for the Royal
Scottish Museum.
Most government support for the creative arts is channelled through the
Arts Councils of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which contribute to
aspects of the arts not provided for by other agencies. They are independent
bodies concerned mainly with promoting music, drama, painting, literature
and sculpture. Members of the Arts Council of Great Britain, which was
established in 1946 and operates under Royal Charter, are appointed by the
Secretary of State for Education and Science in consultation with the Secre¬
taries of State for Scotland and Wales. The Council’s main objects are to
develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and practice of the arts, to
4T4
Local Support
Private
Contributions
Arts Festivals
and Regional
Arts
Associations
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
increase their accessibility to the public, and to advise and co-operate with
government departments, local authorities and other organisations. In 1971-72
it received a government grant of £11-9 million. Most of its funds are used to
support the performing arts through annual grants to professional orchestras
and opera, ballet and theatre companies. Assistance is also given to individual
artists, including painters, sculptors, writers and composers, for particular
projects. Under the Council’s ‘Housing the Arts’ scheme, grants are made
available to assist the construction of new theatres, concert halls and other arts
buildings.
The Council itself, working through panels responsible for different aspects
of the arts, allocates grants to organisations in England. Those in Scotland and
Wales receive grants from the Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are
appointed by the main council and which are allocated a certain proportion o
its funds; in 1971-72 they received £1,161,000 and £703,000 respectively.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland has similar aims and functions to that
of Great Britain. It receives an annual grant from the Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment which in 1971-72 amounted to £255,000. _
A major contribution to the arts (particularly music and drama) is made by
the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) which spends over £2^ million
each year in copyright payments to authors and composers. The BBC has
orchestras employing about a third of the country’s full-time professional
musicians, and each week broadcasts nearly 100 hours of serious music—both
live and recorded^n its Radio 3 channel. It regularly commissions new
music, particularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions
and festivals. On both radio and television, the BBC broadcasts a wide range of
new drama together with adaptations of novels and stage plays. .
The British Council (see footnote, p. 164) takes an active part in displaying
overseas the best in British drama, ballet, music and the visual arts.
Local authorities support the arts in many ways. In addition to their responsi¬
bilities for education (including specialised art education) and the public
library service, many provide and maintain local museums and art galleries. In
Great Britain the authorities may levy up to a zip rate for expenditure on
entertainment in all its forms (including cultural activities) According to
estimates local authority net expenditure on entertainment and the arts amounts
to more than £5 -5 million annually, of which the greater part is used to support
professional orchestras and drama companies. Some authorities contribute
towards the capital cost of new theatres and concert halls; the Greater London
Council which, as the London County Council, built the Royal Festival Hall,
has agreed to contribute towards the cost of the new National Theatre being
built on the south bank of the Thames (see p. 415); building work is expected
to be completed in 1973.
The many voluntary bodies concerned with promoting the arts include
charitable trusts and foundations which give financial support. Industrial
patronage includes support from the independent television companies.
The Government is concerned to encourage further private support for t e
arts.
The arts benefit most when the patrons—central and local government,
voluntary bodies, industry, the universities and individuals—combine. I he
outstanding example is the Edinburgh Festival Society. Other arts festivals
organised on a similar basis include those held in the City of London, Aide
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 415
burgh, Bath, Belfast, Brighton, Cheltenham, Harrogate, King’s Lynn, Leeds,
Norwich and York.
Regional co-operation in arts patronage is growing with support from the
Government which encourages the formation of regional arts associations to
ensure that the whole range of the arts is more widely available to people
throughout the area. Such associations, on which local authorities and a wide
range of other interests are represented, have been established in the north,
the north-west, Merseyside, Lincolnshire, the east and west Midlands, the
south-west, Greater London, eastern and southern England, north and west
Wales and Yorkshire. A growing proportion of Arts Council funds is now
channelled through the associations for distribution to local arts organisations.
Government support for drama is given through the Arts Councils of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland which grant subsidies to drama companies
registered as charities (that is, are non-profit making), provided that such com¬
panies have given evidence of serious aims and of consistently high standards
of practical competence. The Arts Council of Great Britain operates a scheme
to promote new drama: guarantees may be offered to managements giving
the first professional production of selected new plays; and promising authors
may be awarded bursaries. Schemes are also in operation to train stage
designers, producers and those wishing to take up theatre administration.
The British Council makes the British theatre better known abroad by
organising and sponsoring international tours by leading British theatre com¬
panies and individual actors and producers, by sending overseas exhibitions
of books dealing with the British theatre, and by providing newly published
plays through its overseas libraries.
There are some 140 professional theatres in full-time use in Britain. Of these
about half are owned or rented by non-profit-making companies receiving Arts
Council subsidies, while the remainder are operated commercially. In 1970-71
Arts Council support for the theatre in Britain amounted to £2 million.
The centre of theatrical activity is in London where there are over 30
principal theatres in or near the West End and several more in the suburbs.
Most of the theatres are let to producing managements on a commercial basis
for each production, but four are occupied by important subsidised companies,
including the National Theatre and Royal Shakespeare companies. The former,
which will be housed eventually in the new National Theatre, stages classical
and modern plays from all countries, while the latter presents Shakespearean
plays in Stratford-upon-Avon and international plays in London.
Outside London there are some 40 large commercial theatres in the main
cities and about 60 theatres occupied by subsidised ‘repertory companies’.
The commercial theatres, which accommodate pre- and post-West End tours
by the major London productions and performances by companies specially
formed for touring, have been declining in numbers, and several have now
been purchased by local authorities.
Compensating for this decline, there has been a growth in the activities of
the repertory companies, which receive financial support from the Arts
Council and also from the local authorities. The repertory companies employ
many leading dramatists, producers, designers and actors, and standards are
high. Some companies have the use of their own theatres, while others rent
from local authorities. Over a dozen new repertory theatres have been built
since 1958.
All plays produced in Great Britain are subject to the provisions of the
416
Amateur
Theatre
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Theatres Act 1968. There is no censorship, but the Act makes it a criminal
offence to present or direct an obscene performance of a play in public or in
private (including theatre clubs), an obscene performance being defined as
one which tends to ‘deprave and corrupt persons who are likely ... to attend
it’. Provision is made in the Act for a defence against a charge of obscenity on
the grounds that the performance is for the public good in the interests of,
for example, drama, opera or literature.
There are thousands of amateur dramatic societies in Britain with an active
membership of some half a million. They are encouraged by local education
authorities, by other public bodies, and by four special organisations the
British Drama League, the Standing Conference of Drama Associations, the
Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster Drama
Festivals. Most universities have active amateur drama clubs and societies; an
International Festival of University Theatre, inaugurated by Bristol in 1959,
is held annually.
Dramatic
Training
Theatre for
Young People
MUSIC, OPERA
AND BALLET
Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the most
important are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the Central School of
Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, and
the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, all of which are in London; and the
Old Vic School in Bristol. In Scotland there is the Royal Scottish Academy of
Music and Drama in Glasgow which is grant-aided by the Scottish Education
Department. An increasing number of universities offer courses in drama.
Young people’s theatre has been developing in recent years. In 1970, under
the aegis of the National Theatre, the Young Vic was opened as a theatre for the
young. The National Youth Theatre has a permanent home in London and the
Unicorn Theatre for Young People operates at the Arts Theatre. There are
about 12 companies, including Theatre Centre and the Polka Company, which
are concerned exclusively with the production of plays for young people, six of
which are supported by the Arts Council. In the provinces some 35 repertory
companies provide programmes and engage in other types of theatre activity
for young people. Nottingham has its own Youth Theatre Workshop and
Birmingham has the Midlands Arts Centre for Young People, which attracted
about 80,000 young people to performances in its two theatres in 1970-71.
Many schools and youth clubs put on plays and provide some education in
drama. Drama centres for the London education service are provided at the
Cockpit Youth Arts Centre and at the Curtain Theatre; there are youth
theatres in the London boroughs of Camden and Hillingdon.
In 1970-71 the Arts Council’s grants totalled .£158,000 in support of young
people’s theatre activities. The National Council of Theatre for Young Peop e
represents all those actively concerned.
Audiences for broadcast music, concert attendances and sales of gramophone
records serve to indicate the importance of music in all forms in ^ntis
cultural life. In 1970 nearly 66 million long-playing records were produced,
mostly for the home market. Top’ music has achieved very great popularity
particularly with young people and concerts of folk music also attract large
audiences, while jazz, light music and brass bands maintain substantial fo-
lowings. A more widespread interest in ‘serious’ music is reflected both in t e
size of attendances at orchestral concerts and performances of opera, ballet
and chamber music, and in sales of gramophone records.
Music
Orchestras
Choral Societies
Music Festivals
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 417
Through the Arts Council of Great Britain, the Government encourages
interest in the various forms of ‘serious’ music. The Council makes grants to a
number of orchestras, soloists, opera and ballet companies and music societies.
The British Council gives financial assistance to overseas tours by British
musicians; it sponsors recordings of work by British composers and maintains
126 libraries of British music (scores and records) in 93 countries overseas
and, at its London headquarters, a reference library of records, scores and
books on music.
In Britain many libraries have collections of records and musical scores
which are available on loan to the public. The City of Westminster houses the
Central Music Library which lends to other libraries and to individuals.
Another well-known music collection is the Henry Watson Music Library at
the Manchester Central Library.
The National Music Council, representative of many aspects of British
musical activity, is affiliated to the International Music Council, which is
associated with UNESCO.
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large
towns and cities of Britain. In London the principal concert halls are the
Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames, adjacent to which are
the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room which were opened in 1967
for smaller-scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall, Kensington, where the
annual summer season of Promenade Concerts is given; and the Wigmore Hall,
an important recital centre.
The leading British symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony, the Royal Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the New
Philharmonia, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester),
the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony and the
Scottish National orchestras. The BBC runs a total of seven orchestras pro¬
viding broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There are also
specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English Chamber
Orchestra, the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, the London Mozart
Players, the Philomusica of London and the Northern Sinfonia of Newcastle
upon Tyne. Most orchestras (other than those of the BBC) receive financial
aid from the Arts Council of Great Britain and local authorities and some also
receive assistance from commercial television and other business organisations.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Orchestra receives financial aid from the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland.
Among the principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral Society,
the Bach Choir, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Choir, the New Philhar¬
monia Chorus, the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union and the Belfast Philhar¬
monic Society. Certain of these are closely associated with famous orchestras
while others combine with them in major choral works; most of them,
together with hundreds of similar choral and orchestral societies and music
clubs, are affiliated to the National Federation of Music Societies, through
which they are supported with funds provided by the Arts Council.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held
annually in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in
existence for over 200 years. The famous Edinburgh International Festival
lasts three weeks; other festivals such as that at King’s Lynn, last a week or
less. Among the better known are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales;
418
Amateur Interest
Opera and
Ballet
Opera Groups
Ballet Companies
Education in
Music, Opera
and Ballet
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL FIANDBOOK
the National Gaelic Mod, held at a different place in Scotland each year; the
Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; and the
Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. An annual international festival of folk song
and dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is encouraged by the work of County
Music Committees (some of which are voluntary and some sub-committees
of local education authorities), which are aided by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music.
The Rural Music Schools Association is concerned with music-making by
amateurs in country districts; it brings together professional musicians,
teachers, administrators and amateurs. The National Federation of Music
Societies, which receives an annual grant from the Arts Council, assists
amateur groups with the cost of engaging professional soloists.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London, which receives financial assistance from the Arts
Council. The Royal Opera House has its own company (The Royal Opera)
and a ballet company (The Royal Ballet). The opera company numbers about
200 and has a permanent orchestra. The Royal Ballet has a high international
reputation and has made many overseas tours. It has a regular London season,
tours abroad and performs in the provinces for 12 weeks each year. ,
Seasons of opera and operetta in English are given by the Sadler s Wells
Company which plays in modernised premises at the London Coliseum,
besides making provincial tours. Its former home, the Sadler’s Wells Theatre,
provides a London stage for visiting opera and dance companies from the
provinces and from abroad.
The Scottish Opera Company presents annual seasons in several Scottish
towns; it will eventually be based on a new £4-5 million opera house in Edin¬
burgh which is being financed by grants from the Edinburgh Corporation and
the Scottish Education Department.
At Glyndebourne, in Sussex, an opera season, for which an international cast
is specially assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies include
the English Opera Group, noted for its performances of chamber operas by
Benjamin Britten and other composers, the New Opera Company, formed by
members of the Cambridge Opera Group to produce new operas in London,
and the Welsh National Opera Company. Opera in Northern Ireland is
promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust and the Studio Opera Group
with financial support from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
Among other ballet companies are London’s Festival Ballet, the Ballet
Rambert (Britain’s oldest ballet company) and the Scottish Theatre Ballet
which specialises in contemporary works. The work of the Patricia Mulholland
Irish Ballet Company in Northern Ireland, which is sponsored by the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland, combines traditional music, dancing and mime.
Professional training in music is given at colleges of music, of which the Royal
Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music in London, and the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow are U*hel:
leading colleges include the Trinity College of Music and the Guildhall Schoo
of Music and Drama, both in London, the Royal Manchester College of
Music and the Birmingham School of Music. The London Opera Centre for
Advanced Training and Development provides some rehearsal and other
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS
FILMS
Feature Films
Documentary
Films
Production and
Distribution
4I9
facilities for the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. The leading ballet
schools are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert Ballet School and the Royal
Academy of Dancing which, with many private schools, have played an impor¬
tant part in raising British ballet to its present high standard.
Young people are encouraged to take an interest in music, opera and ballet.
There are frequent concerts for children and the National Youth Orchestra of
Great Britain, the National Youth Orchestra of Wales and the London
Schools’ Symphony Orchestra are noted for their high standard of perfor¬
mance. A Youth and Music organisation, affiliated to the international
Jeunesses Musicales, encourages opera, ballet and other performances for
young people. The Royal Ballet sponsors a small group, Ballet for All, to give
lecture-demonstrations to the public and to schools.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and
over 170,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the exami¬
nations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The most
popular instrument with candidates is the piano (some 56 per cent) followed
by the violin, the clarinet and the cello.
Although cinema attendance has been steadily declining in Great Britain from
a peak of 1,635 million in 1946 to about 199 million in 1970, and the number
of licensed cinemas has declined from 4,709 to 1,558 over the same period,
British films, actors and creative and technical talent are appreciated both at
home and abroad and frequently achieve success at international film events.
Television offers very large potential audiences for films and provides oppor¬
tunities of employment for technicians and actors.
London is one of the most important centres for the making of films for
international markets and export earnings are an important part of total
earnings. The Film Production Association of Great Britain is the trade
association to which the majority of feature film producers belong.
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain goes back to
1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive
and imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial
organisations. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then,
British documentary technicians have continued to produce high quality
factual films which have won numerous international awards. The British
Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use of films in
industry, science and commerce. The Federation of Specialised Film Associa¬
tions, the trade association of documentary, short, industrial, advertising and
cartoon film makers, has about 75 members.
Although much of British main feature production is supported by United
States interests at present, EMI Film and Theatre Corporation Ltd. (formerly
Associated British Picture Corporation) and the Rank Organisation maintain
a substantial interest in production, distribution and exhibition. Most British
film producers are independent but make films in association with these major
interests. There are numerous companies, many of them small, which produce
short films.
There is no state-owned film production unit in Britain, but the National
Film Finance Corporation lends money for feature film production. Its
members are appointed by the Department of Trade and Industry and its
funds are limited by statute to £13 million. The Corporation was formerly
involved in financing about half the main feature films made in British studios,
but this proportion has now fallen considerably.
420
Quota System
Cinema Licensing
and Film
Censorship
British Film
Institute
BRITAIN 1972c AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There is also a levy on cinema admissions which provides a fund to benefit
the makers of eligible British films. The money so raised is distributed by a
public body—the British Film Fund Agency—in proportion to a film’s
takings, so that the more successful a film is at the box-office, the more it
receives from the fund.
The Government sponsors a wide range of films to inform audiences
overseas about British life and achievements, including documentary films,
television programmes and newsreels; they are produced through the Central
Office of Information (COI), which commissions their production by private
companies. These, together with films acquired from private industry and
public bodies, are distributed throughout the world, in English and many
foreign languages, by British Information Services. The British Council also
distributes overseas a wide range of specialised films mainly on the arts,
education, medicine, science and technology.
Films are also sponsored by the Government for specialised audiences on
such subjects as science, agriculture, health and industry, and for the general
public on, for example, road safety and health education.
A large number of films are sponsored by industrial concerns and other
organisations, such as the British Tourist Authority and the British Pro¬
ductivity Council. The best of these and industrial films from other countries
are available through the COFs Central Film Library and other agencies.
The Films of Scotland Committee promotes the production of Scottish
films covering the industries and cultural traditions of Scotland.
To help British films to meet the keen American competition, legislation
passed in 1927 introduced the quota system under which a certain proportion
of British films must be shown in British cinemas each year. The proportion
is considered annually by the Department of Trade and Industry after con¬
sultation with the Cinematograph Films Council. For mam feature films it has
stood at 30 per cent since 1950 and for supporting programmes it has remained
at 25 per cent since 1948.
The State takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but before it can
be shown a film must be licensed by the local licensing authority. There are
about 700 of these (usually the local authorities or, in some areas, magistrates).
In considering the suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the
judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to
which are submitted all films (other than newsreels) for public showing.
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative ol
the cinema industry, to ensure that a proper standard was maintained in the
films offered to the public. The Board, which does not use any written code ot
censorship, may require cuts to be made before granting a certificate to a
film- very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the Board are placed
into one of four categories: ‘U’ (suitable to be seen by any person not less than
five years of age); ‘A’ (for persons of not less than five years of age but
containing material that some parents might prefer their children not to see)
‘AA’ (for persons of not less than 14 years of age); and X (for persons of not
less than 18 years of age).
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer gran
and by the Scottish Film Council which also receives a government grant.
The Institute encourages the making and showing of good films. It a so
administers the National Film Theatre in London and the National Fi m
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS
421
Training in Film
Production
Children and
the Cinema
VISUAL ARTS
Archive, runs an annual summer school, and maintains a film library from
which films may be hired, a library of books on the film and an information
service. It makes grants to the Federation of Film Societies, the British
Universities Film Council and the Society for Education in Film and
Television.
The National Film Archive contains over 19,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, besides scripts, art designs, posters and about
700,000 photographic stills, selected to illustrate the history and the art of the
film and as significant social and historical records.
The National Film Theatre, on the south bank of the Thames in London,
has two cinemas showing films of outstanding historical, artistic or technical
interest; it holds a unique position as a cinema offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the
films shown. Each year it organises a London Film Festival. The British Film
Institute has promoted the development of 36 regional film theatres on the lines
of the National Film Theatre and may make grants towards their recurrent
and capital costs. Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts Council of
Northern Ireland.
An independent national film school offering three-year courses for writers,
directors, producers and cameramen began operating in 1971. The school,
which is financed by government grant, is expected eventually to have an
annual intake of 50 students, including some from overseas. Training in film
production is also given at the London Film School which has 250 students
and provides two-year courses.
The Cinematograph Act 1952 provided for the making of regulations by the
Home Secretary to protect the health and welfare of children attending film
shows. Cinemas which give children’s shows require a special licence from the
licensing authority, which may impose conditions. There are about 750
children’s cinema clubs which provide special programmes on Saturday
mornings. An important contribution to these programmes is made by the
Children’s Film Foundation, which, with the aid of grants from the British
Film Fund Agency, produces and distributes entertainment films specially
designed for children.
A number of modern British painters and sculptors have a high international
reputation, winning 100 international prizes since 1949 and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. The growth of interest in the visual arts at
home has been stimulated by an increasingly lively attitude towards display
on the part of museums and galleries, and by the activities of many institutions,
societies, private galleries and the growing number of local art centres.
Painting and sculpture receive state support by grants to national institu¬
tions and, indirectly, through purchase grants made to local art galleries and
museums, and grants to local education authorities for art schools and other
means of promoting education in art. The Arts Council organises exhibitions
and maintains its own collection of contemporary British art. The Government
is advised on grants and policy towards museums by the Standing Commission
on Museums and Galleries and the Royal Fine Art Commissions for England,
Wales and Scotland.
Knowledge of Britain’s fine arts is fostered overseas by the British Council’s
exhibitions and lectures. In 1970-71 fine art exhibitions organised by the
Council were shown in 44 countries and the Council was also responsible for
British participation in seven international exhibitions.
422
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
Scotland, Wales
and Northern
Ireland
Other Collections
Co-operation
Exhibitions
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Over 900 museums and art galleries are open to the public in Britain.
There are 20 national museums and art galleries. Those in London probably
contain between them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic,
archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest ever to exist within
one city. They are the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum,
the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the
Imperial War Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the London Museum
(to be amalgamated with the Guildhall Museum into the Museum of London),
the Wallace Collection, the British Museum (Natural History), the Geological
Museum and the Science Museum (see p. 332).
There are six national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the National Gallery of Scotland, the
Royal Scottish Museum, the National Portrait Gallery of Scotland, the
Scottish United Services Museum, and the Scottish National Gallery of
Modern Art. The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at
St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed; and in Northern
Ireland there is the national Ulster Museum in Belfast.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries (Tower of
London), the Public Record Office (see p. 426) and the Sir John Soane’s
Museum’. In Buckingham Palace there is a small gallery for exhibition of
pictures from the extensive royal collections. Most cities and large towns and
many other towns have a museum devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes by a local
learned’ society or privately by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and
Cambridge are rich in museums, many of them, as in other towns, associated
with the universities—for example, the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford,
founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and the Fitzwilliam Museum in
Cambridge. There are important museums and art galleries in Birmingham,
Bristol Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Read¬
ing Southampton and York. In Northern Ireland there are notable museums
and galleries in or near Belfast (the Ulster Folk Museum and the Northern
Ireland Arts Council Gallery), in Armagh City and in Londonderry. _
A notable development has been the establishment of ‘period-house
museums’, for which outstanding private houses have been taken over by
national and municipal authorities, and of folk museums. Many private art
collections housed in historic family mansions, including those in the owner¬
ship of the National Trust (see p. 171), are open to the public.
A function of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries is to
advise the Government on the relationship between national and provincial
institutions. Close relations are fostered by the eight area museum councils
which cover the whole of Great Britain. They are grant-aided by the Govern¬
ment and help to improve technical facilities.
The Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries and their
staffs throughout the country belong and which also has many overseas
members, is an independent organisation. The Association serves as a central
body for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating
to museum administration, and as a training and examining body for
professional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions organised and sent on tour by the Arts Councils, the
Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science
TELEVISION
An ITV’s school
programme for
stimulating
creative activity
in the classroom.
Below:
Rehearsal of
Benjamin Britten’s
television opera
‘Owen Wingrave’,
specially
commissioned by
the BBC.
SOUTH-WEST
REGION
'The Cumberland
Basin, Bristol.
Right:
Greensplat
China Clay Pit,
St. Austell,
Cornwall.
Far right:
The Sioux
helicopters being
built at Yeovil,
Somerset.
Below left:
Hinkley Point B
power station,
Somerset.
Belozv right:
Bath and West
Show at Shepton
Mallet, Somerset.
4 -
The Millbay
Docks area of
Plymouth.
Above left:
Piddletrenthide,
a Dorset village.
Above right:
New library
buildings, Exeter
University,
Devon.
Right:
The Atomic
Energy
Establishment,
Winfrith, Dorset.
v*
sport
The British team
practising during
the World Archery
Championships.
The 5,000-metre
race at the 1971
British Games,
Edinburgh.
Association
football; the
European
champions cup
final at Wembley
Stadium, London.
Finance
Art Education
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 423
Museum and the Art Exhibitions Bureau are a regular feature of many
museums. The Tate Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal
Academy show loan exhibitions; the Whitechapel Art Gallery, the Camden
Arts Centre and the Institute of Contemporary Arts (at their new premises in
The Mall) also show temporary exhibitions. The Greater London Council
has built a new exhibition gallery, the Hayward Gallery, next to the Royal
Festival Hall, and also exhibits modern sculpture in its parks periodically.
Commercial exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists are held
throughout the year in the galleries of the art dealers of London (largely in the
Bond Street area).
There are a number of national art exhibiting societies, some of which,
notably the Royal Academy at Burlington House, have their own galleries in
London. An increasing number of amateur art societies throughout Britain
hold local exhibitions and encourage local interest in the fine arts. There are
also exhibitions of children’s art, including the National Exhibition of Children’s
Art sponsored annually by the Sunday Mirror.
All national collections are financed from government funds, both those that
are the direct responsibility of the Department of Education and Science (the
Victoria and Albert and Science Museums) and of the Scottish Education
Department (the Royal Scottish Museum) and those run by trustee bodies.
Besides meeting the administrative costs, provision is made for annual
purchase grants which totalled £2 million in 1971-72. The Government also
provides special ad hoc purchase grants and collections may receive works of
art acquired by the Treasury in lieu of estate duty. The buildings are main¬
tained by the Department of the Environment. Local museums and art
galleries, which are maintained from rates or endowments, can be helped in
building up their collections through the annual government grant (£158,000
in 1971-72) administered by the Victoria and Albert and Royal Scottish
Museums. Financial help and pictures are also given to museums and galleries
by certain trusts and voluntary bodies, particularly the National Art-
Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society.
Formal art education is given in publicly supported art colleges, polytechnics,
university art schools, the Royal Academy Schools and a few private art schools.
There are the colleges, art schools and classes administered by the local
education authorities; and at a senior level there is the Royal College of Art,
London, whose students have usually completed a course at a local education
authority college, and which awards its own degrees. Art is also taught at an
advanced level at the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions administered by
the Scottish Education Department. University art schools include the Slade
School of Fine Art and Goldsmiths’ College (London), the Ruskin Drawing
School (Oxford), the Reading School of Art, the Department of Fine Art of
the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the School of Art of University
College, Aberystwyth.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history
of art are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Depart¬
ment of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and
the Warburg Institute, also a part of London University.
In England and Wales three-year full-time courses leading to a Diploma in
Art and Design are available to students who have successfully completed a
foundation course. The Diploma is broadly comparable to a university pass
degree, and is administered by the National Council for Diplomas in Art and
424
Architecture
Education and
Professional
Associations
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Design (an independent self-governing body set up by the Government in
1961). The Council also administers a scheme of post-diploma studies in a
small number of colleges. In Scotland each of the four schools of art awards
a diploma which is roughly equivalent to the pass degree of a university.
The Ulster College of Art and Design is the regional college for Northern
Ireland.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society
for Education through Art, among other activities, encourages the purchase
by schools of original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools
exhibition. Pictures may also be borrowed from an increasing number of public
libraries (see p. 426).
Official responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned with
encouraging the best in new building and preserving the best that has been
inherited from the past.
Several government departments are concerned with architecture and help
to promote good design. The Department of the Environment, the Scottish
Development Department, and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Develop¬
ment are responsible for approving the layout and design of local authority
housing schemes, and set standards for local authority housing. The Depart¬
ment of the Environment is also responsible for the work of the National
Building Agency (see p. 234) which carries out development and research
concerning new building techniques, and for the design, building and main¬
tenance work of all government departments; it has a research and develop¬
ment group which co-ordinates similar groups throughout the government
service. The Architects and Building Branches at the Department of Education
and Science and the Scottish Education Department carry out research for
school building programmes. The Department of Health and Social Security is
implementing a very large building programme and the Regional Hospital
Boards, through their architectural departments, are responsible for the design
and construction of a large number of hospitals and ancillary buildings.
Government departments are assisted in an advisory capacity by the Royal
Fine Art Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland, which also
advise planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of public
amenity or artistic importance, including new building developments.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions
exist to further the interests of architecture, and the Civic Trust (see p. 171)
seeks to promote high standards in architecture and civic planning and to
encourage a wider interest in the appearance and protection of towns and the
countryside.
The Secretaries of State for the Environment, Scotland and Wales have
responsibilities for the preservation of ancient monuments and for the repair
and maintenance of buildings of outstanding historic or architectural interest;
in Northern Ireland these responsibilities are vested in the Ministry of Finance.
In Britain it is illegal for a person to practise under the title of ‘architect’
unless registered with the Architects’ Registration Council of the United
Kingdom. Most students train at a full-time school of architecture; there are
32 schools recognised for exemption from the examination in architecture of
the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA). In addition to these schools,
four of which also have part-time courses, there are five other schools which
have courses leading to the RIBA external examination.
The Royal Institute of British Architects is the leading professional archi¬
tectural institution in Britain with a membership of over 23,000 and more than
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS
425
LITERATURE
AND LIBRARIES
Libraries
6,000 students. Allied to it are 80 architectural societies covering the whole
of the United Kingdom and countries overseas. The RIBA has one of the
largest and most important architectural libraries in the world. It is concerned
with a wide range of activities covering professional practice, science, tech¬
nology, statistics, architectural competitions, and professional and public rela¬
tions; arranges lectures and discussions on a variety of subjects; presents
exhibitions; and, through its Board of Education, exercises control over stan¬
dards of architectural education. Among other associations are the Incorporated
Association of Architects and Surveyors, the Institute of Registered Architects
and the Faculty of Architects and Surveyors. Societies include the Architectural
Association, the Architecture Club, and several which cover particular aspects
of architecture, such as the Modular Society.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, colleges
and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country,
private libraries and a large number of private literary societies. Book reviews
are featured in the press and on radio and television and there are numerous
periodicals concerned with literature.
Government help is given through the Arts Council of Great Britain
which supports literature in a number of ways, including grants for writers,
a fund to aid literary projects, and subsidies to festivals of literature and poetry.
Similar provision is made through the Arts Council of Northern Ireland for
bursaries, poetry readings, and aid for publications. The British Council
promotes the study of English literature overseas.
Recognition of outstanding literary merit is given in the form of literary
prizes, a number of which are awarded annually, for instance, the Queen s
Gold Medal for Poetry, the James Tait Black Memorial prizes for biography
and literature, the John Llewellyn Rhys Memorial prize for young writers of
promise, the Hawthornden prize for imaginative writing, the Winston
Spencer Churchill Literary Award for an outstanding work on the history
of the English-speaking peoples, the Library Association Carnegie Medal
for an outstanding book for children, and the Somerset Maugham award for
young writers.
The British Museum Library in London (over 7 million volumes) is the largest
in Britain. The National Libraries of Scotland (in Edinburgh) and Wales (in
Aberystwyth) both have over 2 million volumes. Together with the Bodleian
Library of Oxford University (3-J million volumes) and the Cambridge
University Library (4 million volumes) these comprise the ‘copyright’ libraries
of the country and are entitled to receive a copy of each new book published in
Britain: the British Museum Library must receive a copy, the other libraries
may claim one.
Together with the British Museum Library and its associated department,
the National Reference Library of Science and Invention, the principal
national libraries are the National Central Library (see p. 427) and the
National Lending Library for Science and Technology (see p. 333). Under
government proposals all four libraries are to be amalgamated (along with the
British National Bibliography) into a new organisation to be known as the
British Library. The reference facilities of the British Library will be concen¬
trated eventually on a site in Bloomsbury, London (near to the British
Museum), while lending facilities will be situated in Yorkshire.
The Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum (Natural
History) in South Kensington also have large libraries and many government
426
Libraries in
Education
Public Libraries
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
departments have old-established libraries of considerable size and importance.
The Public Record Office contains the records of the superior courts of law
and of most government departments, as well as such famous historical docu¬
ments as Domesday Book. The National Register of Archives (maintained by
the Historical Manuscripts Commission) contains particulars of local and
private records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as those of the John Rylands
Library, Manchester, the Signet Library, Edinburgh, and the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions
(for scientific societies and institutions, see p. 322). Examples are the libraries
of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth
Society, the Commonwealth Institute, the Royal Geographical Society, the
Royal Institute of British Architects (see p. 424), the Royal College of
Physicians, the British Drama League (see p. 416), the Royal College of
Music, the Royal Academy of Music, the Central Music Library (administered
by Westminster City Council), the National Library for the Blind and the
National Book League.
The great expansion in education in recent years has increased the strain on
library resources at all levels of education. The ancient university libraries of
Oxford and Cambridge are not matched by any of the more recent foundations,
although the combined library resources of the colleges and institutions of the
university of London total over 4^ million volumes and the university libraries
of Edinburgh, Aberdeen, St. Andrews, Glasgow, Birmingham, Liverpool,
Manchester and Leeds each have over half a million volumes. Many univer¬
sities have succeeded in building up large and important research collections
in special subjects; for example, the Barnes Medical Library at Birmingham
and the Brotherton Library of English Literature at Leeds. The new univer¬
sities, including the new technological universities, are also rapidly building
collections and substantial collections are being assembled in the libraries of
polytechnics and colleges of education.
The importance of good libraries is recognised at all levels of the education
system. School libraries, most of which are maintained by local education
authorities, often receive co-operation from the public library service,
including loans of books. School children are regularly introduced to the
public library system, which they can use in addition to the school library.
Britain is served by a complete network of public libraries, administered by
475 public library authorities (county councils, county borough councils,
London borough councils, municipal borough councils and urban district
councils). The authorities, which provide more than 11,450 service points,
have a total stock of over no million books. (The figures do not include the
libraries in the publicly maintained schools.) Qualified and specialist staff are
available for consultation in all but the smallest service points. Nearly one-
third of the total population are members of public libraries.
Under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 the Secretary of State
for Education and Science is charged with the supervision of the public
library service in England and Wales, acting on the advice of two Library
Advisory Councils, one for England, the other for Wales. Under the Act,
public library authorities are designated and have a duty to provide an
efficient and (with some limitations) free lending and reference library service
for books and periodicals. Outlying areas may be served by mobile libraries,
of which over 480 are in service, and facilities exist for people who are unable
to visit a library.
Library
Co-operation
Library
Associations
Books
ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 427
In addition to lending books, about a third of the library authorities now
lend gramophone records of various kinds and a growing number are adding
loan collections of works of art, either originals or reproductions. Nearly all
library authorities provide children’s departments and reference sections and
art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. Most library authorities possess a significant
collection of books and documents on the history of their localities.
The public library is often a local cultural centre. Film shows, lectures,
adult education classes, book-week exhibitions, drama groups, gramophone
recitals and children’s story hours are among the many activities.
A voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales has grown
up since the first quarter of this century. The nine regional library bureaux
in England and Wales (consisting mainly of public libraries in each area) aim
to be largely self-sufficient in the inter lending of current British books by
means of a system of co-operative subject specialisation. They organise co¬
operation among themselves and through the National Central Library, which
is responsible for interlending at national and international level and has a
bookstock of its own of over 570,000 volumes built up by purchase, gift and
the operation of the British National Book Centre exchange scheme. The
combined resources of libraries available to the National Central Library,
which include university, industrial and other non-public libraries, amount to
many million books and many thousand sets of periodicals. A major contri¬
bution to inter-library lending is made by the National Lending Library for
Science and Technology (see p. 333).
There is a growing number of schemes for the exchange of specialist books
and periodicals as well as information. These involve industrial, commercial
and sometimes university libraries and are normally centred on a major public
or technical college library.
The Scottish Central Library carries out functions similar to those of the
regional bureaux and the National Central Library. Both Central Libraries
are financed in part by Exchequer grants. In Northern Ireland access to the
stocks of all co-operating libraries is available on application to the Belfast
public libraries, Queen’s University Library and the county libraries.
The principal professional organisation is the Library Association, which was
granted a Royal Charter in 1898 to unite all people engaged or interested in
library work, to promote the better administration of libraries and, among
other functions, to hold examinations in librarianship and to issue certificates
of efficiency. The Association in 1971 had a membership of over 18,000 of
whom more than 1,300 were from overseas countries. It maintains a Register
of Chartered Librarians, publishes books, pamphlets and official journals, and
holds regular conferences. There are also associations of libraries of which
the Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux (see p. 333)
and the Standing Conference of National and University Libraries are of
major importance.
New books constitute the large majority of all books published in Britain. In
1970 British publishers issued over 33,000 separate titles, of which more than
23,000 were new books and the rest reprints or new editions. In recent years
there has been a great increase in the number of paperbacked books of all kinds.
The above figures include only a small selection of government publications
by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, which is the largest publishing organisa¬
tion in Britain. The great majority of books, however, are produced by about
428
Literary and
Philological
Societies
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
300 of the principal commercial publishers. These include the university
presses, notably the Oxford University Press and the Cambridge University
Press.
Using copies deposited under copyright law, the British National Biblio¬
graphy is published weekly, with three, six, nine and twelve monthly cumula¬
tions, listing in a classified order, with indexes, all new books and new editions,
excluding reprints, of books published in Britain.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with
book production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association and the
Booksellers’ Association; the Book Development Council promotes British
books overseas. (For sales and exports of books in 1970, see p. 258.)
The National Book League has a membership covering all who are interested
in books; authors, publishers, booksellers, librarians and readers. It en¬
courages an interest in books and arranges exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
Knowledge of British books and periodicals overseas is greatly assisted by the
British Council through the lending and reference libraries (over 220) which
it runs or supplies, through its bibliographical publications, and through the
many touring book and periodicals exhibitions which it organises (238 in
1970-71).
Societies for the promotion of literature include the English Association and
the Royal Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of
Historical, Philosophical and Philological Studies, generally known as the
British Academy, is the leading society of humanistic studies and receives a
grant from the Treasury.
A number of societies sponsor poetry readings and recitals; the Poetry
Society and the Apollo Society are among the best known. Poetry also plays
an important part in various annual festivals, including the National
Eisteddfod—the bardic festival held in Wales—the Stratford-upon-Avon
Festival of Poetry, the Cheltenham Festival of Literature, and the annual
poetry festival organised by the Poetry Book Society in London.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors of which the largest is the Dickens
Fellowship. There are a number of clubs and societies, such as the Book
Society and the Poetry Book Society, which exist to distribute selected new
books to their members.
19 THE PRESS
The British press caters for all political views, different levels of education and
a wide range of interests. It is not subject to State control or censorship.
A large number of newspapers are sold in Britain every day, and although
there are relatively few national newspapers, some of them have circulations
comparable with the greatest in any other part of the world: average daily
sales amount to about million copies per newspaper; individual audited
circulation figures range from about 168,000 to nearly 4^ million.
The national newspapers (daily and Sunday) fall into two categories: popu¬
lar and quality. The tabloid format is more commonly used by the former and
the broadsheet format by the latter. The spread of sizes for dailies ranges from
12 to 26 pages, and for Sundays from 24 to 60 pages. Prices range from ^0-03
to £0-06 for dailies and from £0-04 to £o-oS for Sundays. Separate sections or
pages on finance, business or industry are common, and some papers carry
special supplements on particular subjects, with related advertising. The
quality Sunday newspapers have separate sections for literature and the arts,
business and industry, as well as colour magazine supplements. A colour
magazine supplement is published by a morning newspaper once a week.
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 135 daily and Sunday news¬
papers and 1,174 weekly newspapers are published in Britain. These figures
include certain specialised papers, the circulation of which are limited not by
region, but by interest; for instance, business newspapers, sporting news¬
papers, newspapers in foreign languages for groups of nationals of other lands
resident in Britain and religious newspapers.
Britain imports just over half its newsprint requirements, nearly 1^ million
tons annually, while the rest is made from imported raw materials.
Ownership Newspaper ownership in Britain is concentrated mainly in the hands of a
comparatively small number of large press groups. Although most enterprises
are organised as limited liability companies, individual and partner proprietor¬
ship survives. The seven major newspaper and periodical publishers are:
International Publishing Corporation Limited; Associated Newspapers
Limited; Beaverbrook Newspapers Limited; the Thomson Organisation
Limited; News of the World Organisation; United Newspapers Limited and
Pearson-Longman Limited.
The large national newspaper and periodical publishers are major corpora¬
tions with diversified interests over the whole field of publishing and com¬
munications, and some have shares in the independent television contracting
companies.
Although pronounced views may be expressed in newspapers and their
political leanings may be obvious, they are financially independent of any
political party and not obliged to follow any specific party line.2 In order to
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly; figures are based on the
1971 edition of The Newspaper Press Directory.
2 The exception to non-alignment is the Morning Star which is owned by a co-operative
society and is accepted as expressing the views of the Communist Party of Great Britain.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are
governed by arrangements which vest ownership of the undertaking in trustees,
or operate it in accordance with a deed of trust, or provide that the transfer
of shares be in the hands of trustees. Others have management arrangements
intended to ensure the authority and independence of the editors.
The trend towards concentration of newspaper ownership, which began in
the period after the first world war and was accentuated after the second world
war, gave rise to some public concern lest press monopoly would affect freedom
of information. Consequently it was studied by two Royal Commissions on the
Press, one of which reported in 1949 and the other in 1962. The results of the
recommendations of these Commissions included the establishment and recon¬
stitution of the Press Council; the provision in the Television Act 1963 which
stipulates that, if it appears to the Independent Television Authority at any
time that newspaper shareholdings in television programme companies have
led or are leading to results which are contrary to the public interest, the
Authority may, with the consent of the Minister of Posts and Telecom¬
munications, notify the companies that their programmes may cease to be
transmitted; and the provision in the Monopolies and Mergers Act 19651
under which the Department of Trade and Industry has powers to control the
transfer of a newspaper or newspaper assets to a newspaper proprietor whose
newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with that of the
newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies—the department, in
some cases, referring the matter to the Monopolies Commission for enquiry
and report.
Technological Technological advances in the newspaper industry include the introduction of
Developments web-offset lithography (which is often combined with photo-composition and
the use of the computer in the composing room) and facsimile transmission.
The ‘National
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
Nine morning papers are ‘national’ in the sense of circulating throughout the
British Isles, and there are seven national Sunday papers (see Table 33). All
the national dailies are produced in London, but those with big circulations
also print northern editions in Manchester, and the Daily Express has a
Scottish edition printed in Glasgow. The leading Scottish papers {The
Scotsman and The Glasgow Herald) have a considerable circulation outside
Scotland. Each of the (two) London evening papers has ownership affiliations
with a national daily, but both have their distinctive style, drawing their
readership very largely from people living in and around London.
The regional newspapers of England (86 morning or evening dailies and
Sundays and about 750 newspapers appearing once or twice a week) provide
mainly regional and local news. Some of the daily newspapers also give ex¬
tensive coverage to national affairs, and a number co-operate to provide their
own foreign news service. The leading regional newspapers have wide regional
circulations; a few have nation-wide reputations.
Generally speaking, regional evening newspapers are non-political, while
the morning newspapers are independent or conservative in outlook.
The total circulation of the regional morning and evening papers is estimated
at about 8 million. Of the morning papers The Journal (Newcastle), the York¬
shire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo (Darlington) have circulations of over
100,000 and two provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon
1 This legislation is under review by the Government.
THE PRESS
431
TABLE 33
National’
Newspapers and
London Evenings
Dailies
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
The Daily Telegraph
(1855)
Financial Times (1888)
The Guardian (1821)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1969)
The Times (1785)
London Evenings
Evening News b (1881)
Monday-F riday
Saturday
Evening Standard (1827)
Sundays
News of the World
(1843)
The Observer (1791)
The People (1881)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
The Sunday Telegraph
(1961)
The Sunday Times
(1822)
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Financial Times Ltd.
Guardian Newspapers Ltd.
People’s Press Printing
Society Ltd.
News of the World
Organisation Ltd.
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
Associated Newspapers Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
News of the World
Organisation Ltd.
The Observer Trust
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1971
3,436,214
2,035,169“
4,380,470
1,454,581
168,213
327,897
50,062
2,082,686
341,242
986,852
867,429
527,951
6,170,890
796,528
4,941,738
4,163,105
4,686,564
751,673
1,432,946
° These figures refer to May only when The Daily Mail changed its format.
6 The Evening News costs 3p on Monday to Friday and 4p on Saturday.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tyne) and the Suttday Mercury (Birmingham)—have circulations of over
200,000. Individual circulation figures of regional evening papers start at
about 20,000; most are in the 50,000-100,000 range; a few have circulations of
between 200,000 and 450,000. Weekly papers are mainly of local appeal; they
are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have circulations in the
8,000-35,000 range.
In recent years there has been a growth of free distribution newspapers
(without cover price), some of which are published by orthodox newspaper
publishers. Newspapers of this kind carry about 20 per cent of editorial matter.
London Suburban
Papers
The London local weeklies (163) include papers for every district in Greater
London. They are assembled mainly in groups of six to eight, affiliated in some
cases to larger groups.
A number of new evening newspapers, using the latest production tech¬
nology, have recently been started in the outer metropolitan area on the fringe
of the circulation areas of the two London evening newspapers.
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Wales
Scotland has five morning, seven evening and two Sunday newspapers, in
addition to the Scottish editions of the Daily Express and Sunday Express. The
leading morning papers are The Glasgow Herald and The Scotsman, published
in Edinburgh. Others are: the Daily Record published in Glasgow, the Courier
and Advertiser, published in Dundee; and the Press and Journal of Aberdeen.
Evening papers include the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening
Times and Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s
Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The
Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail and the Sunday Post.
Weekly and local newspapers published in Scotland number about 140. The
most widely known are the People’s Journal, which has several local editions,
and the Weekly News.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening paper and one
Sunday paper, all published in Belfast: they are The News-Letter (Unionist)
and the Irish News (Nationalist), the evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday
News. There are 46 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, with circulations
ranging from about 5,000 to over 25,000. The majority are published by
individual companies.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in
Cardiff; it circulates mainly in southern Wales. In North Wales the Liverpool
Daily Post gives wide coverage to events in the area. Evening papers pub¬
lished in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff, the South Wales Argus,
Newport, and the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea. North Wales is served
by the Liverpool Echo and to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (some 50 papers) includes the English language papers,
some of which carry articles in Welsh; and ten papers in Welsh, of which five
are denominational.
Channel The Channel Islands have two daily (evening) papers (one in Guernsey and
Islands and one in Jersey), a Sunday paper {Island Sun) and two weeklies, which also
Isle of Man circulate in Alderney and Sark. The Isle of Man Times is issued from Mondays
to Wednesdays with a special weekly edition which is published on Friday:
there are five other weeklies.
THE PRESS
433
The
Periodical
Press
News Agencies
There are over 4,460 periodical publications in Britain, classified as ‘general’,
‘specialised’, ‘trade’, ‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There are also some 550
‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or
public services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodicals for all
denominations; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening,
hobbies and humour; journals specialising in various subjects such as politics,
finance and economics, science, agriculture, medicine and the arts; and the
publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and
other associations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales in Britain are: Woman
(2,050,855); Woman's (1,729,826); Woman's Own (1,703,331); Woman’s
Realm (1,022,784); and Weekend (1,274,418); together with the Radio Times
(3,501,096) and TV Times (3,129,381). The leading journals of opinion are
The Economist (circulation 99,747), a politically independent publication
covering topics from a wider angle than its title implies; the New Statesman
(circulation 76,035), which is a review of politics, literature and the arts with
an independent socialist political tendency; the Spectator, which covers much
the same subjects from an independent conservative standpoint; Tribune,
which has a strongly left-wing but anti-communist bias; New Society, which
covers the sociological aspects of current affairs; and New Scientist, which
reports on the progress of science and technology in terms which the non¬
specialist can understand. Punch (110,081), traditionally the leading humorous
periodical, has in recent years devoted increasing attention to public affairs.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, appeal generally speak¬
ing to the more serious type of reader.
The publication of trade, technical, and professional journals (covering
some 500 subjects, many of them in considerable depth) has become one of the
more important aspects of the British publishing industry. In addition to
circulating in Britain, these journals have a considerable circulation outside
the United Kingdom and are an important media for selling British goods
overseas. Their publication ranges in frequency from weekly to quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout the United Kingdom.
Weekly papers are also published in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland:
in Wales several monthly and quarterly journals in both Welsh and English;
in Scotland four monthly illustrated periodicals (Scottish Field, Scotland's
Magazine, Scots Magazine and Scotland), a weekly paper devoted to farming
interests (Scottish Farmer), a number of literary journals, of which the most
famous is probably Blackwood's, and numerous popular magazines; and in
Northern Ireland weekly, monthly and quarterly publications covering farm¬
ing, the linen industry, building, motoring, politics and social work.
There are three principal British news agencies:
Reuters Ltd. is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of the United
Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand through the Newspaper Publishers
Association, the Press Association, the Australian Associated Press and the
New Zealand Press Association, which are parties to a trust agreement to
safeguard the independence and integrity of the news service. Founded in
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1850 and transferred to London in 1851, Reuters now has
about 1,000 correspondents in 180 countries and territories, and links with 77
national or private news agencies, which give it access to coverage by many
434
Training for
Journalism
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
thousands of local reporters. Between 600,000 and 700,000 words of general
news, sports, and economic services reports are received in London every day
over a global network of leased cable and radio circuits. From these messages
regionalised news services, specially tailored to the needs of recipients in the
United Kingdom and eight main overseas regions, are transmitted to 120
countries for distribution to information media, either direct or through
national news agencies. Reuters Economic Services supply up-to-the-minute
information to business houses throughout the world. Its computerised sys¬
tems, including Stockmaster, Videoscan and Videomaster, offer virtually in¬
stant coverage of the important stock and commodity markets by computer
interrogation or video display. A computerised message-handling system,
known as the Automatic Data Exchange, is used to speed up the handling and
distribution of news.
The Press Association Ltd., the British national news agency founded in
1868, is co-operatively owned by the principal newspapers of the United
Kingdom outside London, and the Republic of Ireland. It provides news¬
papers, the broadcasting organisations, Reuters (of which it is a major joint
owner) and other international agencies with a complete service of home news,
including general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all branches of
financial, commercial and sports news; and includes in its services to regional
papers the world news of Reuters and the Associated Press. Through its
Photographic Department the Press Association serves London and regional
newspapers with a daily picture service, including its own world photos and
those of the Associated Press. Its Special Reporting Service supplies reports
of local or special interest to daily and weekly papers and periodicals. All
profits are used to develop the service.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. (Extel), an independent news
agency founded in 1872, is a public company with over 1,000 shareholders,
which supplies financial and sporting news to newspapers and broadcasting
organisations. Racing services are also supplied by teleprinter and telephone
to subscribers in London and the provinces from offices in all important
cities and towns.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by
Associated Press Ltd., which is the British operating company of the Associa¬
ted Press of America, and by United Press International, an international
news agency with a headquarters in London.
A number of other United Kingdom, Commonwealth and foreign agencies
and news services have offices in London, and there are agencies in other
cities, specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require¬
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in the United Kingdom as
in some countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The Printing and Publishing Industry Training Board (which has a chairman
and 23 members—nine employers, nine employees and five from educational
interests) is responsible for training in the printing, publishing and professional
photography industries. Its responsibilities include the formulation of training
schemes, the establishment of standards, ensuring that adequate facilities exist,
and the provision of a regional advisory service.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), composed of
the major representative organisations in journalism and the press, works in
partnership with the Board. Its functions include superintending activities
concerning entry into journalism, setting and conducting examinations; and
organising short training courses and seminars for journalists.
THE PRESS
435
There are two normal methods of entry to newspaper journalism: (i) by
selection for a place on a full-time course lasting for one academic year and
(2) by direct recruitment to a regional or local newspaper. Students selected
for a pre-entry course must have gained two passes at the Advanced level of the
General Certificate of Education (GCE) and be under the age of 20 at the
beginning of a course. Some pre-entry students are sponsored by newspapers;
the others are assisted by the NCTJ to find employment on completion of the
course. The minimum educational requirement for direct entry is five GCE
passes at Ordinary level.
Entrants in both categories take part in a national training scheme which is
compulsory for all beginners under the age of 31. The scheme consists of
on-the-job training, and block-release courses for those who have not attended
a pre-entry course. A similar syllabus covering practical journalism, shorthand,
use of language, law, government and current affairs is used at both kinds of
course. Seven centres (five in England, one in Wales, and one in Scotland)
provide courses for reporters and there is one centre for newspaper photo¬
graphers.
All entrants to regional and local newspapers who are under the age of 24
serve an apprenticeship of three years (two years in the case of graduates)
following a period of probation which last six months for direct entrants and
three months for those who have attended pre-entry courses. At the end of
their apprenticeship trainees take a proficiency test which carries a salary
bonus. NCTJ approved training has been extended into the periodical field
on the basis of a special curriculum and courses are available for entrants in
London where the periodical publishing industry is mainly located.
Other training facilities include a university course in management (at
Warwick University) sponsored by the Newspaper Publishers Association and
the Newspaper Society, and a one-year postgraduate course in journalism
at the University College of South Wales in Cardiff. In addition a wide range
of training courses, covering circulation, advertising, industrial relations and
supervisory management've provided for the regional newspaper industry by
the Newspaper Socie*; training Service. Short general management courses
are also run, in conjunction with the University of Aston in Birmingham.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union Travelling Fellowship Scheme for
the training and education of young journalists throughout the Common¬
wealth, about eight journalists from overseas spend five months in the United
Kingdom each year, two months in the offices of newspapers or periodicals
and three months acquiring a general idea of life in Britain. A limited number
of travelling scholarships are also awarded to British journalists to enable
them to visit Commonwealth countries overseas.
The Thomson Foundation offers scholarships and organises training
courses for journalists from all parts of the world at its Centre in Cardiff,
and provides consultants and tutors for courses for journalists overseas.
The Commonwealth Secretariat is studying a plan for inter-Commonwealth
training arrangements in journalism and communications, based on a com¬
bination of indigenous schemes and training exchanges, and for the provision
of a special course in the United Kingdom on economics and finance for
Commonwealth journalists.
Press
Institutions
The most important organisations to which employers in the industry belong
are the Newspaper Publishers Association, whose members publish national
newspapers in London and Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which
represents the regional, local and London suburban press; the Scottish Daily
436 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Newspaper Society, which represents the interests of daily and Sunday news¬
papers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper Proprietors Association, which
represents the owners of weekly newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern
Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers
in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Publishers Association, whose
membership embraces the independent publishers of trade and technical
publications and general magazines. On the journalists’ side there are the
Institute of Journalists (loj), founded in 1884 as the National Association
of Journalists, and the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in 1907.
All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio, television, public
relations and freelance journalism) are eligible for membership of both these
organisations. In order to achieve joint working and prepare the ground for a
single organisation,1 an arrangement has been made for dual membership
without the payment of extra subscriptions. At the same time, to avoid over¬
lapping, different activities have been allocated to each organisation, the loj
being responsible for professional questions and the NUJ, primarily, for
industrial relations. Total membership is about 26,000 (NUJ about 24,000,
loj about 2,000).
The main aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are to sustain
the dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of
editors, to protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the
education and training of journalists: the Guild has about 400 members. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong.
The Printing and Kindred Trades Federation is the federation of the
printing trade unions which include the National Graphical Association,
the National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA), the
Society of Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT), and the Scottish Typo¬
graphical Association.
The Press The Press Council, established in 1953 and reconstituted in 1963, has a lay
Council chairman and 25 members. Its aims are: to preserve the established freedom
of the British press; to maintain the character of the British press in ac¬
cordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; to keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct
of the press or the conduct of persons and organisations towards the press; to
report on developments in the British press which may tend towards greater
concentration or monopoly; to make representation on appropriate occasions
to the Government, to organs of the United Nations and to press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodical reports recording its work,
and to review from time to time developments in the British press and the
factors affecting them. In fulfilment of these aims, the council carries out the
main centralised research work into the press and the communications industry
generally, and publishes annual reports, which include statistics of the news¬
paper and periodical press and a series of articles examining the structure of
the leading press groups.
The Press and The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say
the Law what it likes provided it does not transgress the law; in general, it is at liberty
1 Progress towards an amalgamation has reached the stage of the preparation of a draft
private Act of Parliament, which is considered to be necessary to constitute the new
combined body.
THE PRESS
437
to comment on matters of public interest. Apart from enactments relating
directly to such matters as the registration of newspapers for postal purposes,
there are no specific press laws but certain statutes include clauses which
apply, in particular or incidentally, to the press. These relate to such matters
as the extent of newspaper ownership in television companies; the transfer
of newspaper assets; restrictions on newspaper reporting of preliminary hear¬
ings of indictable offences (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland); the
right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings of local authorities;
restrictions on the publication of (a) divorce and domestic proceedings in
courts of law, (b) advertisement and investment circulars, which are governed
by Acts dealing with the publication of false or misleading descriptions of
goods and services and with fraud and (c) advertisements of remedies for
certain diseases, which are covered by public health legislation; agreements
between the Post Office and newspaper proprietors on telegraphic communica¬
tions, which must comply with telegraphs legislation; restrictions on certain
types of prize competition; and copyrights, which come under copyright laws.
Of particular relevance to the work of the press are the laws on libel and
defamation: contempt of court—a newspaper may not publish comments
on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice their
reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings nor may it
publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence the
result; and seditious libel and incitement to disaffection. The obtaining and
publication of information from state and official sources of a confidential or
security nature is affected by the Official Secrets Acts.
Legal proceedings against the press are comparatively infrequent; the
majority of actions that do take place are libel actions1 brought by private
individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publisher, printer and
distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author of the article, may all be
held responsible.
1 In view of public anxiety about the severity of some penal damages in libel cases and
the application of official secrets legislation, the Government has set up two enquiries
into these aspects of the law as they affect the press. An enquiry is also in train about
the need for legislation to protect personal privacy in which the press and other media
are involved.
20 TELEVISION
AND RADIO
BROADCASTING
Broadcasting by television and radio in Britain is regulated by the Minister of
Posts and Telecommunications under the Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1949-
1967, which prohibit the sending or receiving of wireless communications,
except under licence.
Radio broadcasting services for Britain and abroad are provided by the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which was established by Royal
Charter in 1927.1 Television services are provided both by the BBC and by
the Independent Television Authority (ITA), which was established by the
Television Act 1954 as a supervisory body to control the operation of com¬
mercial television in Britain. The BBC operates two television and four radio
services on a national basis, and 20 local radio stations. The ITA provides one
television service.
Users of television sets must obtain an annual receiving licence, which can
be bought from most post offices. Licences for sets receiving black and white
pictures cost £7 a year, and for those receiving colour pictures £12 a year.
There were some 16-4 million receiving licences current in Britain in July 1971
of which nearly 15-6 million were for black and white, and over 800,000 for
colour television.
Hours of television and radio broadcasting are regulated by the Minister.
For television, BBC 1 and ITV are required to provide at least 55 hours of
broadcasting a week, but output must not exceed 3,300 hours in a year; for
BBC 2 the weekly requirement is 30 hours and the annual maximum i,95°
hours. Religious and educational programmes and broadcasts in the Welsh
language are excluded from these quotas. For BBC radio, the rules specify
daily limits to the broadcasting hours on each of the services.
Broadcasting Both the BBC and the ITA are constitutionally required to provide a ‘public
Authorities service’ with the purpose of disseminating information, education and
entertainment. The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by
the Royal Charter of 1964 and by the Licence and Agreement of 1969, and
those of the ITA by the Television Act 1964 and its 1969 Licence.
The BBC and the ITA are independent authorities in the day-to-day
operations of broadcasting, including programmes and administration. The
Government, however, retains ultimate control, and the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications, as the responsible minister, is answerable to Parliament
on broad questions of policy and may issue directions to the BBC and the
ITA on a number of technical and other subjects. Both organisations are
expected to show balance and due impartiality in their general presentation of
programmes, particularly where matters of public policy or controversial
1 Under Government proposals, commercial radio stations are to be allowed to broad¬
cast on a local basis (see p. 442)-
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
439
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
The Independent
Television
Authority
subjects are concerned, and in this connection the Minister has powers to
prohibit the broadcasting of any particular item or class of item, or to revoke
the licences of the BBC or ITA at any time. These powers, however, are
treated as major reserve powers and, in fact, no formal veto has ever been
placed on the broadcasting of a particular item. Both the BBC and the ITA
are required to prepare annual reports and accounts which are presented to
Parliament.
The Corporation consists of 12 governors (including a chairman, a vice-
chairman and separate national governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland), each appointed for a period of not more than five years by the
Queen on the advice of the Government. The governors are constitutionally
responsible for the conduct of the whole broadcasting operation, including
the production and presentation of the programmes on television and radio,
and the provision and working of the necessary installations and equipment.
A number of councils advise them on such matters as religious broadcasting,
music, agriculture, school broadcasting, further education, programmes for
immigrants, science and engineering and charitable appeals. The governors
appoint the chief executive officer of the BBC—the Director General—with
whom they discuss all major matters of policy and finance. He is chairman
of the Corporation’s board of management, which also includes the managing
directors for television, radio and external broadcasting, the directors of
programmes for television and radio, the directors of personnel, finance,
public affairs and engineering, and the editor, news and current affairs.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales control the
policy and content of television and radio programmes intended primarily
for reception in their respective countries. Local radio councils, representa¬
tive of the local community, are appointed by the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications (in consultation with the BBC) to help in the develop¬
ment and operation of local radio stations.
The services of the BBC are financed from: an annual grant voted by
Parliament for the domestic services, which is the income from the sale of
broadcast receiving licences less certain deductions for collection and other
expenses; an annual grant-in-aid voted by Parliament for the external
services; profits from BBC publications, mainly the Radio Times, which gives
details of BBC radio and television programmes and, with a weekly sale of
about 4 million copies, attracts a large advertising revenue; and income from
BBC Radio and Television Enterprises. The net revenue from the sale of
licences for the year ended March 1971 amounted to £91-5 million and the
net grant for the external services was £13 ’2 million. The cost of providing the
local radio services is met by the BBC out of licence revenue, although local
authorities are encouraged to contribute.
The Independent Television Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy
chairman and, at present, nine other members (three of whom have responsi¬
bility for Scotland, Wales and Monmouthshire, and Northern Ireland
severally) whose appointment is in the hands of the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications. The ITA plays no part in producing programmes;
these are provided on a regional basis by commercial programme companies.
The authority’s four main functions are to appoint the programme companies,
to control the programme output, to control the advertising and to build, own
and operate the transmitting stations for the independent television network.
The ITA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broad-
44°
The Programme
Companies
Control by
the IT A
Domestic
Television
and Radio
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
casting, religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist
panel advises on medical and allied advertisements.
The chief executive officer of the ITA is the Director General. There are
also two deputy directors general, and a headquarters and regional office staff
covering all technical and administrative services. Regional officers act as
representatives of the ITA to the programme companies.
The ITA receives no payments from licence revenue; the finance for its
operations is drawn from annual rental payments made to it by the programme
companies which amounted to about £7! million in the year ended March
1971. The programme companies also pay to the ITA for transfer to the
Exchequer a further sum (the levy) related to their advertising revenue; in the
year ended March 1971 this amounted to some £25 million.
Fifteen programme companies hold six-year contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions of Britain (two com¬
panies share the contract for London, one providing programmes during
the week and the other at the weekend). The companies operate on a commer¬
cial basis, deriving their revenue from advertisements which are inserted into
and between programmes. The financial resources, advertising revenue,
and programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending
largely on the size of population in their areas. (There are 4-3 million homes
receiving independent television in London as against only 32,000 in the
Channel Islands.)
With the guidance and approval of the ITA, each company plans the
content of the programmes to be broadcast in its area. These consist partly
of material produced by the company itself, partly of that produced by the
other programme companies, and partly of that produced elsewhere, for
example, by the major film companies. The five largest companies (Granada,
Thames, Yorkshire, London Weekend and ATV Network Ltd.) produce a
larger proportion of their own programmes and provide more programmes
for broadcast elsewhere in the national network than do the smaller ones.
A common news service is provided by Independent Television News
Limited, a non-profit-making-company in which all the programme com¬
panies are shareholders. The negotiations concerning the supply, exchange
and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated transmission through
the independent television network take place largely on the Network
Planning Committee which consists of representatives of all the programme
companies and of the ITA.
When a company, on the basis of negotiations with the other companies, has
decided on a programme schedule for its area, it is required to submit this to
the ITA for approval. The authority has wide-ranging powers to control and
regulate the content and quality of programmes; for example, it ensures that a
‘proper balance’ of views is expressed and has drawn up a code on violence
stating that special precautions are to be taken when children are likely to be
viewing. There are also safeguards in the Television Act 19641° prevent news¬
paper shareholdings in a programme company leading to results contrary to
the public interest. However, the ITA believes that newspapers bring valu¬
able qualities to the development of television and is not opposed to investment
by them.
Television viewing has become by far the most popular recreational activity in
Britain and almost all families now have television sets. Average viewing time
per head of population in 1969—70 was over 14 hours a week. In the last decade
BBC Television
Independent
Television
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING 441
there have been major advances in the technical quality and diversity of the
programmes. The introduction of a second BBC television channel in 1964
both increased the choice of programmes available and provided television
pictures of a clearer definition than had previously been possible. The trans¬
mission of colour programmes, which began in 1967 on this new channel and
has since been extended to the other two channels, further increased the scope
of television. A high proportion of programmes transmitted on the three
services during peak viewing hours are in colour.
Radio attracts its largest audiences during the day-time when television is
not on the air. In 1969-70 radio listening averaged some 8^ hours a week per
head of population. Among important innovations in recent years have been
the introduction of a separate BBC radio channel providing continuous ‘pop’
music, and the development of local radio.
In 1936 the BBC launched the world’s first regular public service of high
definition television. It now provides two services: BBC 1, which is trans¬
mitted on both 405 lines very high frequency (vhf) and on 625 lines ultra
high frequency (uhf); and BBC 2, which is transmitted only on 625 lines.
Practically all British families live within range of BBC 1 vhf transmitters.
Over 80 per cent of the population are within range of BBC 2 transmitters,
and some 9 million people are already equipped with sets and aerials capable
of receiving uhf transmissions.
The BBC started the first regular colour television service in Europe in
1967, on BBC 2. In November 1969 BBC 1 went into full colour. BBC colour
television productions cover the whole range of television output: drama,
documentary programmes, feature programmes, films, sport and other out¬
side broadcasts, comedy and other light entertainment, children’s programmes,
music, schools broadcasts, educational programmes for adults, and religious
programmes.
Through co-ordinated planning of programmes on its two television ser¬
vices, the BBC is able to cater simultaneously for people of differing interests.
BBC 1 presents a high proportion of family entertainment programmes and
other programmes with a wide appeal. This allows BBC 2 to be more experi¬
mental, to place greater emphasis on serious cultural and documentary pro¬
grammes, and to cater more for minority tastes.
All BBC 2 programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast
nationally. At certain times of day, programmes of regional news and interest
for different parts of the country are inserted into the BBC 1 service. An ex¬
tension and reorganisation of regional television production has been carried
out, based on proposals outlined in 1969 in the BBC plan Broadcasting in the
Seventies (see Bibliography p. 483). In the course of a year, the BBC television
service broadcasts on the national network for some 6,700 hours. Some 11,000
screen hours are exported annually to 80 countries, including those in Eastern
Europe.
The first regular independent television (ITV) service was inaugurated in
^55 b7 a programme transmission from the ITA London station at Croydon.
Black and white programmes, transmitted on 405 lines vhf, are within range
of almost all the population. In 1969 duplicate programmes in colour were
introduced on 625 lines uhf, and by mid-1971 over 80 per cent of the popu¬
lation were within range of ITV colour transmissions.
The main items broadcast in an average week by the independent television
companies are entertainment programmes, plays and serials, discussions and
documentaries, sport, films, and children’s, religious and educational pro-
442
BBC Radio
Commercial Radio
BBC External
Services
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
grammes. More than one-third of viewing time is filled with ‘serious’ pro¬
grammes. There are about three short advertising intervals an hour, in and
between programmes.
The first regular radio broadcasts by the BBC began in 1927. BBC Radio
provides listeners with four alternative national channels. Following changes
introduced in 1970, each channel has a distinct character of its own. Radio 1,
broadcasting some 12 hours a day, provides a programme of ‘pop’ music,
while Radio 2, broadcasting over 20 hours a day, provides light music as well
as being the principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3, broad¬
casting over 15 hours a day, provides continuous, mainly classical music
(much of which is in stereo) and in the evening offers, in addition, works of
artistic and intellectual interest. Radio 4, broadcasting 17 hours a day, is the
main speech programme, providing the principal news and information service
of the BBC. In addition a wide range of drama, talks and entertainment pro¬
grammes is presented as well as broadcasts to schools.
Local radio was started by the BBC as an experiment in eight towns in
1967 and has since been extended to cover 20 towns. Broadcasting on vhf,
local radio stations provide at least 5-^ hours of locally produced programmes
each day, normally during the early morning, lunch-time and early evening
periods. During the rest of the day they transmit programmes from the BBC’s
national networks. Local broadcasts provide a comprehensive service of local
news and information, besides covering local arts and sports activities and
offering residents opportunities to air their views on subjects of local interest.
Government proposals to permit local broadcasting by a network of up to 60
commercial radio stations were published in March 1971 Alternative
Service of Radio Broadcasting, see Bibliography p. 483). The stations, which
would broadcast on both vhf and medium wavebands, would operate under
the control of the ITA, which would be renamed the Independent Broad¬
casting Authority. Financed by advertising revenue, they would be expected to
combine popular programming with ‘fostering a greater public awareness of
local affairs and involvement in the community’. No date has yet been fixed
for introducing the legislation necessary to implement these proposals.
The BBC broadcasts to most countries overseas. The main objectives of BBC
external broadcasts are to give unbiased news, to reflect British opinion and
to project British life and culture. The BBC broadcasts in 40 languages
(including English) for a total of over 720 hours a week. News bulletins (of
which there are more than 1,000 a week), current affairs programmes, political
commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the main part of the
output. A full service of sports commentaries and results, all kinds of music,
drama and a wide range of general entertainment programmes are also in¬
cluded.
The languages in which the external services broadcast and the length of
time each language is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart
from this the BBC has full responsibility for the broadcasting operations and is
completely independent in determining the content of news and other pro¬
grammes. .
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by additional series of programmes de¬
signed to be of special interest to Africa, Europe and the Caribbean.
The foreign language broadcast services are divided into areas, namely, the
African, Arabic, Eastern, Far Eastern, Latin American, French (to Europe and
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
443
Transmitting
Stations and
Studios
BBC
1TA
Advertising
Africa), Central European, South European, German and East European
Services. Broadcasts range from 70 hours a week in Arabic, 33 hours in Ger¬
man and 31 hours in Russian to half an hour in Nepali. The BBC’s English by
Radio and Television Service is the most extensive language teaching under¬
taking in the world. Some 230 radio programmes of English lessons are
broadcast weekly with explanations in 25 other languages, and recorded lessons
are supplied to some 280 stations in 69 countries. English by Television pro¬
grammes, also produced for teaching purposes, are shown in more than 60
countries.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are rebroadcast by the domestic
radio services of many countries. Rebroadcasting takes the form of direct
relays from BBC transmissions and the use of programme material supplied
in recorded form through the BBC tape and disc transcription service. There
are about 160 rebroadcasts daily of World Service news bulletins in some 40
countries. The Transcription Service offers programmes to more than 80
countries.
Another part of the external services is the Monitoring Service which listens
to and reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news
and comment from overseas to the BBC, the Press, and government depart¬
ments.
Programme links are generally rented by the BBC from the Post Office, al¬
though some are provided by the BBC with Post Office agreement. The opera¬
tion and maintenance of the 231 transmitting stations from which its various
programmes are sent out are, however, solely a BBC responsibility.
For its domestic radio programmes, the BBC uses 151 studios in London
and the regions, and for its external services 47 in London and 7 overseas.
In addition, there are 40 semi-automatic studios which can be operated by
programme officials without engineering staff. BBC television productions
come from main studios at the Television Centre in west London and other
studios in various parts of London, and from fully equipped regional studios
at Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow and Manchester. There are
also television studios at Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Hull, Leeds, Newcastle,
Norwich, Nottingham, Plymouth and Southampton. Outside broadcasting is
covered by a number of mobile units.
The ITA now transmits programmes from 47 vhf and 44 uhf stations through¬
out Britain, programme links being provided by the Post Office. Independent
television programmes are produced at studio centres in Aberdeen, Belfast,
Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Carlisle, Dover, Glasgow, Leeds, London,
Manchester, Newcastle, Norwich, Plymouth, St. Helier, and Southampton.
The establishment of these studios is the direct result of the ITA’s policy of
encouraging the development of regional television, and the programmes are
designed for either local or national broadcasting. A number of new studios
have also been built for colour television.
The BBC does not give publicity to any individual firm or organised interest
except when it is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes.
Under the terms of its licence and agreement it must not broadcast sponsored
programmes or, without the consent of the Minister of Posts and Tele¬
communications, broadcast any matter for payment.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television subject to the
relevant provisions in the Television Act, in particular that there should be
444
Political
Broadcasting
Technical
Developments
Inter-continental
Television
International
Relations
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
no sponsoring of programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should be
clearly distinguishable as such and recognisably separate from the pro¬
gramme, and the amount of time given to advertising should not be so great
as to detract from the value of the programmes as a medium of information,
education and entertainment. In any one hour of broadcasting the amount of
advertising time is normally limited to seven minutes. Averaged over the day’s
programmes it must not exceed six minutes per hour. The ITA has drawn
up a code governing standards and practice in advertising giving guidance
about the types and methods of advertisement that may not be used. Certain
types of advertising are prohibited, notably that of cigarettes (under a govern¬
ment ruling of 1965) and for betting. Advertisements may not be inserted in
certain types of programmes, for example, in broadcasts to schools. The cost
of inserting advertisements in the ITV service is borne by the advertisers,
who pay the programme companies for advertising time.
Broadcasts on political issues include a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament, transmitted on BBC’s Radio 4 when Parliament
is in session, and there is frequent coverage of political subjects in news
bulletins and current affairs programmes on both radio and television.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are also transmitted periodically
under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC and the ITA.
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is advised on the technical
aspects of television and vhf sound broadcasting by the Television Advisory
Committee, which consists of an independent chairman, the Director General
of the BBC, the Director General of the ITA, representatives from the radio
industry, independent members, and representatives of interested government
departments.
Research into technical problems is carried out by the scientific and
engineering staffs of the BBC, the ITA, the Post Office, the Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunications, and the radio industry. Recent developments by the
BBC include the electronic conversion of monochrome and colour television
pictures between the European and the American systems j the reproduction
of television pictures in slow motion; and the development of a sound-and-
vision system, which enables the television sound and picture to be carried
over a single 625-line vision circuit, and thus eliminates the operational com¬
plexity and expense of a separate circuit for the sound. The ITA has carried
out research into unattended transmitter networks and has based its new uhf
network entirely on unmanned transmitters; it is investigating the use of com¬
puters for the control of transmitter networks.
Inter-continental television relays by means of communication satellites began
in 1962 when the first live programme exchanges between the United States
and Europe were made via Telstar, and have increased in range and scale as
synchronous satellites, which appear stationary relative to the earth and thus
permit 24-hour, high-grade transmissions, have been commissioned.
Direct links with other continents were achieved in 1964: between Europe
and Japan, and between Britain and Australia. In 1967 the first world-wide
television programme, containing live sequences from several countries in
Europe and Africa, the United States, Canada, Mexico, Australia and Japan,
was broadcast.
The BBC and the ITA (together with the Independent Television Companies
Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU),
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
445
which was established to advance international broadcasting projects. The
union now has 31 full members among the broadcasting organisations in
Western Europe and 55 associate members (mostly from outside Europe,
including the United States and many of the nations of the Commonwealth).
It manages Eurovision; is responsible for the technical and administrative
arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over that net¬
work and for intercontinental satellite links; and maintains a technical
monitoring station, where frequency measurements and other observations
on broadcasting stations are carried out.
The BBC is a member of the Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.
Each national organisation extends to the others facilities, for instance, in the
use of studios, recording channels, and programme contributions. The BBC,
in addition, provides a large amount of technical aid, particularly in training
the staff of other broadcasting organisations throughout the world, and mem¬
bers of the BBC’s staff are seconded for service overseas.
The BBC, Reuters, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation and the New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation
are joint partners in Visnews, which supplies a service of world news film to
some 150 television organisations in over 80 countries and is the most widely
used newsfilm agency in the world. The International Television Federation
(Intertel), whose members are broadcasting organisations from Canada,
Australia, the United States and the BBC, produces high-quality information
programmes which are exchanged overseas. United Press International, a
television newsfilm agency, and Independent Television News jointly provide
an international service to television organisations via the Eurovision network
and by satellite.
The Government has recently established the Centre for Educational De¬
velopment Overseas (CEDO, see p. 166), which includes in its activities train¬
ing in educational television and radio for members of broadcasting organisa¬
tions overseas. The centre receives an annual grant from the Government.
Training in television work is also provided for overseas trainees at the Thom¬
son Centre in Glasgow, run by the Thomson Foundation, a charitable trust.
The Overseas Development Administration of the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office spends a considerable amount each year on radio and television training
for overseas students in Britain.
The BBC and the ITA participate in the work of the International Tele¬
communication Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency re¬
sponsible for the regulation and control of all international telecommunication
services (including radio and television), for the allocation and registration of
all radio frequencies and, through its international consultative committees,
for the promotion and co-ordination of the international study of technical
problems in broadcasting. The BBC is also represented on the United King¬
dom Committee of the International Special Committee on Radio Interference.
21 SPORT
Central and
Local
Government
Participation
Facilities for
Sport
Interest in most sports in Britain, for both participants and spectators, is grow¬
ing, in some cases (notably swimming, golf, skating and sailing) at a very fast
rate; a recent trend has been the growth of ‘high risk’ sports such as mountain¬
eering and parachuting. Some of the sports most popular among participants
are: swimming, tenpin bowling, fishing, billiards and snooker, association and
rugby football, lawn tennis, squash rackets, golf, riding, cricket and skating.
For spectators (including audiences who watch sport on television) the follow¬
ing sports are among the most popular: association and rugby football, racing,
boxing and wrestling, motor car and motor cycle racing, athletics, cricket, show
jumping, lawn tennis, swimming and skating. Those who engage in sport may
be professionals (paid players) or amateurs.1 Professionals keep up the
technical standards of their sports and spectators make a vital contribution
by their enthusiasm and their financial support; but the sporting life of
Britain derives its character principally from the amateur element—people
who devote time and energy to organising sport and to teaching and training,
as well as the many thousands of all ages who engage in sport for pleasure alone.
The Government is not directly concerned with the organisation or promotion
of sport in Britain; however, it provides funds for the provision of recreational
facilities and for national governing bodies of sport towards administrative
costs, coaching schemes, participation in international events overseas, and the
holding in Britain of important international competitions. In 1971 the
Government announced that the Sports Council (which has advised the
Government on the allocation of funds) would be given executive powers,
including the responsibility for making grants. The Sports Council deals with
sports matters concerning England specifically and Great Britain as a whole;
Scotland and Wales have their own sports councils. All the councils advise the
Government on sport, co-operate with sports organisations and provide a
forum for the discussion of problems affecting sport. Nine regional councils in
England bring together local authorities, voluntary sports and other organisa¬
tions to consider regional sports matters, particularly the planning of facili¬
ties. In Northern Ireland, the Ministry of Education is advised about sport
and physical recreation by the Youth and Sports Council.
In 1970—71 direct government expenditure on sport in Great Britain totalled
some £2 million; in Northern Ireland £453,000 in grants was given to public
authorities and voluntary organisations for sports facilities, playgrounds,
overseas visits and coaching schemes. Voluntary bodies and private concerns
also make substantial provisions for sport in Britain, but the greatest provision
is made by local authorities; capital expenditure by local authorities on sports
and recreational facilities amounted to over £17 million in 1970-71.
The law requires all publicly maintained schools in Britain to provide for the
physical education (gymnastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby Union football, hockey and rowing, are
entirely amateur, but in other sports the distinction between professional and amateur
status is becoming less strictly defined and the Sports Council has recommended
the progressive elimination of the distinction.
SPORT
447
Composite
National Bodies
The Central
Council of Physical
Recreation and
the Scottish
Council of Physical
Recreation
The National
Playing Fields
Association
their pupils. Schools in the national systems (except those solely for infants)
must have a playing field, or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a
gymnasium and other amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls
designed for dance and movement: in an increasing number of areas, physical
education facilities in schools are being expanded to meet the recreational
needs of the whole community. Facilities for, and instruction in, many kinds of
sport are likewise provided at the independent preparatory and public schools
and at the universities (some of which have departments of physical education).
Local authorities also provide playing fields, gymnasia, tennis courts, golf
courses, boating lakes, swimming baths and sports centres on an increasing
scale, and some arrange further education classes in various physical education
subjects. Large industrial firms often provide sports facilities for their
employees and, in many cases, make them available for members of the public.
The national voluntary organisations most closely concerned with the general
development of sport are the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the
Scottish Council of Physical Recreation, and the National Playing Fields
Association. The British Olympic Association, whose main functions are
connected with the participation of British competitors in the Olympic
Games, is also interested in all matters likely to benefit sport or physical
recreation in Britain as a whole. In addition, each sport has its own governing
body with, in many cases, entirely separate autonomous governing bodies in
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The British Sports Association for the
Disabled organises sports and games for disabled people and receives a
government grant.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation (CCPR) in 1971 had a member¬
ship of about 300, over 200 representing national bodies in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland concerned with the development of post-school physical
recreation. Its functions included the promotion of physical recreation, the
organisation of courses for instructors, classes in personal performance,
lectures and publicity events. It has run some 2,000 courses for more than
40,000 people each year and provided advisory, technical and administrative
services, including the secretariat for the Sports Council and regional sports
councils. The CCPR’s role in the arrangements for the reorganisation of the
Sports Council (see p. 446) is being discussed.
The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation (SCPR), the counterpart in
Scotland of the CCPR, has 148 affiliated organisations, including the govern¬
ing bodies of all the Scottish sports, and receives a grant-in-aid from the
Scottish Education Department. In April 1972 the SCPR is to be merged
with the Sports Council for Scotland.
The National Playing Fields Association (NPFA) aims to stimulate the
provision of playing fields, playgrounds and sports centres by publicity and
technical and financial assistance. Since its inception in 1925 it has distributed
over ^1*9 million in the form of grants for playing field and playground
schemes and over £500,000 in the form of loans. It assists more than 400
schemes a year.
The NPFA council is composed of representatives of the governing bodies
of various sports organisations, of the British Olympic Association and the
CCPR, and of a number of educational bodies, voluntary youth organisations,
physical education associations and local authorities. The national head¬
quarters in London employs a small full-time staff, including a technical and
research department which gives advice on the provision and layout of indoor
448 BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and outdoor sports facilities, on matters relating to the recreational needs of
children from their earliest years, and on the establishment of playgrounds
and play leadership schemes. The NPFA derives its funds mainly from
voluntary contributions but it also receives a small government grant towards
administrative costs. It has branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland and in
nearly every English and Welsh county; administration is carried out volun¬
tarily—in many cases in association with a local authority or rural community
council.
National Nine national sports centres in Britain—four in England, two in Scotland, two
Sports in Wales and one in Northern Ireland—are administered by the CCPR and the
Centres SCPR with the help of government grants. The centres, some of which were
established with voluntary funds, provide a wide range of courses for instructors
and performers in many recreational activities. One centre has been developed
as a national sailing centre; two are primarily used as training centres for
mountain activities, including climbing and rescue techniques; and a fourth
provides training for outdoor activities such as walking, climbing, sailing and
field studies. Combined facilities for ranges of sports are provided at the other
centres which include the Crystal Palace National Recreation Centre in
London and the Welsh National Recreation Centre in Cardiff. The centre at
Crystal Palace has a main stadium seating 12,000 spectators, a sports hall seat¬
ing 2,000 spectators, a swimming hall with pools meeting Olympic require¬
ments, a teaching pool and a gallery for 2,000 spectators, an indoor cricket
school, practice rooms for all indoor activities, a hostel for 140 residents and
staff housing: these facilities are available for international competitions as
well as for training purposes, and are supported by a grant from the Greater
London Council, in addition to the government grant. The Cardiff centre is
supported by local authorities, as well as by government grants.
A newly built national rowing centre (financed by the Government and
Nottinghamshire County Council) is to be administered by the CCPR.
Meadowbank sports centre in Edinburgh, administered by Edinburgh
Corporation, includes facilities for athletics, water sports, cycling, squash
rackets, indoor climbing, target shooting and archery. There are several
national centres for individual sports or specialist courses, generally adminis¬
tered by the sponsoring organisations. These include: the national equestrian
centre in Warwickshire, run by the British Horse Society; and a national sports
stadium for the paralysed and disabled—the first of its kind in the world—run
by the British Sports Association for the Disabled.
POPULAR SPORTS Sports popular in Britain are described below in alphabetical order. Mention
is made of various organisations concerned with them, usually in Britain as a
whole; in many cases, associated or subsidiary organisations for particular
sports exist in one or more of the four component countries of Britain.
Aero Sports Aero sports—including private flying, gliding and parachuting—are becoming
increasingly popular in Britain. Private flying is promoted by the British Light
Aviation Centre, founded in 1966, to which are affiliated some 212 clubs.
There are over 18,000 pilots active in Britain (many of whom fly for business
purposes as well as for pleasure) and some 2,800 light aircraft are registered.
Air-racing, with about 250 pilots, is controlled by the Royal Aero Club. Gliding
attracts about 7,000 people to some 80 gliding clubs in Britain. The clubs
organise flying activities, including regional and national championships, and
are members of the British Gliding Association, founded in 1929. Parachuting
SPORT
449
Archery
Association
Football
is a popular sport, with 30 clubs affiliated to the British Parachute Association,
formed in 1962. The association, which has about 3,000 members, organises
national championships, prepares teams for international championships, and
regulates the safety aspects of the sport.
Target archery, which is to be reintroduced into the Olympic Games in
1972, has a following in Britain of some 9,000 members from over 600 clubs
and societies. The governing body is the Grand National Archery Society,
founded in 1844, to which are affiliated regional and county organisations.
Although football of a kind was played in the Middle Ages or even earlier,
as an organised game it dates from the nineteenth century; association football
was adopted at Cambridge in 1848. Nowadays, the game (often called ‘soccer’)
is controlled in England by the Football Association (FA), formed in 1863.
The FA promotes the interests of the game; prevents infringement of the
agreed rules; arranges for instruction of promising young players (some
£50,000 is spent annually on coaching); organises matches and competitions,
including the international matches played by England, the Amateur Cup
competition, the FA Sunday Cup competition, two national youth competitions,
and the competition for its own leading trophy, the FA Challenge Cup; and
chooses and manages English international teams. Over 360 clubs are registered
with the FA and some 32,000 clubs are affiliated to district or regional associa¬
tions. The FA derives its main income from subscriptions and admission
charges to international and cup matches, and ploughs back a large portion of
the money into the game. Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales have their
own controlling bodies: the Scottish Football Association, the Irish Football
Association and the Football Association of Wales.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played once or
twice weekly) are controlled by the Football League, comprising 92 professional
clubs. The League’s funds are derived largely from a levy of 4 per cent of the
net gate receipts from league matches, after allowable expenses have been
deducted; from annual payments from football pools promoters for the use of
league fixture lists; and from television rights. In Scotland the Scottish Foot¬
ball League comprises 37 clubs; Northern Ireland has its own League. Clubs
belonging to the English and Scottish Leagues are organised in divisions, the
members of which compete against one another for the respective league
championships. During the season attendances at Football League matches
total about 30 million and gate receipts amount to about £8 million. Several
million people stake small weekly sums on the results of league matches in a
form of pool betting operated by commercial companies.
The annual competitions for the FA Cup and the Scottish FA Cup are
organised on a knock-out basis and the finals—two of the most important
football matches of the year—are played at Wembley Stadium, London
(which can accommodate some 100,000 spectators) and at Hampden Park,
Glasgow (which can accommodate about 135,000 people). International
matches, especially those between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland, also excite great interest.
Amateur footballers greatly outnumber the professionals (there are nearly
1 million amateurs, including schoolboys and members of the armed forces,
to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals), but their teams rarely compete on equal terms,
since professional teams are more systematically and intensively trained.
Amateur teams compete against each other for the FA Amateur Challenge Cup.
45°
Athletics
Highland Gaines
Badminton
Basket Ball
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England and Wales, amateur athletics, which include running (track, road
and cross-country), relay racing, jumping, vaulting, hurdling, steeplechasing,
throwing and race-walking are governed (for men) by the Amateur Athletic
Association (AAA), founded in 1880 to encourage the sport, to establish
uniform regulations, and to promote annual championship meetings. The
AAA is now organised from club to national level by honorary officers and
managed by representative members appointed by the Northern, Midland,
Southern and Welsh areas and by affiliated clubs and associations (amateur
athletic clubs, schools and youth organisations), of which there are hundreds
throughout England and Wales. It administers a coaching scheme under which
eight full-time national coaches lecture and coach in schools, youth clubs,
evening institutes, training colleges and universities and at special courses
organised by the national associations, by regional associations or by the
Central Council of Physical Recreation. Some of the coaches’ work is directly
concerned with coaching young athletes but their main duties are to instruct
men who wish to qualify as AAA coaches, over 1,600 of whom give voluntary
service in the counties and districts of England and Wales. Women’s athletics
in England and Wales are promoted by the Women’s Amateur Athletic
Association, founded in 1922. Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own
amateur athletic associations, with similar functions; there are also separate
women’s AAAs for each country.
Track meetings are held throughout Britain from April to October. The
main events in England and Wales are: the national championships for men
and women and international matches usually held in London; area and county
championships; and the universities, Services, business houses and schools
championship meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country running from
October to March, and county, area and national cross-country champion¬
ships are held. Scottish events follow a similar pattern.
International athletics and the selection of British teams are dealt with by
the British Amateur Athletic Board, composed of representatives of the
national associations for men and women and affiliated to the International
Amateur Athletic Federation. Teams from Britain compete in the Olympic
Games, and separate teams representing England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, held at four-yearly
intervals between the Olympic Games.
The Highland Games, traditional gatherings of local people in the Highlands
of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting the weight,
and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping competitions take place,
are unique spectacles which attract large numbers of spectators from all oyer
the world. Among better known Highland Games are the Braemar Gathering
on Deeside (traditionally attended by the Royal Family), the Argyllshire
Gathering at Oban, and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear, but the Badminton Association of
England—which together with the Scottish and Welsh Badminton Unions
today organises the sport in Great Britain—was formed in 1893 and the first
tournament was promoted five years later. By I9t4 game had spread to
many other Commonwealth countries and it is now played throughout the
world (the national bodies in Great Britain were among the founder members
of the International Badminton Federation).
Basket ball is played in Britain both indoors and outdoors, primarily by men
and boys. There are about 1,000 senior clubs and the game is played in many
Billiards and
Snooker
Bowls
Boxing
Canoeing
SPORT 451
schools. The Amateur Basket Ball Association, organises championships and
is affiliated to the Federation Internationale de Basket Ball Amateur.
Although references to billiards in England survive from the sixteenth
century, the character of the present game was acquired at the end of the
seventeenth century .The Billiards and Snooker Control Council is the game’s
controlling body (for professionals and amateurs) and holds the copyright of
the rules. In the early 1930s snooker (a shorter game offering more diverse
incidents) began to acquire popularity, often at the expense of professional
billiards, and today, although both games are played widely at amateur levels,
snooker forms the essence of the professional game.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. Nowadays the
game is regulated, as far as the English Bowling Association (EBA) is con¬
cerned, by the International Bowling Board (IBB), founded in 1905. The
Bowling Associations of Ireland, Scotland and Wales also play to the IBB’s
laws, but there are other bowling associations in England—the English Bowl¬
ing Federation, the Crown Green Association and the English Women’s
Bowling Association—which are not under the IBB’s control. During the
summer bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in winter it is played
on indoor greens, which are increasing in number. At one time regarded as a
pastime for the elderly, the game is now played by people of all ages. Over
2,620 bowling clubs are affiliated to the EBA. International, inter-county
matches, and national championship competitions of singles, pairs, triples and
fours are played. The World Bowls Championships for 1972 are to be played
at Worthing, Sussex.
Boxing as an English sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modern
form, which has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates from 1865
when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules eliminating much of
the brutality that had characterised prize fighting, and making skill the basis
of the sport. Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs,
and there are various amateur boxing competitions carried out according to
the rules of the Amateur Boxing Association, which controls all amateur
boxing, including schoolboy boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing
in the three Services.
Professional boxing is covered by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board’s strict medical regulations provide for an
examination of boxers before and after each contest, an extensive annual
medical examination and the appointment of inspectors to ensure that the
regulations are observed and to guard against over-matching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests since
the presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late Lord
Lonsdale in 1909. Amateur championships are decided at 11 weights: light
flyweight, flyweight, bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight, light welter¬
weight, welterweight, light middleweight, middleweight, light heavyweight
and heavyweight. In professional boxing there are no light welterweight or
light middleweight categories.
Canoeing, the world’s oldest type of boating, dates as a modern sport from the
mid-nineteenth century; a canoe club was founded in 1866 and in 1867 a canoe
regatta was held on the Thames. The International Canoe Federation was
formed in 1946; in Great Britain, the British Canoe Union (a member of the
452
Cricket
Croquet
Cycling
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Federation and established in 1936) promotes canoeing in all its forms and
assists the interests of its members. There are about 400 canoe clubs in
Britain, with about 100,000 devotees.
Cricket, sometimes called the English national game, has uncertain origins,
but it is known to have been played at Guildford Grammar School by 1550,
and after the Restoration (of 1660) it became fashionable with the nobility,
who competed with each other to sponsor matches for very large sums of
money. Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century was the
famous Hambledon Club in Hampshire, whose members supported the most
brilliant players of the day. Towards the end of the century the Marylebone
Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in London and reframed the ‘Laws of
Cricket’. It has since had considerable influence on the development of the
game in Britain. Its headquarters, Lord’s (named after Thomas Lord, who
rented the first headquarters), are at a cricket ground in London which was
opened in 1814. Nowadays, cricket in Britain is governed by the Cricket
Council, made up of representatives of the MCC, the Test and County
Cricket Board (representing first-class cricket) and the National Cricket
Association (representing club and junior cricket). The MCC retains world¬
wide responsibility for the laws of cricket.
The game is played in schools and universities, and most towns and villages
(as well as industrial sports clubs) have teams which play at least one match a
week from late April to early September. In the London area a large number
of pitches are provided by local authorities to augment those leased or owned
by clubs. In the Midlands and the north of England there is a network of
League cricket, contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players reinforced
by professionals, often distinguished overseas players.
The focus of the season centres on a series of ‘Test matches’ played between
England and a touring team from overseas (or sometimes two teams). The
first of these matches was played in Melbourne between England and Australia
in 1877. Since then international tours have taken place regularly between
countries of Test status, which now number seven. The matches last 30 playing
hours spread over five days and arouse great popular interest.
In addition to the Test matches, a First Class County Championship,
decided on a points system, is contested by 17 counties, each playing 24
three-day matches. The counties not deemed first-class and second elevens of
the first-class counties play in a Minor Counties Championship. The univer¬
sity teams of Oxford and Cambridge rank as first-class and play an annual
match at Lord’s. The counties also compete in a knock-out competition with
one-day matches and in a Sunday League.
Cricket is also played by women and girls in Britain, the governing body
being the Women’s Cricket Association.
Croquet originated in Britain in the middle of the nineteenth century and has
developed into a game played by people of all ages on the lawns of local
croquet clubs and private gardens. Some 70 clubs are registered with the
Croquet Association—formed in 1896—which promotes the sport in Britain
and maintains links with croquet associations in other countries.
In Britain the internationally recognised body for cycle racing is the British
Cycling Federation which has 692 affiliated clubs and provides third party
insurance and a legal aid service for its members. It controls track and massed
start road racing in Britain, and is concerned with the cycling events in the
SPORT
Fencing
Field Sports
Hunting
Game Shooting
453
Olympic and Commonwealth Games and the annual world championship.
Time trials are organised by the Road Time Trials Council.
Touring by bicycle is catered for by both the British Cycling Federation
and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (CTC), the oldest touring club in the world,
with a membership of some 20,000. CTC representatives in all parts of Britain
offer help to touring cyclists; its 50 district associations arrange holiday and
week-end tours and competitions, rallies and rides of all kinds; and its travel
department provides touring itineraries for members both at home and over¬
seas, and maintains a full travel agency service. Other benefits include a tour¬
ing magazine, a member’s handbook, legal aid and third party insurance.
Fencing as a sport has made considerable progress throughout Britain during
the past 25 years. The Amateur Fencing Association (founded in 1902) has
over 700 clubs, and many classes are organised and financed by local authori¬
ties. Fencing is also practised in most universities and an increasing number of
schools. Under the auspices of the Association, national championships and
international tournaments are held every year.
The most popular field sports—hunting, game shooting and fishing—have a
long history, and still play a considerable part in the life of the countryside.
The British Field Sports Society looks after their interests.
In Britain hunting means primarily fox hunting on horseback with a pack of
hounds; but it also includes stag hunting (in Devon and Somerset), hunting
the hare, either on foot with beagles or with harriers when the followers are
mounted, and otter hunting along river banks. Hunting depends not on right
but on the goodwill of small landowners and farmers, most of whom support
their local hunt by allowing it to ride over their property.
Fox hunting orginated some 200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for
the landed gentry and local farmers, it has gradually widened its appeal, in
spite of the fact that it is an expensive pastime for those who ride to hounds.
The sport is not without its critics, but an ever larger number of people,
including many townsmen, take a keen interest in it. Most hunts meet two
or three times a week and an estimated 25,000 to 30,000 people ride to hounds
weekly, many others following in cars, on bicycles or on foot. The fox hunting
season starts in early November and lasts until April; it is preceded by cub
hunting (the hunting of young foxes) when young hounds are trained. At the
end of the season most hunts organise steeplechases (point-to-points) which
attract large crowds. There are over 200 packs of hounds in England and
Wales, 17 in Northern Ireland, and 10 in Scotland. Hunts are financed mainly
by the subscriptions of their members (£15 or less to £50 or more), by ‘caps’
(contributions paid by non-subscribers), and by the proceeds of such annual
events as the point-to-points and the hunt ball. Sometimes the Master of
Fox-hounds, who is in charge of the hunt, bears a proportion of the cost.
Game shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the
early part of the nineteenth century; nowadays, game consists mainly of
grouse, partridge, pheasant, snipe and woodcock. There is virtually no free
shooting in Britain. A certificate (for which a fee is payable) must be obtained
from the local police by anyone who possesses, purchases or acquires a shot
gun1; and it is necessary to have a licence to kill game. Nearly all game birds
1 A shot gun is defined in the Criminal Justice Act 1967 as ‘a smooth bore gun having
a barrel not less than 24 inches in length, not being an air-gun’. Shot guns are subject to
control under the Firearms Acts 1937 and 1965.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are found on privately owned land, shot over either by the owner and his
friends or by syndicates which have leased the shooting rights. However, in
some parts of the more remote countryside, rough shooting may be enjoyed in
a less formal way. Much of the country’s wild-fowling is controlled by the
Wildfowling Association of Great Britain and Ireland, through its numerous
clubs. The Game Conservancy, formed by landowners, farmers and others
interested in game conservation and research, collects information on a
national scale and studies factors controlling game population.
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other birds are protected by law
during a ‘close season’ and allowed to breed in security, often under the care of
privately employed gamekeepers on numerous estates. Grouse shooting takes
place mostly in Scotland, northern England and north Wales; partridge and
pheasant shooting in nearly all regions of Great Britain, the former mainly
over farm land, and the latter in or near woodland; and wildfowling on the
marshes and fenlands of the coastal areas.
Deer stalking is mainly a sport of the Highlands of Scotland. The deer are
preserved in privately owned ‘deer forests’, covering from 9,000 to over
30,000 acres (3,642 to 12,140 hectares), and are also protected during close
seasons.
Fishing is the most popular of the country sports, being within the reach
of everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and
line to the experienced fly-fisherman). There are some 3 million anglers
in Britain. The outstanding forms of the sport are salmon and trout fishing.
There are trout streams in most parts of the country, and in Scotland many
hundreds of lochs also provide good sport. Salmon fishing may be enjoyed in
many regions of Britain, but the best salmon rivers are in Scotland. In England
and Wales the most widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as
pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench, chub and bream, and the National
Federation of Anglers (NFA) has some 450,000 members in over 3,000 clubs
comprising 160 associations. Match angling—competitive fishing for coarse
fish by weight—is a feature of the many angling clubs affiliated to the NFA,
particularly in the Midlands and north of England. A national angling cham¬
pionship, composed of teams of 12 anglers, is organised annually by the NFA,
and the NFA enters a team in the International Angling Competition. As a
rule, freshwater fishing has to be paid for and local enquiries made about any
permit or licence required. Most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs; trout
and salmon fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club, stay at an hotel
with its own fishing rights, or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or
month. The cost of salmon fishing is often high.
Coastal fishing and deep-sea fishing for shark and tunny are growing in
popularity and are free to all (except for salmon and sea trout fishing, which is
by licence only).
The National Anglers’ Council is a central consultative and co-ordinating
body, representative of the various national bodies concerned with angling.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in other
parts of Britain until towards the end of the nineteenth century. Since then,
however, it has gained steadily in popularity (particularly since the mid-
1950s); nowadays there are golf courses in the vicinity of many towns and
villages in all parts of Britain—some owned by local authorities, but the
majority owned by golf clubs—and the question of the game’s large land
SPORT
Gymnastics
Hockey
Judo
Lacrosse
455
requirements is being studied by the Department of Social and Economic
Research at the University of Glasgow. The headquarters of the Royal and
Ancient Golf Club is St. Andrews, Scotland.
The main event of the golfing year is the British Open Golf Championship,
first played in i860; other important matches include the Walker Cup (for
amateurs) and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played between Britain
and America; the Amateur Championship; the World Amateur Team
Championship; and the Ladies Championship.
Gymnastics involving bodily exercises and disciplines were originally de¬
veloped as a sport in ancient Greece; nowadays in Britain the sport is a non-
seasonal activity for both men and women and is controlled nationally by
the British Amateur Gymnastics Association (affiliated to the Federation
Internationale de Gymnastique and the British Olympic Association). The
Association’s activities include the promotion of international and national
programmes (including the national championships at the Royal Albert Hall,
London) and of a proficiency award scheme for people of all ages.
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain
for at least five centuries, and some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in
Scotland, are still played extensively. Modern hockey, however, dates from
the formation (in 1886) of the Hockey Association of England. The Inter¬
national Hockey Rules Board, comprising the Associations of England,
Scotland and Wales and the Irish Hockey Union, together with delegates from
the Federation Internationale de Hockey, representing the rest of the world,
controls the rules of the game. There are some 2,000 men’s hockey clubs
throughout Britain with at least 30,000 male adult players; some 600 boys’
schools also play the game. A county championship is held annually in
England; in Wales there is a cup competition; and in Scotland there is a cup
competition and six local league competitions. Regular amateur international
matches are also played. Men’s hockey is an Olympic sport, and arrangements
for the British team are made by the British Olympic Hockey Board.
The controlling bodies of women’s hockey are: the All England Women’s
Hockey Association (founded 1895) to which are affiliated some 900 clubs and
2,200 schools, representing a total membership of about 72,000 adults and
1 - i million schoolgirls; the Irish Ladies’ Hockey Union; the Scottish Women’s
Hockey Association; and the Welsh Women’s Hockey Association. The first
international women’s hockey match took place in 1896. Nowadays such a
match is played annually at Wembley Stadium (in addition to those played in
other parts of the country) and attracts some 60,000 spectators.
Judo, an Olympic sport originating in Japan, has a large and growing follow¬
ing in Britain and is governed by the British Judo Association, which is
affiliated to the International Judo Federation under the rules of which judo
competitions are conducted. There are some 580 clubs in the Association,
which has coaching schemes for some 30,000 registered members.
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North
America, is played mainly by women—in girls’ schools, at lacrosse clubs, and
at universities. Women’s international and regional matches are played under
the auspices of the All England Ladies’ Lacrosse Association, the All Wales
Ladies’ Lacrosse Association and the Scottish Ladies’ Lacrosse Association.
The men’s game, controlled by the English Lacrosse Union, is played in ten
456 BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
universities, several colleges of education and by clubs and schools, mainly in
the London, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and Nottingham areas. Matches
played include county matches, an annual fixture between the North of
England and the South, and international matches between Australia,
America, Canada and England.
Lawn Tennis The forerunner of modern lawn tennis (the game known zsjeu de paume) was
introduced into England from France in the fifteenth century and a ‘tennis
court’, built by Henry VIII, is still in use at Hampton Court. The modern
game, first played in England in 1873, quickly became very popular; in 1877
the first championships were played. The Lawn Tennis Association, the
game’s controlling body in Britain, was founded in 1888. The international
governing body of the game (the International Lawn Tennis Federation, with
headquarters in London and Paris) was founded in 1913.
The number of tennis players has greatly increased during the present
century, particularly since the game has spread to practically every country in
the world. In Britain the game is played in almost all girls’ and in many boys’
secondary schools, on private courts, in parks and recreation grounds and at
several thousand tennis clubs.
The annual Wimbledon fortnight, held during the summer, is the main
event of the lawn tennis season in Britain, and, in fact, in the world. These
championships, for players of many nationalities, draw large crowds; the
grounds at the All England Club at Wimbledon can accommodate over 30,000
spectators, including 14,000 round the Centre Court where the finals are
played. Other tournaments which attract a good deal of attention are: the British
Hard Court Championships, the British Junior Championships, and the
County Championships. There are also national competitions for boys’ and
girls’ schools. The most important international events are the Davis Cup (for
men) and the Federation Cup competition (for women). Women players from
Britain and the United States also compete for the Wightman Cup.
Motor Sports Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain; more
racing and sports cars have been built in Britain than in any other country;
and British drivers (including women drivers) have an international reputation
second to none. The Royal Automobile Club (RAC) is the governing body of
motor sport in Great Britain, and the 750 motor clubs registered with it
organise each year 5,500 motor sporting events, 230 of which are race meetings
held on 17 different racing tracks licensed by the RAC. The RAC also issues
yearly 24,500 competition licences covering all events from hill climbs and
autocross to full international race meetings; and it organises the British Grand
Prix which counts towards the Formula One World Motor Racing Champion¬
ship. Kart racing also comes under the RAC’s jurisdiction.
In addition to motor car racing, there is motor cycle racing—the most
important contest of the year is for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy for
which the controlling body is the Auto-Cycle Union (founded in 1903 and
represented on the Federation Internationale de Motorcycliste), with over 700
affiliated clubs in Great Britain. Motor cycle speedway racing, introduced into
Britain in 1928, is governed by the Speedway Control Board.
Mountaineering The popularity of mountaineering has greatly increased in recent years. Clubs
in the British Mountaineering Council (BMC) and the Mountaineering
Council for Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number over 190,
ranging from national clubs, such as the Alpine Club (founded in i857> the
SPORT
Netball
Orienteering
Polo
Racing
Horse-racing
457
oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish Mountaineering
Club, to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. A number of local
education authorities, and national bodies such as the Central Council of
Physical Recreation, the Scottish Council of Physical Recreation and the
Outward Bound Trust, have established mountaineering training centres in
the hills. Training courses are run jointly by the CCPR and BMC, the Youth
Hostels Association and other bodies, and many universities and schools have
mountaineering sections. Membership of the known clubs is about 15,000
but several times this number take part in climbing and mountaineering.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring and climbing
most of the great ranges of the world, for example, the first ascent of the
Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, and of Kangchenjunga in 1955. In
recent years frequent expeditions have gone to Greenland, Alaska, the Andes,
Patagonia, the Caucasus and the Pamirs, as well as the Himalayas.
Netball is a popular game for girls and women. The controlling body in
England is the All England Netball Association to which clubs, colleges and
schools are affiliated through county netball committees. The three women’s
Services and national youth, university and college organisations are also
affiliated. National tournaments for counties, clubs, colleges and schools and
international matches are organised each year; and inter-Commonwealth tours
are also arranged.
Orienteering involving competitive wayfinding across country (usually on
foot) was introduced into Britain on a national basis in the early 1960s,
although similar activities had been promoted in the past (the armed forces,
for instance, often use wayfinding in training programmes). Both men and
women participate and the sport is organised for team and individual competi¬
tions by the British Orienteering Federation. Several schools have taken up
the sport, combining outdoor exercise with practical geography.
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British
in India, and brought to England in 1869. The sport’s governing body is the
Hurlingham Polo Association, to which many overseas polo associations are
affiliated. Polo players are a very small section of the community, for the cost
of keeping polo ponies is high. However, many clubs now own trained ponies
for hire to members at moderate cost. About 470 players receive handicaps
from the Association, but many less expert players take part in club games for
which they may be locally handicapped. Public interest in polo has increased
in recent years and spectators attend inter-club tournaments and matches
between high-handicap teams with players from several countries.
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean, first and foremost,
horse-racing. Other forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing,
pony racing, trotting races and pigeon flying.
Horse-racing has been known in England since Tudor times and even earlier.
The Jockey Club (formed about 1750), which controlled flat racing, and the
National Hunt Committee (founded in 1866), which controlled steeple¬
chasing and hurdle racing, amalgamated in 1968 as The Jockey Club. Granted
a royal charter in 1970, the club controls all horse-racing in England and its
rules are the basis of universal turf procedure.
Flat racing is carried on from late March till the end of October and national
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
hunt racing from August to June. The classic flat races are: the Two Thousand
Guineas for colts and fillies, and the One Thousand Guineas for fillies only,
both run at Newmarket; the Derby for colts and fillies and the Oaks for fillies
only, both run at Epsom; and the St. Leger, for colts and fillies, run at
Doncaster. The Derby is the outstanding event in the racing calendar; it takes
place annually in late May or early June and is one of the most colourful and
exciting events of the sporting year. The most fashionable race-meeting of
the season is held at Ascot in Berkshire, in mid-June, and is known as ‘Royal
Ascot’, being traditionally attended by the Sovereign.
The most important national hunt meeting is the National Hunt Festival
Meeting at Cheltenham in March. The best-known single steeplechase is the
Grand National at Aintree, near Liverpool, run annually since 1839.
In England and Wales there are 57 racecourses (which must be licensed by
The Jockey Club) and Scotland has six racecourses. There is a total of about
900 days’ racing annually. There are some 11,000 horses in training in Great
Britain, at a total average cost of about £30 a week.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926,
when the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester.
There are now about 130 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of them near
large towns, and meetings are held two or three times a week. The licensing
authorities for greyhound racing tracks are the county and county borough
councils. Some 10 million people a year attend greyhound racing, the rules
of which are drawn up by the National Greyhound Racing Club, founded in
1928. The 51 greyhound racecourses which accept the rules of the Club are the
largest in the country and account for approximately 92 per cent of the total
attendance and totalisator turnover. All are members of the National Grey¬
hound Racing Society which controls the general policies of greyhound racing,
administers the affairs of, and acts as spokesman for, the sport.
Greyhound racing can be conducted only at a licensed greyhound racecourse
and only on 130 racing days in a licensing year (1st July-3oth June). There
are some 10,000 greyhounds in training under the National Greyhound Racing
Club Rules, and the average cost for their upkeep including training is about
£375 a week.
Betting on racing is allowed for people of at least 18 years of age, subject to a
government betting duty (see p. 345). ‘Bookmakers’ (who must hold personal
permits) provide betting facilities both on and off racecourses and greyhound
tracks (bets laid off course in Great Britain comprise about 87 per cent of the
betting turnover, mainly through some 15,000 licensed betting offices). For
horse-racing, the Horserace Totalisator Board (HTB), a statutory body, runs
totalisator betting (a form of pool betting), both on and off the courses; for
greyhound racing there is no official body, but some 70 tracks are allowed to
run their own totalisators under strict control by local authorities. Book¬
makers and the HTB have to contribute a ‘betting levy’ to the Horserace
Betting Levy Board which promotes the advancement of veterinary science
and education and the improvement of horse breeding (including the work of
the National Stud at Newmarket) and horse-racing in general.
Riding The British Horse Society is the national body responsible in Great Britain for
promoting the interests of horse and pony breeding, furthering the art of
riding, and encouraging horsemastership and the welfare of horses and ponies.
It provides tests, lectures, publications, a film library, courses and examina¬
tions, and employs a national instructor who, together with riding schools
Greyhound Racing
Betting on
Racing
SPORT
459
Show Jumping
Rowing
Rugby Football
approved by the Society, helps to promote horsemastership throughout the
country. With some 18,000 members, the Society—which runs the National
Equestrian Centre in Warwickshire—is also the parent body of the Pony Club
and the Riding Club Movement. The Pony Club runs its own national
championships, arranges conferences, instructors’ courses and efficiency tests,
and publishes information on riding techniques and horse management. The
Riding Clubs also hold national championships each year, and the Riding Club
Committee is jointly responsible with the Arab Horse Society for the Golden
Horseshoe Long Distance Ride—a test of stamina for horses and riders, held
annually in different parts of Britain.
Horse trials are held throughout Britain during the spring and summer.
The three-day trials held each year—in April at Badminton, Gloucestershire,
in May at Tidworth, Hampshire, and in September at Burghley House,
Lincolnshire—are among the outstanding equestrian events of the year.
These trials include dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping; some
45 one-day trials on similar lines are held annually.
Affiliated dressage competitions are held throughout the year, many of them
as qualifying rounds for championships held at the Royal International Horse
Show and the Horse of the Year Show (see below) and for dressage champion¬
ships at the National Equestrian Centre.
Show jumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association, which
is responsible for drawing up the rules for the judging of jumping competitions
and prescribing the general standards and height of obstacles for show
jumping. It encourages the holding of show jumping events and keeps a
register of horses and ponies taking part at affiliated shows. The Association
seeks to improve the standard of jumping and to provide for the representation
of Great Britain in international competitions. More than 800 shows are
affiliated each year to the Association, which has a membership of over 9,000.
The two major show jumping events each year are the Royal International
Horse Show and the Horse of the Year Show.
Rowing is enjoyed by participants from all sections of the community and
attracts considerable spectator interest. The art of oarsmanship is taught in
many schools, universities and rowing clubs (including women’s clubs)
throughout Great Britain, where the governing bodies of the sport are the
Amateur Rowing Association and the Scottish Amateur Rowing Association.
Since the late 1940s, the number of rowing clubs has doubled. The first rowing
course in Britain to Olympic 2,000-metre standards has been opened at the
National Water Sports Centre in Nottingham.
The University Boat Race between eight-oared crews from Oxford and
Cambridge originated in 1820 and has been rowed on the Thames each spring
from 1836. The Head of the River Race in March (also on the Thames) is the
largest assembly of racing craft in the world—more than 350 eights row in
procession. At Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire (founded in 1839) crews from
all over the world compete each July in various kinds of races over a straight
course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-1 kilometres). Many other riverside resorts
arrange summer regattas. The oldest annual event in the English racing
calendar is Doggett’s Coat and Badge, founded in 1716 and organised since
by the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers; originally for professional
watermen and limited to six entrants, the race (along the Thames in London)
is now open to amateurs (who must still be apprentice watermen).
Rugby football (‘rugger’) is played according to two different sets of rules.
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rugby Union Football (in which there are 15 players in a team) is played (in
England) under the auspices of the Rugby Football Union, established in
1871. International matches between England. Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and
France are played regularly at the leading rugby football grounds of each
country, including Twickenham, London—the headquarters of the Rugby
Football Union—and there are tours by international teams. Other important
rugby matches are the county championship competitions, the annual match
between the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the Hospitals’ Cup Final,
and the Inter-Services tournament. Membership of the Rugby Union is
confined to amateur clubs of which there are over 1,600 in membership, with
about 1,000 schools.
Rugby League Football—a 13-a-side game for professionals as well as
amateurs—is played mostly in the north of England. The game’s governing
body, the Rugby Football League (instituted in 1895) has its headquarters
at Leeds and regularly sends touring teams to Australia and New Zealand.
Annual international games, professional and amateur, are played against
France. The major match of the season—the Rugby League Challenge Cup
Final—has attracted crowds of 100,000 at Wembley Stadium in recent years.
Sailing has always been popular on Britain’s inland and coastal waters but in
recent years the sport, and in particular small boat sailing, has greatly widened
its appeal. The Royal Yachting Association (RYA), the national governing
body for both sailing and power yachting, has over 1,500 clubs and 32,000
personal members. The RYA has approved sailing schools giving courses for
novices, a National Sailing Centre where instructors are coached and tested,
and is responsible for the selection of Great Britain’s Olympic team. One of
the world’s main regattas takes place from Cowes in the Isle of Wight annually
during the first week of August. Other major events are held at such sailing
centres as Poole, Lowestoft, Harwich, Burnham on Crouch, Plymouth,
Falmouth and the Clyde. Racing is subject to the rules of the International
Yacht Racing Union, founded in 1907.
The Joint Shooting Committee for Great Britain, founded in 1955, represents
its member associations—the National Rifle Association (NRA), the National
Small-Bore Rifle Association (NSRA) and the Clay Pigeon Shooting Associa¬
tion (CPSA)—in the International Shooting Union and the British Olympic
Association. The Committee sponsors all entries to international competitions.
Full-bore (7-62 mm and -303 in.) rifle and pistol (high power) shooting is
organised by the NRA, founded in i860. Some 80 county rifle associations, 90
schools and more than 500 rifle clubs are affiliated to the NRA. The annual
Imperial Meeting at Bisley Camp, Surrey—attended by some 2,500 competi¬
tors from Britain and other Commonwealth countries, including cadets from
schools—comprises (for individuals and teams) competitions for members of
the Services and for schools, and target rifle competitions at county, national
and international level, concluding with the Queen’s Prize, which attracts
about 1,000 entries. The NRA also organises postal matches for British and
overseas teams, and sends teams to other Commonwealth countries.
Small-bore (-22 in.) rifle and pistol shooting—carried out either on indoor
ranges of 15 to 25 yards (14-23 m) in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards
(183 m)—and air-pistol shooting (’177 ^n‘) at ^ yards and 10 metres (both
indoors and outside) are also widely practised in Britain. Some 4,000 clubs are
affiliated to the NSRA, which arranges inter-club and inter-county competi¬
tions for teams and individuals. Clubs also compete in county and local
SPORT
Skating
Ski-ing
Squash Rackets
Swimming
461
groups. The NSRA organises a National Bisley Meeting (usually attended by
more than 2,000 competitors), a Scottish meeting (some 600 competitors),
and the British Pistol Championships (some 500 competitors) at Bisley.
International small-bore rifle and pistol matches are held with teams from
overseas. The NSRA provides coaching and advisory services.
Clay pigeon shooting clubs are situated in all parts of Great Britain; the
sport is governed by the CPSA (comprising individual shooters and clay
pigeon clubs), which represents Great Britain in major international events.
The world’s first skating club was formed in Edinburgh in 1742 and the first
mechanically refrigerated ice rink was built in London in 1876. There are
now 37 artificial ice rinks in Britain, and where facilities exist many local
authorities provide skating tuition for school children. Over 70 ice clubs are
affiliated to the National Skating Association of Great Britain (which also
promotes roller skating), formed in 1879—one of the associations which in
1892 established the International Skating Union to supervise and standardise
ice figure, ice speed and (later) ice dance skating regulations.
When there is sufficient snow, ski-ing takes place in several parts of Britain.
The governing body of the sport is the National Ski Federation of Great
Britain. Ski-ing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the winter
sports centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and Glenshee,
where ski-runs equal to those in other areas of Europe have been developed,
and ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction are now available. There are
some 50 artificial ski-slopes in areas other than the Scottish centres.
Squash rackets is thought to have originated at Harrow school in the 1850s;
the Squash Rackets Association, formed in 1929 to promote and organise the
game, is affiliated to national organisations throughout the world. The game,
which is both amateur and professional, is played mainly by men and boys
(it is very popular in many boys’ schools, youth clubs and universities),
although an increasing number of participants are women. There are national
inter-county championships. With some 700 clubs in England alone, squash
rackets is one of the fastest growing sports.
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the
seaside, and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people.
The existence of indoor swimming baths (mainly provided by local authorities)
makes all-the-year swimming possible, and instruction and coaching is
provided in some places by qualified teachers who hold certificates for
elementary or advanced teaching awarded by the Amateur Swimming Associa¬
tion (ASA). The ASA’s objects are to promote the teaching and practice of
swimming, diving and water polo and to stimulate public opinion in favour of
providing proper accommodation and facilities for them; and to draw up and
enforce uniform laws for the regulation of amateur swimming, diving and
water polo championships and competitions in England.
Underwater swimming (sub aqua), one of the fastest growing sports in
Britain, is governed nationally by the British Sub Aqua Club, which promotes
underwater exploration, science and sport. Formed in 1953, the Club has
become the largest in the world, with some 14,000 active members and 425
branches in Britain and overseas. A training programme for members forms
one of the Club’s main activities.
462
Table Tennis
Tenpin Bowling
Volleyball
Water Ski-ing
Weightlifting
Wrestling
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table tennis had its origins in Britain in the late nineteenth century and was
then often referred to as ‘ping pong’ (the name is derived from the sound of the
ball hitting the bat). In 1902 the Ping Pong Association was formed to organise
championships, and in 1927 it was reconstituted as the English Table Tennis
Association—the body which today controls the game.
Types of bowling are thought to have been played in ancient Egypt and have
been known in Europe for over 700 years. Tenpin bowling was re-introduced
in its present form from North America in i960 and rapidly became a popular
sport in Britain where the controlling body is the Tenpin Bowling Association,
founded in 1961.
Volleyball, introduced into Europe from the United States, is growing in
popularity in England and Scotland where it is promoted by the English
Volleyball Association and the Scottish Volleyball Association. There are some
120 clubs affiliated to the English Association, and both associations are
members of the British Olympic Association. National championships are
held annually and there is a special emphasis on coaching, particularly in
schools.
The popularity of water ski-ing in Britain as a summer sport has increased
greatly in the last 20 years, despite the often unfavourable climate. There are
nearly 70,000 water-skiers throughout the country. The British Water Ski
Federation was formed in 195* arid British participants now compete in major
international events. AVithin Britain national championships for men and
women are contested in three classic parts -figures (free-style tricks ),
slalom and jumping, with an award to the best overall performer.
Modern weightlifting with bar-bells and dumb-bells became popular towards
the end of the nineteenth century; the first championships open to the world
were held in London in 1891. The sport is regulated on a world-wide scale by
the International Weightlifting Federation, formed in 1920, and in Britain
by the British Amateur Weightlifters’ Association.
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world. The style most commonly
used in Britain is the ‘free’ style, which evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can
or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling is still
practised in the north of England and in Scotland, and Cornish style wrestling
(in which the contestants wear rough canvas jackets by which all holds must
be taken) takes place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the free and Graeco-Roman
styles features at the Olympic Games; in the Commonwealth Games only
free style is wrestled. Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British
Amateur Wrestling Association, which is affiliated to the International
Amateur Wrestling Federation, under the rules of which all wrestling is
conducted. Professional wrestling is usually in the ‘all-in’ or ‘free’ style, which
is not the same as the free style used in amateur wrestling.
APPENDIX
Adoption of
Metric System
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
CURRENCY
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There
are six denominations: 50p; lOp; 5p; 2p; Ip; and ^p.
METRIC EQUIVALENTS FOR BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The Metrication Board was set up in 1969 to promote the planning and
publicising of the changeover to the international system of units for weights
and measures throughout the economy and educational system, mainly by 1975.
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
,840 square yards
640 acres
= 2-54 centimetres
= 30-48 centimetres
= 0-914 metre
= 1 -609 kilometres
1 square inch = 6-451 square centimetres
= 1 square foot = 929-03 square centimetres
= 1 square yard = 0-836 square metre
= 1 acre = 0-405 hectare
= 2-59 square kilometres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
1 quart =
1 gallon :
1 bushel =
1 quarter =
= 1 square mile
= 0-568 litre
= 1-136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2-909 hectolitres
16 oz.
14 lb.
112 lb.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (lb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1-016 metric tons
0-907 metric ton
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them,
as the case may be, for example, 1 centimetre — 0-394 inch, and 1 inch — 2-540
centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-404
0-309
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
464
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Thermometrical
Table
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
35-368
40-914
45-460
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 553
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade — 212° Fahrenheit.
To convert °Fahrenheit into °Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by f;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by f, then add 32.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide to
further reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers are asked to note that in Britain the Central Office of Information refer¬
ence documents marked with an asterisk may be obtained, on payment of a small
charge, from the Central Office of Information, Reference Division Distribution
Unit, Hercules Road, Westminster Bridge Road, London SE1 7DU; and overseas
they may be obtained from British Information Offices.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Information can
be purchased from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These
pamphlets are listed here with their respective prices {postage extra).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from
they H.M. Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
Physical
Background
Demographic
Background
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
Best, R. H. and Coppock, J. T. The Changing Use of Land in
Britain Faber
Bowen, David. Britain’s Weather David & Charles
East, W. Gordon, Editor. Regions of the British Isles (series)
Nelson
Fairbrother, N. New Lives, New Landscapes
Architectural Press
Martin, W. Keble. A Concise British Flora in Colour. 2nd edn
Ebury Press
Mitchell, J. B., Editor. Great Britain: Geographical Essays
Cambridge University Press
Mountfort, G., Hollom, P. A. D. and Peterson, R. A. Field
Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe. Rev. edn. Collins
Newman, L. Hugh. The Complete British Butterflies in Colour
Michael Joseph
Reader’s Digest. Complete Atlas of the British Isles
The Reader's Digest Association
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse.
3rd edn Longmans
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: A Geographic and
Economic Survey. 5th rev. edn Longmans
British Regional Geology Handbooks HMSO
Meteorological Office Annual Report, 1970 HMSO
Allen, D. Elliston. British Tastes Hutchinson
Howard, Alexander. Endless Cavalcade: A Diary of British
Customs and Traditions Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Johns, E. A. The Social Structure of Modern Britain. Corrected
reprint Pergamon
Marsh, D. C. The Changing Social Structure of England and
Wales, 1871-1961 Routledge
Annual Reports
Registrar General, Northern Ireland For 1969 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland
Part I. Mortality Statistics For 1969 HMSO
Part II. Population and Vital Statistics For 1969 HMSO
£
1952 2-10
1962 2-10
1969 2-75
1960 3-15
onwards to
5-25
1970 3-75
1969 2-50
1962 2-70
1966 1-50
1968 1-75
1966 5-50
1963 5-25
1962 3-50
1947 0-40
to
1970
1971 0-80
1968 2-25
1964 1-50
1966 0-87i
1966 2-00
1971 1-52*
1971 3-85
1971 1-35
466
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports—contd.
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
Part I. Medical: Tables 1969 HMSO 1971
Part II. Population Tables 1968 HMSO 1970
Part III. Commentary 1966 HMSO 1970
Census of Northern Ireland 1966. General Report
Belfast, HMSO 1968
Census 1971. Preliminary Report, England and Wales HMSO 1971
Scotland HMSO 1971
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics 1815-1950,
by N. H. Carrier and J. R. Jeffery HMSO 1953
Household Food Consumption and Expenditure 1968 HMSO 1971
Population of the United Kingdom. First Report of the Select
Committee on Science and Technology HMSO 1971
Sample Census 1966 Great Britain Summary Tables HMSO 1967
Social Trends No. 1. Central Statistical Office HMSO 1970
Ulster Year Book 1971 Belfast, HMSO 1971
£
3-90
1-50
1-35
1-50
0-60
0-30
0-421
1- 25
2- 40
1-621
3- 25
0-75
General Survey
The Monarchy
Parliament
2. GOVERNMENT
Birch, A. H. The British System of Government Allen & Unwin
Calvert, H. Constitutional Law in Northern Ireland
Sweet & Maxwell
Clarke, John Joseph. Outlines of Central Government (including
the judicial system of England). 14th edn Pitman
Cross, J. A. British Public Administration
University Tutorial Press
Hanson, A. H. and Welles, Malcolm. Governing Britain
Fontana-Collins
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 5th edn
Cambridge University Press
 The Queen’s Government Penguin
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History of Modern
Britain since 1485. 9th edn A. G? C. Black
Lawrence, R. J. The Government of Northern Ireland: Public
Finance and Public Services Clarendon Press
Stacey, Frank. The Government of Modern Britain
Oxford University Press
Wade, E. C. S. and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law. 8th edn
Longmans
Hardie, F. The Political Influence of the British Monarchy
Batsford
The Monarchy in Britain Reference Pamphlet R.5526/71 COI
Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A Parliamentary Dictionary.
3rd edn Butterzvorth
Butler, David E. and Freeman, Jennie. British Political Facts,
1900-1967. 2nd edn Macmillan
 and Stokes, D. Political Changes in Britain: Forces shaping
Electoral Choice Macmillan
Campion, Lord, Consultant Editor) Fellowes, Sir Edward and
Cocks, T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas Erskine May’s Treatise
on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament
Butterworth
Coombes, David. The Member of Parliament and the Administra¬
tion Allen & Unwin
Fairlie, Henry. The Life of Politics Methuen
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parliament. 6th edn Cassell
Hanson, A. H. and Crick, Bernard, Editors. The Commons in
Transition Fontana-Collins
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Party Politics
Vol. I. Appeal to the People Cambridge University Press
Vol. II. The Growth of the Parties Cambridge University Press
Vol. III. The Stuff of Politics Cambridge University Press
Laundy, Philip. The Office of Speaker Cassell
 and Wilding, Norman. An Encyclopaedia of Parliament
Cassell
Richards, Peter G. Parliament and Foreign Affairs
Allen & Umvin
Roberts, Geoffrey K. Political Parties and Pressure Groups in
Britain Weidenfeld & Nicolson
1967
1968
1965
1970
1970
1966
1965
1969
1965
1968
1970
1970
1971
1970
1968
1970
1971
1966
1968
1964
1970
1960
1961
1962
1964
1968
1967
1970
1-25
5-00
1-50
1-10
0-50
l-37i
0-20
1-75
1-75
1- 05
4-00
2- 10
#
2- 50
3- 50
4- 50
8-80
2-00
2-10
1-50
0-50
2-25
2-50
2- 521
3- 75
4-20
1- 75
2- 50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Prime
Minister, The
Privy Council,
Government,
Government
Departments
Local
Government
‘The Times.’ House of Commons 1970 The Times 1970
The British Parliament
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5448/71 HMSO 1971
The Organisation of Political Parties in Britain
Reference Paper R.4769/69 COI 1969
Parliamentary Elections in Britain
Reference Paper R.5513/70 COI 1970
Benemy, F W. G. The Elected Monarch: The Development of
the Power of the Prime Minister Harrap 1965
Brown, R. G. S. The Administrative Process in Britain Methuen 1970
Fry, Geoffrey Kingdom. Statesmen in Disguise. The Changing
Role of the Administrative Class of the Home Civil Service,
1853-1966 Macmillan 1969
Mackintosh, John P. The British Cabinet. 2nd edn Stevens 1968
New Whitehall Series: For the Royal Institute of Public Adminis¬
tration
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, by Sir John
Winnifrith Allen & Unwin 1962
The Central Office of Information by Sir Fife Clark
Allen & Unwin 1971
The Colonial Office, by Sir Charles Jeffries Allen 6? Unwin 1955
Her Majesty’s Customs and Excise, by Sir James Crombie
Allen & Unwin 1962
The Foreign Office, by Lord Strang and others Allen & Unwin 1955
The Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam Allen & Unwin 1955
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government, by Evelyn
Sharp Allen & Unwin 1969
The Inland Revenue, by Sir Alexander Johnston
Allen & Unzvin 1965
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, by Sir
Geoffrey King Allen & Unwin 1958
The Scottish Office and other Scottish Departments, by Sir
David Milne Allen & Unwin 1958
The Treasury, by Lord Bridges. 2nd edn Allen & Unwin 1967
The Ministry of Works, by Sir Harold Emmerson
Allen & Unwin 1956
Annual Reports
Civil Service Department For 1969 HMSO 1970
Her Majesty’s Civil Service Commissioners For 1969 CSC 1970
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.5599/67 COI 1967
Central Government in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5564/71 HMSO 1971
The Civil Service. Report of the Committee 1966-68 (Fulton
Report) Cmnd 3638 HMSO 1968
Her Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Public Departments
[5 issues a year] HMSO
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration: Report for
1970 HMSO 1971
467
£
3-50
0-22
#
#
1-25
3-75
6 00
2-75
2-00
2-50
0-90
1-75
1-75
1- 50
2- 00
1-75
1-75
1- 50
2- 00
1-50
0-37i
free
*
0-30
0-87i
0-20
1-25
Clarke, J. J. Outlines of Local Government of the United
Kingdom. 20th rev. edn Pitman 1969
Cross, C. A. Principles of Local Government Law. 3rd edn
Sweet & Maxwell 1966
Drain, Geoffrey. The Organisation and Practice of Local Govern¬
ment Heinemann 1966
Griffith, J. A. G. Central Departments and Local Authorities
Allen & Unwin 1966
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of Local Government
and Administration. 8th rev. edn Butterworth 1968
Headrick, T. E. The Town Clerk in English Local Government
Allen & Unwin 1962
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Local Government. 3rd edn
Macmillan 1968
Jackson, W. Eric. Achievement: A Short History of the London
County Council Longmans 1968
Jewell, R. E. C. Central and Local Government Knight 1966
Mapstone, L. and Pearce, P. An Introduction to Local Govern¬
ment in England and Wales. 2nd edn Estates Gazette 1965
Municipal Year Book and Public Utilities Directory
For 1971 Municipal Journal 1971
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 2nd edn Shaw 1962
2 00
3-90
1-75
3-25
3-75
1-75
1- 25
0-50
2- 10
2-12*
8-40
5-25
468
The Fire Service
The Law
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Report
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1969 and 1970 Cmnd 4753 HMSO
The Future Shape of Local Government Finance
Cmnd 4741 HMSO
Local Government in Britain and Addendum 1970
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5505/68 HMSO
Local Government in England. Government proposals for Re¬
organisation Cmnd 4584 HMSO
Local Government Reform [Summary of Maud Report]
Cmnd 4039 HMSO
The Management of Local Government
Vol. I. Report of the Committee HMSO
Reform of Local Government in Scotland
Cmnd 4583 HMSO
Reform of Local Government in Wales HMSO
Scotland: Local Government Reform [Summary of Wheatley
Report] Cmnd 4150-1 HMSO
The Staffing of Local Government. Report of the Committee
HMSO
Fire Protection Directory 1971 Benn
Annual Reports
Departmental Report on the Fire Services for Scotland
For 1968 Cmnd 4110 HMSO
Fire Research 1970 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England and Wales)
For 1970 Cmnd 4700 HMSO
The Fire Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5580/67 COI
Report of the Departmental Committee on the Fire Service
Cmnd 4371 HMSO
3. LAW AND ORDER
Abel-Smith, Brian and Stevens, Robert. In Search of Justice:
Society and the Legal System Allen Lane
Black, H. K. and Latham-Brown, D. J. An Outline of English
Law Methuen
Cornish, W. R. The Jury Allen Lane
De Smith, A. Constitutional and Administrative Law Penguin
Edwards, J. LI. J. Law Officers of the Crown Sweet & Maxwell
Fanner and Latham, Editors. Stone’s Justices’ Manual
Butterzvorth
Foulkes, David. Introduction to Administrative Law
Butterworth
Halsbury, Lord. Laws of England. 3rd edn. Editor-in-Chief
Viscount Simonds. 43 vols Butterworth
Hanbury, H. G. English Courts of Law. 4th edn
Oxford University Press
Harding, Alan. A Social History of English Law Penguin
Holdsworth, Sir William. A History of English Law. 16 vols
Methuen!Sweet & Maxwell
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Justice in England. 5th edn
Cambridge University Press
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law. 7th edn
Butterworth
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law. 6th edn
John Murray
Radzinowicz, Leon. A History of English Criminal Law and its
Administration from 1750. 4 vols Stevens
Wade, H. W. R. Administrative Law. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press
Walker, D. M. The Scottish Legal System William Green
Walker, Peter N. The Court of Law David & Charles
Wraith, R. E. and Lamb, G. B. Public Inquiries as an Instrument
of Government Allen & Unzvin
£
1971 0-07
1971 0-30
1968 0-20
1971 0-12i
1969 0-17i
1967 0-75
1971 0-22^
1971 0-30
1969 0-15
1967 1-05
1971 3-50
1969 0-11
1971 0-95
1971 0-22*
1967 *
1970 1 00
1968 3-15
1966 1-05
1968 2-50
1971 1-50
1964 4-20
1971 10-50
1968 2-50
1954 258-00
to
1964
1967 0-371
1966 0-371
1956 2-70
to to
1968 4-50
1967 2-50
1969 1-80
1967 1-75
1948 5-50
to to
1968 7-00
1967 1-50
1969 3-75
1970 1-75
1971 4-50
Treatment of
Offenders
The Police
Service
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Yardley, D. C. M. Introduction to British Constitutional Law.
3rd edn Butterworth 1969
Annual Reports
The Law Commission for 1969-70 HMSO 1970
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice Act
For 1969-70 HMSO 1971
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid Scheme
For 1969-70 HMSO 1971
Council on Tribunals For 1969 HMSO 1970
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales
For 1970 Cmnd 4708 HMSO 1971
Criminal Statistics, Scotland For 1970 Cmnd 4707 HMSO 1971
Scottish Law Commission For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
The English Legal System
CO I Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5312/68 HMSO 1968
Justices of the Peace in England and Wales. The appointment and
duties of HMSO 1967
Royal Commission Assizes and Quarter Sessions [Beeching Report]
Cmnd 4153 HMSO 1969
469
£
1-60
0-25
0-45
0-40
0-221
1-90
0-55
0-171
0-221
free
0-871
McClean, J. D. and Wood, J. C. Criminal Justice and the Treat¬
ment of Offenders Sweet & Maxwell 1969
Morris, Pauline. Prisoners and Their Families Allen fsf Unwin 1965
Rose, Gordon. Schools for Young Offenders Tavistock 1967
Walker, N. D. Crime and Punishment in Britain
Edinburgh University Press 1965
West, D. J. The Young Offender Duckworth 1967
Wolff, Michael. Prison. The Penal Institutions of Britain—
prisons, borstals, detention centres, attendance centres, approved
schools and remand homes Eyre & Spottiswoode 1967
Annual Reports
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
Parole Board For 1970 HMSO 1971
Parole Board for Scotland For 1970 HMSO 1971
Prisons in Scotland For 1969 Cmnd 4476 HMSO 1970
The Work of the Prison Department 1970 Cmnd 4724 HMSO 1971
People in Prison Cmnd 4214 HMSO 1969
Report on the Work of the Probation and After-Care Department,
1966-68 Cmnd 4233 HMSO 1969
The Sentence of the Court. A Handbook for Courts on the Treat¬
ment of Offenders HMSO 1966
Social Work and the Community Cmnd 3065 HMSO 1966
The Treatment of Offenders in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4414/68 HMSO 1968
Conlin, J. Local and Central Government: Police Administra¬
tion Cassell 1967
Critchley, T. A. A History of the police in England and Wales
Constable 1967
Howe, Sir Ronald Martin. The Story of Scotland Yard
Barker 1965
Marshall, Geoffrey. Police and Government: the Status and
Accountability of the English Constable Methuen 1965
Whitaker, Ben. The Police Eyre & Spottiswoode 1964
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police at the Metropolis
For 1970 Cmnd 4680 HMSO 1971
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary for Scotland
For 1969 Cmnd 4396 HMSO 1970
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary (Counties and Boroughs
in England and Wales) For 1970 HMSO 1971
The Police Service in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5598/69 HMSO 1969
3-15
1- 05
2- 60
3-50
1-75
2-50
0-15
0-30
0-20
0-50
0-65
0-62^
0-421
0-25
0-11
0-20
2-10
2-50
1-25
0-37
1-05
0-65
0-15
0-70
0-221
4. DEFENCE
Barnett, Correlli. Britain and Her Army 1509-1970
Allen Lane
Brassey’s Annual: Defence and the Armed Forces 1971, edited by
Major-General J. L. Moulton and others Clowes
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1971-72, edited by John W. R.
Taylor Sampson, Low, Marston
1970 5-00
1971 4-20
1971 12-50
470
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1971—72, edited by R. V. B. Blackman
Sampson, Low, Marston
Jane’s Weapons Systems 1971—72, edited by R. T. Pretty and D.
Archer Sampson, Low, Marston
The Military Balance 1970—71 Institute for Strategic Studies
Supplementary Statement on Defence Policy 1970
Cmnd 4521 HMSO
Supply Estimates 1971-72, Defence HMSO
Statement on the Defence Estimates Cmnd 4592 HMSO
£
1971 12-50
1971 12-50
1970 0-65
1970 0-15
1971 0-70
1971 0-45
State and
Voluntary
Services
5. SOCIAL WELFARE
Brown, M. Introduction to Social Administration in Britain
Hutchinson
Forder, A., Editor. Penelope Hall’s Social Services of England
and Wales Routledge
Hobman, David. Who Cares? A Guide to Voluntary and Full-time
Social Work Mowbrays
Jefferys, M. An Anatomy of Social Welfare Services
Michael Joseph
Marsh, David. The Welfare State Longmans
Morris, Mary. Voluntary Work in the Welfare State Routledge
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social Services:
Handbook of Information and Directory of Organisations. Rev.
edn XCSS
 Directory of Grant-making Trusts NCSS
  Public Social Services: Handbook of Information. 12th
edn NCSS
Timms N. Social Work. An Outline for the Intending Student
Routledge
Willmott, Phyllis. Consumer’s Guide to the British Social
Services Penguin
Annual Report
Charity Commissioners for England and Wales
For 1970 HMSO
Social Services in Britain  
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5595/69 HMSO
1969
1971
1971
1965
1970
1970
1970
1968
1966
1970
1971
1971
1969
1- 25
2- 50
0-50
3- 00
1- 50
2- 50
0-62i
4-00
0-80
1-50
0-40
0-30
0-62^
Social Security
George, V. N. Social Security: Beveridge and After Routledge
Gilbert, B. B. The Evolution of National Insurance in Great
Britain Michael Joseph
Gregg, Pauline. The Welfare State Harrap
Social Security in Britain „, _
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5455/70 HMSO
1968
1966
1967
1970
2-10
4-20
2-00
0-22^
Health and
Welfare
Abel-Smith, B. A History of the Nursing Profession Heinemann
Brockington, C. F. A Short History of Public Health. 2nd edn
J. & A. Churchill
Dainton, Courtney. The Story of England’s Hospitals
Museum Press
Farndale, J., Editor. Trends in the National Health Service
Pergamon
Farndale, J. and Freeman, H., Editors. New Aspects of the
Mental Health Services Pergamon
Foren, R. and Brown, M. J. Planning for Service. An Examination
of the Organisation and Administration of Local Authority Social
Services Departments Charles Knight
Forsyth, Gordon. Doctors and State Medicine: a study of the
British Health Service Pitman {Medical)
Medawar, J. and Pyke, D. Family Planning Penguin
National Old People’s Welfare Council. The Elderly: hand¬
book on care and services (VTA^ -71
National Society for Clean Air. Clean Air Year Book 1970-71
T'JSZC' A
Parker, Julia. Local Health and Welfare Services
Allen & Unwin
Townsend, P. and Wedderburn,
Welfare State
Annual Reports
Central Health Services Council
Dorothy. The Aged in the
Bell
For 1970 HMSO
1960
1966
1961
1964
1967
1971
1966
1971
1968
1970
1965
1966
1971
2-10
1-50
1- 05
7-00
5-25
2- 00
1-50
0-35
0-42i
0-50
1-50
1-05
0-22|
Child Care
Immigration and
Race Relations
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Report—contd.
Department of Health and Social Security
For 1970 Cmnd 4714 HMSO
 On the State of the Public Health For 1969 HMSO
Health Education Council For 1969-70 The Council
Ministry of Health and Social Services (Northern Ireland).
Report of the Chief Medical Officer
For 1966 Cmd 510 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department. Social Work in Scotland in 1969
Cmnd 4475 HMSO
Scottish Home and Health Department and Scottish Health
Services Council. Health Services in Scotland
For 1970 Cmnd 4667 HMSO
Care of the Elderly in Britain Reference Paper R.5858/69 COI
Health and Welfare: The Development of Community Care.
Revision to 1975-76 Cmnd 3022 HMSO
Health Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5154/68 HMSO
The Hospital Building Programme. A revision of the Hospital Plan
for England and Wales Cmnd 3000 HMSO
Hospital Plan for Northern Ireland 1966-75
Cmd 497 Belfast, HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4972/69 COI
The Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts. Report of the Advisory Com¬
mittee on Drug Dependence HMSO
Reorganisation of the Scottish Health Services
Cmnd 4734 HMSO
Review of the Hospital Plan for Scotland Cmnd 2877 HMSO
Boss, P. Exploration into Child Care Routledge
A Guide to Adoption Practice. Advisory Council on Child Care
HMSO
Annual Report
Children in Care in England and Wales, March 1970
Cmnd 4559 HMSO
Children in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5236/67 HMSO
Children’s Department of the Home Office. Report on Work 1967-
69 HMSO
Banton, Michael. Race Relations Tavistock
Rose, E. J. B. and Associates. Colour and Citizenship. A report
on British race relations For Institute of Race Relations OUP
Sivanandan, A. Coloured immigrants in Britain. Select biblio¬
graphy. 3rd edn Institute of Race Relations
Annual Reports
Community Relations Commission For 1970-71 HMSO
Race Relations Board For 1970-71 HMSO
Commonwealth Immigrants Acts 1962 and 1968. Statistics 1970
Cmnd 4620 HMSO
The Education of Immigrants. Education Survey 13 HMSO
6. EDUCATION
Argles, Michael. South Kensington to Robbins: An Account
of Technical and Scientific Education since 1851 Longmans
Association of Commonwealth Universities. Commonwealth
Universities Yearbook, 1971 The Association
Association of Commonwealth Universities. United Kingdom
Postgraduate Awards, 1969-71 The Association
Association of Teachers in Colleges and Departments of
Education. Handbook for Colleges and Departments of
Education, 1972 Lund Humphries
Baron, George. A Bibliographical Guide to the English Educa¬
tional System. 3rd edn Athlone Press
Benn, C. and Simon, B. Halfway There (Comprehensive Schools)
McGraw-Hill
British Council. Annual Report, 1969-70 British Council
 and The Association of Commonwealth Universities.
Higher Education in the United Kingdom, 1971-72: A Handbook
for Students from Overseas Biennial Longmans
471
£
1971 2-80
1970 1-30
1970 free
1967 0-224
1970 0-45
1971 0-95
1969 *
1966 1-874
1968 0-39
1966 0-30
1966 0-124
1969 *
1968 0-20
1971 0-124
1966 0-074
1971 1-50
1970 0-75
1971 0-15
1967 0-324
1970 0-45
1967 3-15
1969 2-75
1969 1-05
1971 0-45
1971 0-35
1971 0-15
1971 0-85
1966 1-05
1971 11-00
1969 0-50
1971 1-05
1965 0-75
1970 2-25
1970 0-124
1971 0-60
472
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Burgess, Tyrrell. A Guide to English Schools Penguin
  and Pratt, John. Policy and Practice: The Colleges of
Advanced Technology _ Allen Lane
Callender, Patricia. Programmed Learning, its Development
and Structure Longmans
Committee of Vice-chancellors and Principals of the
Universities of the United Kingdom. A Compendium of
Entrance Requirements for First Degree Courses in the United
Kingdom, 1971-72 Annual The Committee
Council for National Academic Awards. Compendium of
Degree Courses 1971 C^AA
 Report for 1969-70
Dent, H. C., Editor. Year Book of Technical Education and Train¬
ing for Industry, 1971 A- & C. Black
The Educational System of England and Wales
University of London Press
Education Committees Year Book, 1971-72
Councils and Education Press
Gross, Richard E., Editor. British Secondary Education
Oxford University Press
Halsey, A. H. and Trow, Martin. The British Academics Faber
Jackson, Stephen. Special Education in England and Wales
Oxford University Press
Kelly, Thomas. A History of Adult Education
Liverpool University Press
Layard, R., King, J. and Moser, C. The Impact of Robbins
Penguin
Lester-Smith, W. O. Education in Great Britain
Oxford University Press
Maclure, J. Stuart. Educational Documents, England and Wales.
1816-1968 Chapman & Hall
Mountford, Sir James, British Universities Oxford University Press
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education in the
United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations Annual
National Institute of Adult Education
Provision for Adult Education
National Institute of Adult Education
Perkin, H. J. New Universities in the United Kingdom OECD
Robinson, Eric E. The New Polytechnics Penguin
Universities Central Council on Admissions. Fifth Report,
1969-70 UCCA
Annual Reports ,
Department of Education and Science [with other departments].
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom. For 1968 HMSO
Education and Science in 1970
Statistics of Education (6 volumes)
Vol. 1 (1969) Schools
Vol. 2 (1969) School Leavers, GCE and CSE
Vol. 3 (1969) Further Education
Vol. 4 (1969) Teachers
Vol. 5 (1969) Finance and Awards
Vol. 6 (1969) Universities
Blackie, John. Inside the Primary School
Bristow, Adrian. Inside the Colleges of Further Education^^^
Burgess, Tyrrell. Inside Comprehensive Schools HMSO
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland Trn/rcn
Education in Northern Ireland 1969 Cmd 542 Belfast, HMSO
Education Statistics No. 11
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in 1970
Scottish Educational Statistics 1970 ,
Children and their Primary Schools. Report of the Central
Advisory Council for Education (England) [Plowden Report] _
Vol. I. Report HMSO
Vol. II. Research and Surveys HMbU
Day Release. Report of a Committee set up by the Minister ot
Education [Henniker-Heaton Report]
Education in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4751/66 COI
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Department of Education and Science Biennial
For 1966-68 HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Belfast, HMSO
Cmnd 4605 HMSO
HMSO
1969 0-30
1970 5-25
1970 1-75
1971 1-30
1971 free
1971 free
1971 2-50
1969 1-50
1971 2-75
1965 1-50
1971 5-00
1966 0-67i
1962 2-10
1969 0-30
1968 0-32i
1969 2-50
1966 0-37i
1971 0-65
1970 2-10
1969 2-40
1968 0-30
1971 0-40
1970 1-50
1971 0-60
1970 1-70
1971 1-60
1971 1-40
1971 1-70
1970 1-30
1971 2-70
1967 0-25
1970 0-30
1970 0-30
1970 0-30
1971 0-87^
1971 0-80
1971 2-40
1967 1-25
1967 L62i
1964 0-15
1966 *
1970 0-721
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Youth Service
Higher Education [Robbins Report] Cmnd 2154 HMSO 1963
Higher Education in Northern Ireland [Lockwood Report]
Cmd 475 Belfast, HMSO 1965
The Open University. Report of the Planning Committee HMSO 1969
Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges: Higher Education in the
Further Education System Cmnd 3006 HMSO 1966
Primary Education in Scotland HMSO 1965
Primary Education in Wales HMSO 1968
Technician Courses and Examinations. Report of the (Hazlegrave)
Committee HMSO 1969
Universities in Britain Reference Paper R.5520/69 COI 1969
University Grants Committee
Annual Survey, Academic Year 1969-70 Cmnd 4593 HMSO 1971
University Development 1962-67 Cmnd 3820 HMSO 1968
473
1-00
0-20
0-07*
0-52i
1-62*
0-62^
0-30
0-97*
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme: Report for 1970-71
Duke of Edinburgh's Award Office 1971
Hawes, Derek. Young People Today SCNVYO/NCSS 1966
Hogan, J. M. The Future of the Youth Service
Leeds University Institute of Education 1965
Milson, Fred. Youth Work in the 1970s Routledge 1970
Morse, Mary. The Unattached Penguin 1965
National Council of Social Service. Young People and
Voluntary Service NCSS 1965
Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organi¬
sations. Directory, 1971 NCSS 1971
Development of the Youth Service Cmd 424 Belfast, HMSO 1961
Youth and Community Work in the 70s HMSO 1969
Youth Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5506 COI 1963
free
0-30
0-121
1-50
0-20
0-10
free
0-06
0-75
#
7. TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
Bracey, H. E. People and the Countryside Routledge
Cullingworth, J. B. Town and Country Planning in England and
Wales Allen & Unwin
Gibberd, Frederick. Town Design. 5th edn Architectural Press
Heap, Desmond. An Outline of Planning Law. 5th edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Osborn, Sir Frederic and Whittick, Arnold. The New Towns:
The Answer to Megalopolis. 2nd edn Leonard Hill
Schaffer, F. The New Town Story McGibbon & Kee
Tetlow, John, and Goss, Anthony. Homes, Towns and Traffic
Faber
Thomas, Ray. London’s New Towns PEP
Administration of Town and Country Planning in Northern
Ireland Cmd 456 Belfast, HMSO
Annual Reports
Commission for the New Towns For 1969-70 HMSO
Countryside Commission (E & W) For 1969-70 HMSO
Countryside Commission for Scotland For 1970 HMSO
Development Corporations of the New Towns
England and Wales For 1969-70 HMSO
Scotland For 1969-70 HMSO
Ulster Countryside Commission For 1969-70 Belfast, HMSO
Bath, Chester, Chichester and York: Studies in Conservation
HMSO
Reference Paper R.5877/70 COI
Cmnd 2928 HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Land Conservation in Britain
Leisure in the Countryside
National Park Guides
New Life for Old Buildings
The New Towns of Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4506/69 HMSO
People and Planning HMSO
The Planning of the Coastline. Report of the Countryside Com¬
mission HMSO
Protection of the Environment Cmnd 4373 HMSO
Town and Country Planning Cmnd 3333 HMSO
Town and Country Planning in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5355/68 HMSO
Development Control Policy Notes (for England and Wales)
Nos. 1-11 HMSO
1970 3-15
1970 2-80
1967 4-20
1969 2-50
1969 8-40
1970 2-75
1968 2-50
1969 1-00
1964 0-05
1970 0-37^
1970 0-65
1971 0-40
1970 3-50
1970 1-15
1971 0-25
1969 24-50
1970 *
1966 0-07i
various
1971 0-05
1969 0-29
1969 0-75
1970 0-87^
1970 0-15
1967 0-14
1968 0-29
various
474
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
8. HOUSING
Cullingworth, J. B. English Housing Trends Bell
 Housing and Local Government in England and Wales
Allen & Unwin
Donnison, D. V. The Government of Housing Penguin
Annual Reports
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1969 and 1970 Cmnd 4753 HMSO
Northern Ireland Ministry of Development
For 1969-70 Cmd 549 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Development Department For 1970 Cmnd 4625 HMSO
Council Housing: Purposes, Procedures and Priorities [Culling¬
worth Report] HMSO
Fair Deal for Housing Cmnd 4728 HMSO
Homes for Today and Tomorrow [Parker Morris Report] HMSO
Housing Associations. A Working Paper of the Central Housing
Advisory Committee HMSO
Housing Design Bulletins Nos. 1-20 HMSO
Housing in Britain COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5875/70 HMSO
Housing Statistics Great Britain Quarterly HMSO
Local Housing Statistics England and Wales Quarterly HMSO
Old Houses into New Homes Cmnd 3602 HMSO
The Reform of Housing Finance in Scotland Cmnd 4727 HMSO
Report of the Committee on the Rent Acts Cmnd 4609 HMSO
The Older Houses in Scotland, A Plan for Action
Cmnd 3598 HMSO
1965
1966
1967
1971
1971
1971
1969
1971
1961
1971
1962
to
1970
1970
1968
1971
1971
1968
£
0-50
2-00
0-524
0-70
0-30
0-80
0-75
0-224
0-20
0-80
0-06
to
1-00
0-274
0-90
0-80
0-14
0-124
2-85
0-09
9. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland. Handbook
For 1971 Baptist Union
Catholic Directory, 1970 Bums & Oates
Church and State Church of England Information Office
Church of England. Official Yearbook for 1971-72. For the Church
Assembly Church of England Information Office
Church of Scotland. Year Book
For 1971 Church of Scotland Department of Publication
Congregational Union of England and Wales. Congregational
Year Book for 1971-72 Congregational Church
Episcopal Church in Scotland. Year Book and Directory
For 1971 Representative Church Council of
the Episcopal Church in Scotland
The Jewish Year Book, 1971 Jewish Chronicle Publications
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual Conference of the
Methodist Church, 1971 Methodist Publishing House
Presbyterian Church of England. Official Handbook
For 1971-72 Presbyterian Church of England
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book
For 1971 Presbyterian Church of Wales
Salvation Army. Year Book
For 1971 Salvationist Publishing & Supplies
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Handbook (for 1970-
73) and Directory (for 1971) Unitarian and Free Christian Churches
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook
For 1971-72 United Free Church of Scotland
1971
1970
1970
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1-25
1- 75
0-60
2- 10
0-50
2-25
1-00
1-75
1-90
0-70
0-43
0-50
0-75
0-15
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Aldcroft, D. H. and Fearon, P. Economic Growth in Twentieth-
Century Britain Macmillan 1969
Brittan, S. Steering the Economy—The Role of the Treasury
Penguin 19/1
Cairncross, Sir Alec, Editor. Britain’s Economic Prospects Re-
considered . Allen & Unwin 1971
Caves, R. E. and Associates. Britain’s Economic Prospects ^
The Brookings Institute!Allen & Unwin 1968
Clapham, Sir John. A Concise Economic History of Britain:
From Earliest Times to 1750 Cambridge University Press 1949
2- 50
0-60
3- 25
3-60
1-75
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Organisation
and Production
Fuel and Power
Coal
 An Economic History of Modern Britain, 3 vols
Cambridge University Press
Deane, Phyllis and Cole, W. A. British Economic Growth, 1688-
1959. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
Lewes, F. M. M. Statistics of the British Economy
Allen & Unwin
Economic Trends Monthly HMSO
National Account Statistics: Sources and Methods. Studies in
Official Statistics. No. 13 HMSO
National Institute Economic Review Quarterly
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
Northern Ireland Economic Report on 1970 Belfast, HMSO
Statistics
Abstract of Regional Statistics. No. 6. 1970 HMSO
Annual Abstract of Statistics. No. 107. 1970 HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice Yearly HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice Yearly
Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics. No. 16. 1969 HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
National Income and Expenditure 1971 HMSO
Statistics on Incomes, Prices, Employment and Production
Quarterly HMSO
475
£
1930 12 00
1967 2-25
1967 1-90
0-40
1968 2-25
0-75
1971 0-374
1971 1-25
1971 2-10
0-60
0-75
1970 1-00
0-374
1971 0-75
1-00
11. INDUSTRY
British Standards Institution. Year Book for 1971 BSI
Dunning, J. H. and Thomas, C. J. British Industry. 3rd edn
Hutchinson
Grove, J. W. Government and Industry in Britain Longmans
Robson, W. A. Nationalised Industry and Public Ownership.
2nd edn Allen & Unwin
Rowley, Charles K. The British Monopolies Commission
Allen & Unwin
Tivey, Leonard J. Nationalisation in British Industry Cape
Youngson, A. J. Britain’s Economic Growth 1920-66
Allen & Unwin
Abstract of Regional Statistics No. 6
Annual Reports
British Steel Corporation
Council of Industrial Design
Industrial Reorganisation Corporation
Industries Development Assistance For 1969-70 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Development Department
For 1970 Cmnd 4625 HMSO
HMSO
For 1970-71 HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
For 1970-71 HMSO
Area Development in Northern Ireland Belfast, HMSO
National Economic Development Council. Productivity. A
Handbook of Advisory Services HMSO
Nationalised Industries. A Review of Economic and Financial
Objectives Cmnd 3437 HMSO
Nationalised Industries in Britain
Reference Paper R.5629/68 COI
Northern Ireland Development Programme 1970-75
Belfast, HMSO
Productivity in British Industry Factel No. 601 COI
Public Purchasing and Industrial Efficiency Cmnd 3291 HMSO
Regional Economic Planning Councils: Reports on individual
regions HMSO
The Regulation of Monopolies, Mergers and Restrictive Practices
in Britain Reference Paper R.5830/68 COI
Wales 1970 Cmnd 4566 HMSO
1971 1-50
1966 1-38
1962 2-25
1962 3-50
1966 3-25
1966 1-50
1968 1-50
1970 1-25
1971 0-70
1970 0-25
1971 0-174
1971 0-074
1971 0-80
1969 0-25
1967 0-574
1967 0-09
1968 *
1970 1-00
1970 *
1967 0-05
1966
to various
1971
1968 *
1971 0-70
Fuel Policy Cmnd 3438 HMSO 1967
Department of Trade and Industry Digest of Energy Statistics
For 1970 HMSO 1970
Coal in Britain Today NCB 1969
Corbin, E. G., Editor. Guide to the Coalfields, 1971
Colliery Guardian 1971
0-40
2-75
free
2-75
476
Petroleum
Electricity and
Gas Supply
Water Supply
Construction
Manufacturing
Industries
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Report and Accounts
National Coal Board
Vol. I. Report
For 1970-71 HMSO 1971
Vol. II. Accounts and Statistical Tables
For 1970-71 HMSO
Safety in Mines Research, 1970 HMSO
Cooper, Brian and Gaskell, T. F. North Sea Oil The Great
Gamble . Heinemann
Statistical Review of the World Oil Industry, 1970
British Petroleum Co.
Electricity Council. Statistical Digest for 1970 The Council
Gas Council. Investment in Natural Gas The Council
Minchin, Leslie T. The Gas Industry Today and Tomorrow
Harrap
Annual Reports and Accounts
Central Electricity Generating Board For 1969-70 HMSO
Electricity Council F°r -^a rjiuron
Gas Council For 1969-70 HMSO
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board For 1970-71 HMSO
South of Scotland Electricity Board For 1970-71 HMSO
Nuclear Energy in Britain _
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151/69 HMSO
Report from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries:
The Electricity Supply Industry TTA/ron
Vol. I. Report and Proceedings HMSU
Hartley, Dorothy. Water in England
^British Kail For 1962 HMSO
Ministry of Housing and Local G^ernmen^ ^ ^ ^
Water Pollution Research 1969 1 qao ™
Water Resources Board For 1969 70 HMSO
The Future Management of Water in England and Wales.A Report
by the Central Advisory Water Committee HMSO
Ground Water Year Book 1964-66 HMSO
Morecambe Bay and Solway Bay Barrages: Report on Desk Ruches
Report on the Water Resources of Wales Cmnd 1331 HMSO
The Wash: Estuary Storage. Report on Desk Study HMSU
The Water Service in Central Scotland HMSU
Water Supplies in South East England HMSU
Bowley, Marian. The British Building Industry
Cambridge University Press
Colclough, T. R. The Construction Industry of Great Britain
Butterworth
Henry, Dorothy and Jerome, J. A. Modern British Bridges
’ Maclaren
Pannell, J. P. M. An Illustrated History of Civil Engineering
Thames & Hudson
White, R. B. Prefabrication: A History of its Development in Great
Britain HMSU
Annual Reports
Building Research, 1970
Hydraulics Research, 1970 HMS
Allen, G. C. The Structure of Industry in Britain. 3rd edn
Longmans
British Industries and their Organisation. 5th edn Longmans
Briscoe, L. The Textile and Clothing Industries of the United
Kingdom Manchester University Press
Gale W. K. V. The British Iron and Steel Industry: A Technical
History David & Charles
Hardie, D. W. F. and Davidson Pratt, J. A. History of the
Modern British Chemical Industry Pergarnon
Keeling, B. S. and Wright, A. E. G. The Development of the
Modern British Steel Industry Longmans
Rainnie, G. F., Editor. The Woollen and Worsted Industry
’ ’ Oxford University Press
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. The Motor
Industry of Great Britain 1971 SMM1
1971
1971
1966
1971
1971
1968
1966
1970
1970
1970
1971
1971
1969
1963
Macdonald 1964
1971
1961
1971
1971
1971
1970
1966
1961
1970
1963
1966
1966
1965
1965
1964
1965
1971
1971
1970
1970
1971
1967
1966
1964
1965
1971
£
0-55
1-15
0-60
1-75
free
free
free
1-25
0-65i
1-35
1-00
0-65
0-65
0-30
0-57i
2-50
14-50
0-70
1-15
0-70
0-70
10-00
0-52^
0-374
1-05
0-374
3-15
3-50
0-874
3-15
2-10
2-50
0-85
0-80
1- 50
2- 25
3 00
2-10
1-05
1-25
1-50
5-00
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Textile Council. Cotton and Allied Textiles. A Report on
Present Performances and Future Prospects Textile Council 1969
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Aircraft Industry
[Plowden Report] Cmnd 2853 HMSO 1965
Shipbuilding Inquiry Committee, 1965-66 [Geddes Report]
Cmnd 2937 HMSO 1966
477
£
2-25
0-50
0-65
Agriculture
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Donaldson, J. G. S. and F. and Barber, B. Farming in Britain
Today Allen Lane 1969
Economic Assessment to 1972 NEDO 1970
Russell, Sir E. John. A History of Agricultural Science in Great
Britain Allen & Unwin 1966
Whitlock, Ralph. A Short History of Farming in Britain Baker 1965
Agricultural Marketing in Britain
Reference Paper R.5779/67 COI 1967
Agricultural Statistics, England and Wales, 1968-69 HMSO 1971
Agricultural Statistics, Scotland, 1970 HMSO 1971
Agriculture in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5635/69 HMSO 1969
Agriculture’s Import Saving Role. EDC for Agriculture HMSO 1968
Annual Reports
Agricultural Marketing Schemes For 1968-69 HMSO 1970
Animal Health Services in Great Britain For 1969 HMSO 1971
Crofters Commission: Report For 1970 HMSO 1971
Department of Agriculture for Scotland: Agriculture in
Scotland 1970 Cmd 4626 HMSO 1971
Ministry of Agriculture, Northern Ireland
For 1969-70 Cmd 552 Belfast, HMSO 1971
National Food Survey Committee: Household Food Con¬
sumption and Expenditure 1968 HMSO 1971
Annual Review and Determination of Guarantees
For 1971 Cmnd 4623 HMSO 1971
The Changing Structure of Agriculture, April 1970 HMSO 1970
Examination of the Plorticultural Industry, 1967 HMSO 1968
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual For 1969-70 HMSO 1971
Modern Farming and the Soil HMSO 1971
Output and Utilisation of Farm Produce in the United Kingdom,
1964-69 HMSO 1970
3-50
free
3-15
0-90
1-25
0-90
0-27i
1-00
0-80
0-85
0-40
0-65
0-85
1-25
0-224
0-324
0-35
1- 25
2- 10
0-11
Fisheries
Fishing Industry Index International 1972 Haymarket Press 1971
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For 1970 Cmnd 4689 HMSO 1971
Herring Industry Board For 1970 Cmnd 4565 HMSO 1971
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1970-71 HMSO 1971
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For 1970 HMSO 1971
Sea Fisheries For 1970 HMSO 1971
Committee on Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries: Report
Cmnd 2691 HMSO 1965
4-20
0-45
0-25
0-45
0-65
0-59
0-40
Forestry
Edlin, H. L. Forestry in Great Britain: A Review of Progress to
1969 Forestry Commission 1969
Forestry in Scotland Forestry Commission 1970
Latham, Bryan. History of the Timber Trade Federation of the
United Kingdom: The First Seventy Years Benn 1966
Ryle, G. Forest Service, the First 45 Years of the Forestry
Commission David & Charles 1969
Census of Woodlands, 1965-67. A Report on Britain’s Forest
Resources HMSO 1970
Timber! Your Growing Investment HMSO 1969
Annual Reports
Forestry Commissioners For 1969-70 HMSO 1971
Forest Research For 1969—70 HMSO 1971
Britain’s Forests [10 booklets] HMSO 1948
to
1965
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission Guides HMSO 1954
to
1968
free
free
1-75
3-15
0-60
0-324
0-70
1-50
0-024
to
0-124
0-074
to
0-424
478
Shipping
Inland Transport
Railways
Roads
London Transport
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Blake, G. Lloyd’s Register of Shipping 1760-1960
Lloyd's Register of Shipping
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual Report,
1970 CSUK
International Shipping and Shipbuilding Directory, 1971
Shipping U'orld/Benn
National Ports Council. Digest of Port Statistics 1970 NPC
  Container and Roll-on Port Statistics, Great Britain.
Part 1:1970
Port of London Authority. Annual Report for 1970 FLA
Annual Reports and Accounts TTllirc,~
British Transport Docks Board For 1970 HMSO
National Ports Council For 1970 HMSO
Final Report of the Committee of Inquiry into certain matters
concerning the Port Transport Industry [Devlin Report]
Cmnd 2734 HMSO
Ports in Britain Reference Paper R.5759/67 COi
Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Shipping [Rochdale
Report] Cmnd 4337 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Marine Search and Rescue HMSO
Jackman, W. T. The Development of Transportation in Modern
England, 3rd cdn Fvatih Cass
National Freight Corporation. Annual Report For 1970 HMSO
Proposals for a Fixed Channel Link Cmnd 2\ol HM.SU
Transport Planning: The Men for the Job [Sharp Report]
Ellis, C. Hamilton, British Railway History, 1877-1947
Allen & Unwin
British Railways Board. Annual Report, 1969 HMSO
 The Development of the Major Railway Trunk Routes
The Board
 Report on Organisation ^JMSO
Railway Policy Cmnd 3439 HMSO
British Road Federation. Basic Road Statistics 1970 _ BRF
Buchanan, C. D. Mixed Blessing: The Motor in Britain
Leonard Hill
Elliot, T. D. W. and Street, Harry. Road Accidents. (Law and
Society Series) PenZum
Company For 1970 HMSO
Better Use of Town Roads ^MSU
The Highway Code, including Motorway rules
Highway Statistics 1969 , yfV/r<in
London Taxicab Trade (Stamp Report) Cmnd 4483 HMS
Public Transport and Traffic Cmnd 3481 ff-MNU
Road Accidents 1969
Road Research Laboratory. Road Research 1969 TricJoA
Road Safety—A Fresh Approach Cmnd 3339 HMSU
Roads for the Future: A New Inter-Urban Flag^dE^fgn^MSO
Roads in England 1969-70 Wlwr^n
Roads in Urban Areas un/iQn
Road Track Costs coad/aq Y’DT
Town Traffic in Britain Reference Paper R.5860/69 GUI
Traffic in Towns [Buchanan and Crowther Reports] HM&U
 (Shortened edition) hm^O
The Transport of Freight Cmnd 3470 HMSO
Barker, T. C. and Robbins, M. A History of London Transport.
Vol. I. The Nineteenth Century Allen & Unwin
Day, John R. The Story of London’s Underground
’ J Tendon Transport
Annual Report
London Transport Executive
Transport in London (Ministry
For 1970 LTE
of Transport)
Cmnd 3686 HMSO
1960 2-10
1971 free
(limited)
1971 7 00
1970 2-25
1971 LOO
1971 free
1971 1-65
1971 0-30
1965 0-50
1967 *
1970 3 00
1970 0-20
1966 8-40
1971 0-65
1963 0-32i
1970 0-62i
1960 2-00
1971 0-90
1965 0-75
1969 0-20
1967 0-29
1970 0-50
1958 2-25
1968 0-75
1971 0-45
1967 0-371
1967 1-05
1969 0-06
1970 0-65
1970 M5
1967 0-19
1970 0-75
1970 1-00
1967 0-09
1970 0-171
1970 1-05
1966 1 05
1968 0-55
1969 *
1963 2-50
1964 0.521
1967 0-14
1963 3-50
1969 0-25
1971 0-50
1968 0-371
Inland Waterways
Civil Aviation
The Post Office
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Edwards, L. A. The Inland Waterways of Great Britain and
Ireland. 2nd edn Imray, Laurie, Norte & Wilson
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals David & Charles
British Waterways: Recreation and Amenity Cmnd 3401 HMSO
British Waterways Board. Report for 1970 HMSO
 Facts about the Waterways HMSO
 Leisure and the Waterways HMSO
Flight Directory 1971 Annual Kelly's Directories Ltd.
Annual Reports
Air Transport Licensing Board. For year ended 31st March
1971 HMSO
British Airports Authority For 1969-70 HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1970-71 HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1970—71 HMSO
British Air Transport in the Seventies Cmnd 4018 HMSO
Report of the Commission on the Third London Airport (Roskill)
TJriX/TQf}
Martin, Nancy. The Post Office Dent
Annual Reports and Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. For 1970-71 HMSO
Post Office For October 1969-March 1970 HMSO
Britain and Commonwealth Telecommunications
Reference Paper R.5525 COI
Reorganisation of the Post Office Cmnd 3233 HMSO
Report of the Select Committee for Nationalised Industries—The
Post Office HMSO
14. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
Ball, I. D. L., Editor. Industrial Research in Britain. 7th edn
Harrap
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great
Britain: A Handbook compiled from Official Sources. 61st edn
Allen & Unwin
Moonman, Eric, Editor. British Computers and Industrial Innova¬
tion. The Implications of the Parliamentary Select Committee
Allen & Unwin
Nicholson, Max. The Environmental Revolution
Hodder & Stoughton
Purver, M. The Royal Society: Concept and Creation. Routledge
Space Research in the United Kingdom Science Research Council
Who’s Who of British Scientists Longmans
Zuckerman, Sir Solly. Beyond the Ivory Towers. The Frontiers
of Public and Private Science Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Annual Reports
Agricultural Research Council
Atomic Energy Authority
Council for Scientific Policy. 2nd Report
Medical Research Council
National Research Development Corporation
For 1969-70 HMSO
Natural Environment Research Council For 1969—70 HMSO
Science Research Council For 1969-70 HMSO
Britain and International Scientific Co-operation
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5814/68 COI
British Patent System Cmnd 4407 HMSO
British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Reference Paper R.8791 COI
Electronics in Automation in Britain: An Outline
Reference Paper R.5833/68 COI
Going Metric, Progress in 1970. Second Report of the Metrica¬
tion Board . . HMSO
Industrial Research and Development in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5820/68 COI
Notes on Science and Technology in Britain
Reference Paper R.5476/Series COI
For 1969-70 HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
Cmnd 3420 HMSO
For 1970-71 HMSO
479
£
1962 2-25
1966 2-50
1967 0 05
1971 0-70
1965 0-75
1967 0-30
1971 2-75
1971 0-17i
1970 M5
1971 0-95
1971 0-70
1969 1-75
1970 5 00
1969 1-50
1971 0-25
1970 1-50
1963 *
1967 0 09
1967 0-82i
1968 8-40
1964 2-25
1971 2-50
1970 4-20
1967 2-25
1971 0-67i
1969 15-00
1970 2-50
1970 0-65
1970 0-85
1967 0-21
1971 0-85
1970 0-37i
1970 0-65
1970 0-42^
1968 *
1970 1 15
1966 *
1968 *
1971 0-80
1968 *
1962 *
to
1971
480
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151/69 HMSO
OSTI. The First Five Years. The Work of the Office for Scientific
and Technical Information 1965-70 HMSO
Persons With Qualifications in Engineering, Technology and
Science 1959-69 HMSO
The Protection of the Environment Cmnd 4373 HMSO
Report on Marine Science and Technology HMSO
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution. First Report
Cmnd 4585 HMSO
Scientific Research in British Universities and Colleges, 1970-71
Vol. I. Physical Sciences HMSO
Vol. II. Biological Sciences HMSO
Vol. III. Social Sciences HMSO
Statistics of Science and Technology 1970 HMSO
Technological Innovation in Britain. Report of the Central
Advisory Council for Science and Technology HMSO
1969
1971
1971
1970
1969
1971
1971
1971
1971
1970
1968
£
0-30
0-50
2-25
0-15
0-27i
0-45
6-50
6-00
5-50
1-25
0-17*
15. FINANCE
Artis, M. J. Foundations of British Monetary Policy Blackwell
Chubb, B. The Control of Public Expenditure: Financial Com¬
mittees of the House of Commons Oxford University Press
Clarke, W. M. The City in the World Economy Penguin
Cleary, E. J. The Building Society Movement Elek
Croome, D. R. and Johnson, H. G. Money in Britain 1959-69
Oxford University Press
Dacey, W. Manning. The British Banking Mechanism. 5th edn
Hutchinson
Gaskin, Maxwell. The Scottish Banks Allen & Unwin
Gibb, D. E. W. Lloyd’s of London Macmillan
Giuseppi, J. A. The Bank of England Evans
Hicks, Ursula K. British Public Finances: Their Structure and
Development, 1880—1952 Oxford University Press
Kellett, Richard. The Merchant Banking Arena Macmillan
Macrae, Norman. London Capital Market. 2nd edn
Staples Press
Morgan, E. V. and Thomas, W. A. The Stock Exchange: Its
History and Functions Elek
Nevin, E. and Davis, E. W. The London Clearing Banks Elek
Prest, A. R. Public Finance. 3rd edn Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Reid, Gordon. The Politics of Financial Control: the role of the
House of Commons Hutchinson
Roseveare, H. The Evolution of a British Institution: The Treasury
Allen Lane
Sayers, R. S. Modern Banking. 7th edn Oxford University Press
Bank of England: Quarterly Bulletin Bank of England
Scammell, W. M. The London Discount Market Elek
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Customs and Excise
For 1969-70 Cmnd 4555 HMSO
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1969-70 Cmnd 4615 HMSO
Committee on Invisible Exports For 1970—71 The Committee
Decimal Currency Board For 1970-71 HMSO
Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Royal Mint
For 1970 HMSO
Estimates 1971-72: Memorandum by the Chief Secretary to the
Treasury Cmnd 4627 HIM SO
Financial Statement and Budget Report 1971-72 HMSO
Financial Statistics Monthly HMSO
Loans from the National Loans Fund 1971-72
Cmnd 4635 HMSO
New Policies for Public Spending Cmnd 4515 HMSO
Preliminary Estimates of National Income and Balance of Payments
Cmnd 4361 HMSO
Public Expenditure: A New Presentation
Public Expenditure 1969-70 to 1974-75
Reform of Corporation Tax
Reform of Personal Direct Taxation
Value-added Tax
Cmnd 4017 HMSO
Cmnd 4578 HMSO
Cmnd 4630 HMSO
Cmnd 4653 HMSO
Cmnd 4621 HMSO
1965
1962
1967
1965
1970
1967
1965
1957
1966
1954
1967
1957
1962
1971
1967
1966
1969
1967
1968
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1971
1970
1971
1969
1971
1971
1971
1971
1-50
1- 75
0-30
3-50
2- 25
1- 25
2- 00
1-25
3-15
0-62|
1-50
1- 50
4- 20
5- 25
2- 50
1-38
4-20
1-75
free
4-20
110
0-65
free
0-65
0-65
0-85
0-45
0-90
0-20
010
0-30
0-17i
0-45
0-17*
0-12i
0-17i
BIBLIOGRAPHY
16. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Overseas Trade Cooper, John. Suitable Case for Treatment (What to do about
and Payments the Balance of Payments) . Fengmn
Little. I. M. D. and Clifford, J. M. International Aid
Allen & Unwin
An Account of the British Aid Programme: Text of United
Kingdom Memorandum to the Development Assistance
Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development HMS
^Bddsh Tourist Authority For January-March l 970 BTA
Commonwealth Development Corporation For 1970 HMoU
Britain as a Market for Developing Countries ,,„r
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5667/67 COI
Britain’s International Investment Position.
COI Reference Pamphlet R.5874/70 HMSO
Britain’s Invisible Exports
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 5852/69 HMSO
British Aid Statistics 1965-69
Overseas Development. The Work in Hand Cmnd 3180 HMoU
Overseas Trade Accounts of the United Kingdom MontMy
HMbU
The Pattern of British Exports Reference Paper R.5760/70 COI
Report from the Select Committee on Overseas Aid WO-Tl^^
United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1971 HMSO
Internal Trade Borrie, G. and Diamond, A. L. The Consumer, Society and
the Law. 2nd edn . Penguin
Davis, Dorothy. A History of Shopping , T „ ^ „ ,
Routledge & Kegan Paul
Hill, S. R. The Distributive System Pergamon
Mathias, P. The Retailing Revolution Longmans
Annual Report . rj7,T0^
Consumer Council. Final Report Apnl-December 1970 HMSO
Census of Distribution, 1961. In 14 vols HMSO
The Co-operative Movement in Britain „ rA*a inn rm
Reference Paper R.5434/70 COI
The Distributive Trades in Britain ^
Reference Paper R.5495/66 COI
Family Expenditure Survey. Report for 1969 HMSO
17. LABOUR
Armstrong, E. G. A. Industrial Relations. An Introduction
Harrap
Bain G. S. The Growth of White Collar Unionism
Oxford University Press
Birch, Lionel, Editor. The History of the T.U.C. 1868-1968
TUC/Hamlyn
Clegg H. A. The System of Industrial Relations in Great Britain
Blackwell
Flanders, Alan. Management and Unions. The Theory and Re¬
form of Industrial Relations _ . Faber
Hare A. E. C. First Principles of Industrial Relations. 2nd edn
Macmillan
Lovell, John and Roberts, B. C. A Short History of the TUG
Macmillan
Wigham, Eric L. Trade Unions. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press
Young, A. F. Social Services in British Industry
Routledge & Kegan Paul
Annual Report
Commission for Industrial Relations , .
For 1969-70 Cmnd 4417 HMSO
British Labour Statistics. Historical Abstract 1886-1968 HMSO
Changes in Rates of Wages and Hours of Work: April 1971
HMSO
Employment and Productivity Gazette Monthly HMSO
Labour Force Statistics, 1958—69 HMSO
1968
1965
1970
1970
1971
1967
1971
1970
1970
1967
1970
1971
1971
1968
1966
1966
1967
1971
1964
1970
1966
1970
1969
1970
1968
1970
1970
1965
1968
1968
1968
1970
1971
1971
1971
481
l
0-30
2-25
0-20
0-25
0-70
*
0-45
0-37i
2 00
0-50
1- 85
*
0-45
0 90
0-30
2- 25
0-87^
2-10
0-30
various
#
#
1-624
1- 75
2- 75
0-624
3- 25
3-50
1- 25
2- 10
0-374
2-00
0-15
1-00
0-124
0-30
1-50
482
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’
Associations Cmnd 3623 HMSO 1968
Trade Unions in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5682/69 COI 1969
£
1-00
#
The Arts
Visual Arts
Literature
Drama
Films
Music
18. ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS
Arts Council of Great Britain. Twenty-fifth Annual Report,
1969-70 Arts Council
Green, Michael, and Wilding, Michael. Cultural Policy in
Great Britain UNESCO
The Obscenity Laws: Report of the Arts Council Working Party
Deutsch
Williams, Raymond. Communications (television, films, theatre,
advertising, books and magazines) Penguin
A Policy for the Arts: The First Steps Cmnd 2601 HMSO
Promotion of the Arts in Britain Reference Paper R.5647/70 COI
Alley, R. British Painting since 1945 Tate Gallery
Farr, D. British Sculpture since 1945 Tate Gallery
Gaunt, William. A Concise History of English Painting
Thames & Hudson
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens in Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, 1971 ABC Travel Guides
Hoar, Frank An Introduction to English Architecture Evans
Museums and Galleries in Great Britain and Ireland, 1970-71
ABC Travel Guides
Webb. M. Architecture in Britain Today Country Life
Future Policy for Museums and Galleries Cmnd 4676 HMSO
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries. Eighth Report,
1965-69 HMSO
Atkinson, F. The Public Library Routledge
British National Bibliography Annual
For 1970 The Council of the British National Bibliography
The Oxford Companion to English Literature, edited by Sir Paul
Harvey. 4th edn Oxford University Press
The British Library Cmnd 4572 HMSO
Inter-Library Co-operation in England and Wales HMSO
Clunes, Alec. The British Theatre Cassell
Taylor, John Russell. The Penguin Dictionary of the Theatre
Penguin
The Oxford Companion to the Theatre, edited by Phyllis Hartnoll.
3rd edn Oxford University Press
The Stage Year Book, 1969 Annual Carson & Comerford
The Theatre Today in England and Wales. Report of the Arts
Council HMSO
British Film Institute. Annual Report for 1970 BFI
Montagu, Ivor. Film World Penguin
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency For 1970-71 HMSO
Cinematograph Films Council For 1970-71 HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of Accounts)
For 1970-71 Cmnd 4761 HMSO
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book for 1971
British Federation of Music Festivals
Opera and Ballet in the United Kingdom 1966-69. Report of the
Arts Council HMSO
Orchestral Resources in Great Britain 1970. Report of the Arts
Council HMSO
The Oxford Companion to Music, edited by Percy Scholes. 9th edn
Oxford University Press
Young, Percy M., A History of British Music Benn
1971 0-25
1970 free
1969 1-50
1968 0-25
1965 0-07i
1970 *
1966 0-25
1965 0-25
1964 1-75
1971 0-30
1963 2 10
1971 0-30
1969 3-15
1971 0-07*
1970 0-72i
1970 0-90
1971 18-00
1967 2-50
1971 0-074
1962 0-15
1964 1-80
1966 0-40
1967 4-20
1969 1-75
1970 0-50
1971 free
1964 0-374
1971 0-074
1971 0-074
1971 0-15
1971 0-50
1969 0-75
1970 0-90
1955 4-20
1967 5-25
19. THE PRESS
Goulden, John. Newspaper Management
Hall, Bernard J. Basic Training in Journalism
Levy, H. Phillip. The Press Council
Heinemann 1967 1-25
Pergamon 1968 0-524
Macmillan 1967 5-25
BIBLIOGRAPHY
McNae, L. C. T., Editor. Essential Law for Journalism. 3rd edn
Staples 1967
Newspaper Press Directory, 1970 Annual Benn 1971
Press Council. The Press and the People: Seventeenth Annual
Report 1970-71 The Council 1971
Rule, Leonard G. Our Contributor. District Men, Specialists and
Freelances Pergamon 1968
Scott, George. Report Anonymous: the First Hundred Years of
the Press Association Hutchinson 1968
Seymour-Ure, Colin. The Press, Politics and the Public
Methuen 1970
Turnstall, Jeremy. The Westminster Correspondent Routledge 1970
White, Cynthia. Women’s Magazines 1963-68 Michael Joseph 1970
Willing’s Press Guide 1971 Annual Hutchinson!Willing 1971
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book 1971 Annual A. G? C. Black 1971
The British Press COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5572/70 HMSO 1970
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press (1961-62) [Shaw-
cross Report] Cmnd 1811 HMSO 1962
483
£
1-80
9-00
0-50
0-474
2-25
2- 25
1-60
3- 25
4- 20
0-90
0-35
0-65
20. TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
Briggs, Asa. The History of Broadcasting in the United Kingdom:
Vol. I. The Birth of Broadcasting Oxford University Press 1961
Vol. II. The Golden Age of Wireless Oxford University Press 1965
Vol. III. The War of Words Oxford University Press 1970
British Broadcasting Corporation. BBC Handbook 1970 BBC 1970
Broadcasting in the Seventies BBC 1969
Independent Television Authority. ITV, 1971. A Guide to
Independent Television ITA 1971
Pratten, C. F. The Economics of Television
Political and Economic Planning 1970
Wedell, E. G. Broadcasting and Public Policy Michael Joseph 1968
 Structures of Broadcasting: a symposium
Manchester University Press 1970
Wilson, David. Broadcasting: Vision and Sound Pergamon 1968
An Alternative Service of Radio Broadcasting Cmnd 4636 HMSO 1971
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation
For 1969-70 Cmnd 4520 HMSO 1970
Independent Television Authority For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
Sound and Television Broadcasting in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5531/69 HMSO 1969
2- 50
3- 75
6-50
0-50
free
0-75
0-80
2-50
1-50
0-474
0-124
1-65
0-80
0-324
21. SPORT
Annual Reports
Central Council of Physical Recreation
National Playing Fields Association
Scottish Council of Physical Recreation
The Sports Council. A Review for 1966-69
For 1969-70 CCPR
For 1970 NPFA
For 1970-71 SCPR
The Sports Council
1970
1971
1971
1969
0-25
0-15
free
free
Most of the organisations concerned with sport publish year books covering results and
records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or monthly periodicals on
sport are also published. In addition some newspapers issue annual surveys of sport.
INDEX
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
As the main purpose of this book is to inform readers overseas about Britain, organisa¬
tions and societies are generally indexed under their subject matter rather than under
Association of, British, National, Royal, etc. {that is, Accidents, Royal Society for the
Prevention of; Archives, National Register of). In cases where the first word is not
separable, however {for example, Royal Air Force, Royal Society), entries will be found
appropriately.
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where
they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the
relevant subject headings.
Page
Aslib see Libraries
Abbotsinch (airport) .. ..312
Aberdeen:
industry .. . . . . .. 208
newspapers .. .. •• 432
population . . .. .. . . 208
port . . .. . . . . 281
University .. . . 160, 161, 426
Abingdon . . . . . . . . 222
Academic Awards, Council for
National . . . . .. . . 162
Accession Council .. .. .. 27
Accidents:
industrial .. .. 401,402,403
road users .. .. 23,303, 304
Royal Society for the Prevention
of(rospa) .. .. 304,403
Administrative Staff College 64,212
Administrative tribunals .. 88-9
Admiralty:
Board .. .. .. ..no
Court . . . . .. .. 83
tankers .. .. .. .. 289
See also Research, defence
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising .. .. . . 176,387
Association .. . . .. 387
broadcasting . . 439,440,443-4
Institute of Practitioners in .. 387
Standards Authority .. ; • 387
Advisory Committees and Councils
see relevant subject matter
Advocates .. .. .. 9I>92,93
Aerodromes .. .. .. 311-2
Aero-engines see Aircraft
Aero sports . . . . .. 44^-9
After-care:
prisoners: .. .. .. 99-101
young offenders .. .. 100-3
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
Advisory Council .. ..271
Advisory Service, National (naas) 279
and Horticulture Co-operation,
Central Council for . . . . 277
colleges and institutes 156, 278, 279,
280-1
Development and Advisory Service
(ADAS) 279, 280
engineering colleges .. . . 280
Page
Agricultural—contd.
Engineering, National College of 270
improvement schemes 272, 273, 274,
276
Land Service .. .. .. 279
Land Tribunal . . . . . . 276
Loans Fund (Northern Ireland) . . 274
machinery industry 205,239,270
Mortgage Corporation .. 274,275
Research Council .. 51,319, 324, 328,
330,334
Research in Progress, Index of . . 334
Scientific Services Station .. 278
Securities Corporation,
Scottish 274, 275
wages boards . . .. . . 4°8
workers:
earnings . . .. 269,270,272, 399
numbers .. 192,200,261,390
protective legislation 271, 275, 276,
402
Agriculture .. 194,195,205,261-81
advisory services .. .. 271,279
animal disease control 49, 266, 267,
277-8,328
annual reviews .. . . . . 272
area available for .. .. 261,262
artificial insemination (ai) 266, 267
chemicals, toxic . . .. 278-9
credit facilities for .. .. .. 269
crofts and crofters . . .. 271, 279
crops .. 261,262,264,265-6,273
protection products . . . . 250
dairying .. 262, 266-7, 270, 271
economics service and advice . . 280,
328-9
education and training .. 153,280-1
expenses and income . . 269, 270-1
exports . . . . . . • • 267
farms, number, size and types 5,261-2,
276
farm tenure .. .. 261-2,276
feedingstuffs 262,264,266,267,269,
279, 282-3
fertilisers . . . . 250, 268, 272, 283
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 49,
52, 73, 134, 176, 194, 271, 280,
281, 283, 284, 285, 321, 322, 326,
328,329
food supplies, home grown 264, 265-9,
272
INDEX
Page
Agriculture—contd.
fruit growing . . 268, 269, 276
glasshouse crops . . . . 268-9
government support for .. 269,271-6,
272,273,274-5
grants see subsidies below
grassland . . . . 5, 261, 264-5, 267
hill farming . . 261, 267, 270, 273
horticulture 20, 262, 268-9, 271, 274,
277,280
infestation control . . . . 278, 279
land drainage .. 261,274,275-6
livestock 261,262,264,267-8,269,
272,273,275,276, 277, 279
machinery syndicates .. . . 270
manpower see Agricultural workers
market gardening .. . . . • 268
marketing boards and schemes . . 266,
273»276-7,38i
mechanisation 239, 269, 270, 274, 275
milk production and distribution 262,
266-7, 270, 272, 273, 277
pest clearance . . 262,278-9,328
plant health service 49, 278, 322, 328
policy of Government .. 271-5
price guarantees .. . . 266, 272-3
production 262-4, 268, 273, 359
research see Research
rough grazing . . 261, 264-5,270
smallholdings . . 262, 268, 274, 275
soils . . .. • • 5» 261, 285
subsidies and grants 194,269,270,
272,273,274, 275, 276
veterinary services 267, 277-8, 279, 328
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air:
Force see Defence and Royal Air
Force
freight traffic .. 295-6,311,312
operators’certificate .. • • 3I3
pollution, prevention of .. 5, 7°, I35,
177,321
Registration Board (are) 309, 313, 402
safety  312-3, 4°2
traffic control services .. 3I3_4
Training, College of .. •• 3J3
Transport see Civil Aviation
Transport Licensing Board (atlb) 309
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 195, 201,
205, 206, 244, 246-7
aerospace industry . . 246-7
ministerial responsibility . . 44
Armed Forces 114, 115, 116, 246, 313
carriers . . . . . • 116, 117
civil. . . . 246, 309, 310-n, 312
Establishments, Royal .. 246,312
landing systems .. .. • • 3I4
National Gas Turbine Establish¬
ment . . .. • • •• 246
research .. 57,. 119720, 246, 312
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Airways Board, British .. . . 3°9
Albert Hall, Royal .. .. 21,417
Aldeburgh (festival) .. .. 4I5> 4*8
Aldermen .. . • • • 27, 68, 79
Aliens .. . . ■ • 12, 53, i°7, 395
Almoners see Medical Social Workers
Ambergate (electronic exchange) . . 316
Ambulance services . . . • 7°, T43
Amenities preservation societies 171-2
485
Page
Ancient Monuments 51, I74~5> 4I3> 424
Angle Bay . . .. .. 221, 295
Anglican Communion . . 188-9
See also Church of England
Angling . . .. . . • • 454
Animal Health .. .. 49, 278
Animals, import of .. .. 277, 368
Antibiotics . . .. .. 250, 334
Anti-Locust Research Centre .. 335
Appellate courts 42, 83, 84, 87, 90, 94
Apprenticeship . . .. 233, 396
Aquatic sports 451, 459, 460, 461, 462
Arbitration boards and tribunals .. 411
Archbishops 32, 45, 187, 188, 189, 190
Archery . . .. .. •• 449
Architects . . .. . . 424_5
associations and societies 424-5
Institute of British, Royal (riba) 424—5
Architecture .. .. .. 424~5
education .. . . .. 162, 424-5
Archives, National Register of . . 426
Area Boards:
electricity . . 216, 222-3, 224, 227
gas  228, 229
Area Colleges see Colleges, technical
Area Consultative Councils:
electricity . . . . .. 216, 223
gas . . .. •• •• 216, 228
Armagh .. . . .. .. 422
Armed Forces see Defence
Arms and ammunition import con¬
trols .. .. . • • • 368
Army no, in, 112, 113, 114, 115, ll6,
117,121
Board  no
Reserve Forces .. .. .. 112
Staff College .. .. .. 112
See also Defence
Arrest, law relating to .. .. 81
Art:
and artists’ societies 414-5, 421-4
collections and exhibitions 21, 422,
colleges and schools 156, 162, 416,
421, 423-4
Commissions, Royal Fine 421, 424
Exhibitions Bureau .. .. 422
festivals . . .. 4i4_5> 4I7_8, 424
galleries .. . . 58, 70, 413, 422-3
National Exhibition of Children’s 423
National Galleries.. . . 422, 423
Royal College of . . .. 160, 423
Society for Education through . . 424
Arts:
Council of Great Britain 413-4, 415,
417, 418, 421, 422, 425
Council of Northern Ireland 413, 414,
415, 417, 418, 420, 421, 425
encouragement of the . . 413-28
Royal Academy of . . . . 423
Royal Society of .. 211,322,323
Ashridge College of Management .. 212
Assay Offices .. . . .. .. 248
Assizes .. . . 79, 80, 92, 94
Associated Press Ltd. .. . . 434
Association football see Football
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy .. .. .. ..331
Astrophysics Research Unit . . 325
Athletics .. . . 21, 446, 450
Atlas Computer Lab. .. . . 325
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
486
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Atomic Energy Authority (UK) 120, 224,
225, 226, 227, 241. 320, 321, 329-
30,334
Attendance centres (young offenders) 96,
101, 102
Attorney-General .. .. 44, 54, 81
Auditor General see Comptroller
Page
Automatic Data Exchange . . .. 434
Automation .. 210, 212, 238, 383, 384,
, . 385
Automobile Club, Royal (rac) . . 456
Automobiles see Motor
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Avonmouth .. . . .. 205, 295
B Bacon curing .. .. 255, 268, 272
Bacteriological laboratory services .. 139
Badminton .. . . .. .. 450
Bail  81, 86
Balance of Payments 193,194, 342, 372-80
Ballet and ballet companies 21, 418, 419
Ballet for All
schools
Ballylumford
Baltic Exchange
Bank Holidays
Banking system
Bank:
notes
of England 55
rate
Barnsley
Barristers
Barrow
Basket-ball
Bath . .
Batley..
Bedford and Bedfordshire
Belfast:
art, drama and music
Corporation
electricity supply
Fire Brigade
industries ..
motorway . .
museums ..
newspapers
population . .
port. .
public libraries
•• 4i9
• • 4i9
.. 223
291, 371
. . 401
337, 349-54
349, 35°
338, 349-50, 35i, 352,
355, 368, 371
194, 349, 350,352
. . 207
9L 92, 93, 94
.. 206
450-1
159, 175, 205, 415, 418
.. 207
246, 257,268,
280,312
4i5, 4i7
.. 74, 76, 223
.. 222, 223
. . 76
208, 221, 247, 256
..307
. . 422
• ■432
15, 208
293, 295
427
Queen’s University 158, 160, 163, 280
Recorder of . . .. .. 88
research (veterinary) . . . . 278
Berkeley Laboratories .. . . 227
Betting . . . . 21, 345, 386, 458
Beverages industries . . 254, 255-6
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billiards . . . . . . • • 451
Billingham-on-Tees .. .. .. 221
Bills, parliamentary see Parliament
Bingo . . . . . . .. . . 2i
Biological Research Board .. • • 327
Biology .. .. .. 328, 332
Birds  6, 20, 453-4
Birkenhead .. .. .. . . 206
Birmingham:
airport .. .. .. .. 312
art, drama, music 333, 416, 417, 422
Assay Office .. .. .. 248
housing and planning 146, 173, 174,
180, 182, 186
Industrial Safety Training Centre 403
industries . . . . . . 205, 248
newspapers .. .. •• 432
Birmingham—contd.
population . . 15, 16, 148, 173, 205
radio tower .. .. • • 317
universities .. 159, 426, 434
Birthrate .. .. .. ..8-10
Births, registration of . . .. 7
Biscuit industry .. .. . . 254
Bishops . . . • 32, 187, 188, 189
Blackburn . . .. .. .. 206
Blackpool .. .. .. .. 206
Blind:
employment and training 143, 394
welfare services .. .. 124, 143
Blood laboratories .. .. .. 139
Blood transfusion service . . 136, 139
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Boat races .. .. .. .. 459
Boat shows .. .. . . . . 370
Boilers and boilerhouse plant . . 241
Bolton . . . . . . . . 206
Book:
Centre, British National .. .. 427
Development Council .. 259, 428
exhibitions .. . . .. 428
League, National .. .. 426, 428
Society .. .. .. . . 428
Books . . . .258, 322, 425, 426, 427-8
See also Libraries and Publishing
Booksellers’ Association . . . . 428
Borough Councils see Local Govern¬
ment, councils
Borstal institutions and training 96, 100-1
Boston (port) .. .. .. 293
Botany .. .. .. .. 322
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew .. 322
Bothamsell .. .. .. .. 220
Boundary Commissions .. .. 33
Bournemouth . . •. 205, 417
Bowls .. .. .. .. ..451
Boxing .. .. .. 21,451
Boys’ Brigade .. .. .. 168
Boys’ Clubs, National Association of 168
Bracknell .. .. 112,173,322
Bradford .. .. 15, 16, 206
Bread and flour confectionery in¬
dustry . . .. . . 254-5
Brewing industry 201, 206, 208, 256
Brickmaking .. .. . . .. 257
Bridges and tunnels 69, 234, 300, 301
Bridleways .. .. .. 178, 179
Brighton .. .. .. .. 205
Bristol:
art and drama .. .. . • 416
industries . . .. 205, 222, 256
museum and art gallery .. .. 422
population .. . . . . 15, 205
port of .. . . . . 293, 295
INDEX
Bristol—contd.
telephones ..
University ..
Britannia Royal Naval College
British:
Academy ..
Army of the Rhine (baor)
Page
• • 316
.. 160
111-2
.. 428
in, 113,
114,116
Association for the Advancement
of Science .. .. 322, 324
Broadcasting Corporation (bbc) 159,
414, 438, 439, 44i, 442, 443, 444,
445
Calibration Service . . .. 212
orchestras . . . . 414, 416, 417
Radio and Television Enterprises 439
See also Broadcasting
Council .. 34, 164, 165, 166, 335-6,
380, 414, 415, 417, 420, 421
370
1- 6
1
3-5
5-6
5
2- 3
7
5, 261
333, 422, 425
332, 422, 425
Export Board
Isles
area and definition of .
climate . .
fauna
flora
geology and topography
languages
soil and vegetation
See also Population
Museum
Natural History ^ ; _r_j
Standards Institution 211, 212, 320, 387
For other organisations with British
as first word of their title see
relevant subject
Broadcasting: television and radio 20,
J . . 55, 158-9, 438-45
advertising on . . 439, 440, 443-4
advisory councils and committees 439,
444
colour transmission 438, 441,
Councils, National .. . . 439
educational 158-9, 438, 440, 441, 442,
445
Educational Development Over
seas, Centre for (cedo)
Eurovision
films
frequencies . . 441
international relations
licences
line definition . . 441
local stations
monitoring
political
press and ..
programme companies 439
166, 445
• . 44
159, 420
443, 444
444-5
433, 439
443, 444
439, 442
443, 445
.. 444
429, 43°
440, 444
487
Page
Broadcasting—contd.
publications .. ,. 433, 439
receivers industry .. . . 244
relations with government depart¬
ments 55, 438, 439, 442, 443, 444,
. 445
religious
research .. . . 331,
services
domestic television & radio
external ..
studios . .
television
topical tapes
transcription
transmitting stations
See also British Broadcasting
Corporation and Independent
Television
Brush industry .. .. 259, 260
Buchanan report . . . . 174, 296
Buckingham Palace (Art Gallery) .. 422
439, 440
441, 444
440-3
440-1,
442, 443
442-3
. . 44'?
44i, 443
442-3
•• 443
443
Buddhists
Budget
Building:
Agency, National . .
Agrement Board . .
and civil engineering
.. 191
341-7, 350
182, 234, 424
.•235
173, 182, 201,
, , 233-5, 321
contractors plant .. .. . . 240
employment in .. 200, 201, 233
industrialised .. .. 154, 183
by local authorities 180, 181, 182, 233
new towns, progress in .. 172-4
offices .. . . 172, 174, 209
overseas . . .. .. .. 235
preservation notices .. . . 174
private . . .. 180, 184, 233-5
production.. . . .. 233-5
reconstruction .. 174, 180, 182, 186
Research Station .. 182, 235, 321
societies 184, 185, 197, 354, 358
standards .. .. .. 181, 184
National House Builders’ Regis¬
tration Council
Burghs see Law and Local Govern¬
ment
courts
Burnley
Burton-on-Trent
Bury ..
Bus and coach services 173, 296, 297, 301,
302-3, 305, 306
184
85
206
206
206
Business Statistical Office
By-elections ..
By-laws
.. 209
33, 35
• • 53
COI see Information, Central Office of
Cabinet 25, 26, 29, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
46,48,54,110,194
Office .. .. 48, 195, 209
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . 315, 317
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated) industry
„ , _ 205, 206, 244
Cambridge:
Institute of Criminology . . . . 103
Library . . .. .. .. 425
Cambridge—contd.
museums . .
Observatory
Opera Group
population . .
sport
University
Press
research at
Cambridgeshire
422
33i
418
205
449, 452, 459, 460
42, 103, 160, 161, 331,
435, 449, 452, 459, 460
.. .. .. 428
205,331
262, 269
488
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Canals. . 206, 288, 296, 297. 3^6, 307
Cancer research . . 134. I46. 327
Campaign (British Empire) 146, 327
Canning industry .. • • 2C)S. 255
Canoeing . . • • • • o ’ 1
Canteens . . • • • • 3°5. 4°5
Canterbury, Province of 187, loo, 189
Canvey Island (gas terminal) . • 229
Capenhurst (research centre) . . 227
Capital gains tax see Taxation
Capital punishment (Northern
Ireland) . . • • • • • • 95
Charity Commission
Charter services (aircraft)
Cardiff
museums ..
newspapers
population ..
port. .
recreation centre
Carlisle
208, 289, 435, 443
. . .• 422
..432
15, 208
-.293
• •448
207, 313, 443
164,
418
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust
Carpets industry 206, 207, 208, 251, 253
Carrington .. • • • • • ■ 222
Catering trades . . • • 385. 395
Catholic:
Child Welfare Council . . • • J47
Church, Roman 34, 99. I87> I9°> I9I
schools .. ..150,151.152.190
Marriage Advisory Council . . 124
Overseas Appointments Bureau . . 166
Cats 20
Celtic language . . • • • • I3
Cement industry .. 205, 257, 258
Censorship:
films . • • • • • • • 42o
British Board of Film Censors 420
plays  4i6
Census of: „ o o
Distribution 381, 382, 383, 384, 385
Population .. 7—8, I4, I7, 55
Production • • • • 200, 268
Central:
Criminal Court . . • • 79. 80, 81
Policy Review Staff .. • • I94
Statistical Office . . 48, 199, 209
Treaty Organisation (cento) 109, 115,
165
Chamber of Shipping •. .. 291
Chambers of Commerce .. • • 204
Association of British . • • • 204
Association of Northern Ireland. . 204
Council of Scottish •. • • 204
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the:
Duchy of Lancaster .. 44, 91
Exchequer.. 43, 49, 5°, 54, S®, 339,
34i» 342, 345
See also Finance, Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court)
Channel Islands:
airports
area
Page
■ . 123
308, 309,
310-11
205, 220, 304, 415, 4t8
83, 87
7,
.. 311
1
• • 3i
.. 14
25, 3i
13, 14
432
bailiwicks . .
language
legislature
population . .
press • • ■ •
relationship with UK and Crown 25,
26, 27, 3L 42, 53
war pensioners . . • • • • 53
See also Guernsey and Jersey
Channel Tunnel . . • • 52, 3°°
Cheltenham
Chemical:
industries .. 197,201,205,206,207,
210, 248-51, 390
plant industry .. •• 207,241
See also Engineering
Chesham .. •• •• .. 112
Cheshire . . • • 206, 221, 222, 254
Chesterfield .. . • • • • • 206
Chest Radiological Service .. • • I39
Chief of the Defence Staff •• ii°
Chiefs of Staff Committee .. ..no
Children:
adoption of . • • • 79, I47
allowances for 53, 129, 130, 131, 132,
342
art, drama, films and music 416, 419,
421, 423, 424
child guidance centres .. .. 152
cinema attendance and clubs . . 421
deprived of home life, care of 123,
125, 146-7
employment .. • • • • 4°4
foster homes . . • • .. 146
handicapped 53, 14°, I4I, I42, 143,
153-4
Mentally Handicapped, National
Society for . . • • I24> x43
National Society for the Preven¬
tion of Cruelty to .. 123, 147
nurseries . . • • 7°, I25, I4°, I4I
orphans .. 129, 13°, I33, I46, t47
school transport . . • • . . 152
voluntary child care organisations 141,
147
Children’s Film Foundation • • 421
Children’s homes .. . • 146, 147
China manufacture .. • • 206, 257
Chiropodists .. . • I4°, I4I, x45
Chocolate and Confectionery 207, 255
Chorley  206
Church:
Commissioners .. • • o’188
in Ireland (Presbyterian) 99, i89, I9°
in Scotland, Episcopal (Anglican) 99,
loo
in Wales (Anglican) .. ••0l8o
of England. . 32, 34, 45, 99, 187-8
appointment of senior clergy 29, 45^
archbishops .. . • 32, 45, ^7
bishops . . • • • • 32, 45, ^7
Children’s Society . . 124, 147
clergy .. • • 34, 187, 188
colleges . .  
ecclesiastical courts .. • •
finance . . • • •• ••
General Synod I°o
Laity • • • • • • • • l88
Lambeth Conference .. l88oo
parishes .. • • • • • * I88
parochial councils .. ‘
provinces and dioceses . . • • 188
relations with Monarchy 29, I87,
189
relations with State .. I87> J88
schools .. •• 150,187,188
social work .. • • §9,
of Ireland (Anglican) 34, 187»
INDEX
• • 45
.. 124
.. 190
187, 190, 191
150, 151, 152,190
173, 187-91
191
191
Page
Church—contd.
of Scotland (Presbyterian) 34, 99, 187,
189
General Assembly
social work
of Wales (Presbyterian)
Roman Catholic 34, 99
schools ..
Churches
British Council of
co-operation between
Council of Christians and Jews . . 191
Free (non-conformist) ..189-90,191
Free Church Federal Council .. 191
welfare work . . . . .. 99
World Council of . . . . .. 191
Churchill Travel Scholarships . . 166
Cinemas . . .. . . 21, 419-21
Cinematograph Films Council . . 420
. . 124
. . 12
171, 424
308-14, 320
• • 3i3
308, 315
311-12
.. 309
3il, 312
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux
Citizenship
Civic Trust ..
Civil Aviation
aircrew qualifications
airmail services
airports
Authority . .
British Airports Authority
British Caledonian Airways .. 311
British European Airways (bea) 308,
„ . . , ^ . 309, 3io,313
British Overseas Airways
Corporation (boac) 308, 309-10,313
charter operations 308, 309, 310-n
earnings .. .. .. .. 310
Eurocontrol .. .. ..314
helicopter service . . .. ..312
independent airline companies 309,
310-11
licences .. .. . . 308, 309
ministerial responsibility for 57, 308,
312,313,320
navigational aids .. .. ..314
private flying .. .. ..3x1
Business Aircraft Users Associa¬
tion .. .. .. . . 311
Research and Development Board 321
safety measures .. .. 312-3, 402
traffic control .. .. 313-4
training colleges and schools .. 313
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil:
Courts . . .. 82-5, 86-7, 90
Defence .. . . .. .. 113
Civil Defence Training
Establishment .. .. 113
Royal Observer Corps .. . . 113
Warning and Monitoring
Organisation .. .. .. 113
See also Defence
Service . . 43, 47, 48, 60-6, 112
Arbitration Tribunal
Classes ..
College . .
Commission
conditions of service
Department
earnings . .
Fulton Committee
staff associations
structure
training ..
48
.. 411
.. 62
48, 6i, 64
49, 61, 64
.. 65
61, 64, 411
65, 400
61
65, 411
..62-3
.. 64
489
Page
consumers’ councils
consumption
exports and imports
Clerk:
of the Court .. . . . . 79
of the House of Commons . . 33
of the Parliaments . . . . 33
Climate . . . . .. .. 3-5
Climbers’ Clubs .. . . 456-7
Clinical Research Board and Centre 327,
328
Clinics .. 139, 140, 141, 142, 152
Clock and watch industry .. 208, 242
Clothing:
Export Council . . .. .. 254
industry 204, 207, 208, 210, 253, 254
Clubs:
social .. . . .. . . 22
youth . . . . 157, 167, 168
Clyde and Clydeside 15, 16, 208, 223,
234. 247, 281, 293, 294, 295, 460
bridge .. . . .. . . 301
Coal:
Board, National .. 200,201,217-8,
219, 220, 230, 403
coalfields and mines 2, 206, 207,
216-9, 220
.. .. 216
216, 218, 219
216, 217, 218,
219, 361
industry 57, 206, 207, 210, 215, 216-20
mechanisation . . . . .. 219
production and manpower 200, 207,
216, 217, 218-9
research .. .. . . 220, 321
associations .. . . .. 220
establishments .. .. .. 220
Utilisation Council .. .. 230
See also Gas and Mines and quarries
Coalminers:
earnings
numbers employed
Coastal preservation..
Coastguard Service ..
Cockenzie
Coinage .. .. -r-..
Coke consumption and production 215,
229
Colleges:
advanced technology 156, 159, 160,
, . 324, 325
central institutions (Scotland) 156
university status 160, 324, 325, 426
agricultural .. 156, 280-1
Air Training .. .. • • 313
art . . .. 156, 157, 160, 162
of education 124, 149, 150, 157, 159,
161-2, 163, 166, 168, 188, 426
residential (adult education) 157, 158
Services .. .. .. 111-2
technical 156, 157, 158, 159, 162, 164,
166, 325
theological . . . . . . .. 188
Village .... . . 157-8
See also Education
Colombo Plan . . . . . . 165
Colonial Development and Welfare
Acts (cd & w) .. . . .. 379
Combine harvesters . . 239, 266, 270
Commercial:
banks .. .. 349,351.368
education see Education
premises, health and welfare in . . 404
radio .. .. .. .. 442
••399
196, 219, 390
.. 171, 176-7
.. 291
. . 225
350, 463
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Commissioners:
of Irish Lights . . . • • • 292
of Northern Lighthouses .. 292
of Police . . .. • • • • io5
Committees see relevant subjects
Commodity markets . . • • 371
Common Market see European
Economic Community
Commons and village greens .. 179
Commonwealth:
Agricultural Bureaux and
Institutes . . • • 334> 335
aid to . . .• •• 377-8o
Awards, Special .. .. .. 166
Bursary Scheme .. .. .. 164
citizens . . • • • • .. 12
employment of .. .. i43> 395
co-operation:
broadcasting .. • • 444> 445
defence . . .. • • H5i ttQ
education . • 164—5, 379> 380
financial and trade 354“5> 363> 366,
372, 378, 379
research 326, 327, 331, 333> 334> 335
technical. . . . . • 379-8°
Development Corporation (cdc) 378,
379
Development Finance Company
Limited (cdfc) .. . . 354> 355
Education Conference ... . • 165
Education Liaison Committee . . 165
Forestry Institute .. .. 287, 329
Games .. .. 45°> 453> 462
immigration . . 11-12, 53, 395
member nations . . . . • • 26
Office, Foreign and see Foreign
Press Union .. • • • • 435
Queen as Head of . . 26, 27
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 164,
165
Scientific Committee (esc) . . 335
Study and Serve Scheme . • 165
Sugar Agreement .. .. • • 273
Universities, Association of 164, 165,
166
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Community:
Associations, National Federation
of    *58
Centres .. .. 125, 158, 413
development .. •• • • I25
Relations Commission .. .. 148
Service volunteers . . • • I44
Comptroller and Auditor General 160,
339, 340
Computers .. i95> 2I3> 243, 3IO> 3I6,
325, 334, 434
See also Data and Post Office
Computing Centre, National . . 212
Concert halls . . • • 21, 417
Confectionery industries see Food
Confederation of British Industry
(cbi) 204, 343, 403, 405, 406, 408, 412
Conservative Party . . • • 35, 39
Consolidated Fund 337, 338, 340, 343,
345, 348
Constabulary, Inspectors of 105, 106
Construction:
equipment . . . . • • 238, 240
industries 51, 209. 210, 233—5, 240
Industry Research Association 235, 326
Page
Consumer:
associations . • • • 387—8
councils .. . • • • • • 2°3
expenditure see Expenditure
goods industries see individual
industries
Groups, National Federation of
protection
research
sales promotion
Consumers:
Association (ca)
councils and committees
Contractors’ plant
Conurbations. .
Convalescent homes
. 388
387-8
. 388
384-5
19, 387
203, 216
.. 240
16, 205
138, 144, 4°5
160
221
Conversion tables .. • • 463-4
Coolkeeragh . . . • • • • • 223
Co-operative:
London, Society . . • • • • 382
marketing (agricultural) . . • • 277
societies . . • • 381, S®2, 383, 3°4
Wholesale Society. . .. 200, 381
Corby . • . • • • • I73, 206
Corn Exchange, Liverpool .. • • 371
Cornwall 2, 7, 13, 205, 213, 238, 257,
266, 268
Coronation . . • • • • ‘do
Coroners’ Courts . . • • 88, 92
Corporation tax see Taxation
Correspondence courses . . 157:
Coryton . . • •
Cost of living see Price, relation to income
Cotton:
Exchange, Liverpool .. •• 37*
industry .. • • 195, 196, 206, 251
Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association . . .. 251
Councils of counties, boroughs, etc.,
see Local Government
Councils, Other, see relevant subject
Counsel, see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State . • 3°, 42
Country: . . „
Landowners’ Association .. • • 207
planning see Planning
Countryside, access to .. • • I79
Countryside Commissions 175, 177, ^8
County:
Court Rule Committees .. . • 9°
courts 82—3, 84, 86, 87, 9°, 91, 94
Court of: „ „ „
Appeal 42, 80—1, 82, 83? 84, 87? 9°>
9i> 94
Common Council.. • • . . 104
Session 85, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 94, 103
Courts-martial
Appeals Court
Courts of Inquiry (Labour)
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden Market
Covent Garden Opera
Coventry
Crafts Council and Centres
Craigavon
Credit Cards ..
Cricket
Criminal:
Courts
I52
55, 89-90
90, 94
.. 411
277, 381
.. 418
I5>2°5
.. 212
173, 234
35L 385
3i7, 452
• • 79-82, 85-6, 87, 90, 94
Injuries Compensation Board . . 89
investigation departments 104, 105,
106, 107
INDEX
Page
Criminal—contd.
Law Revision Committee .. 95
records   92, 107
Criminals, treatment of .. 95, 100-1
Crofters’ Commission . . 271, 275
Croquet .. . . .. . .
/''i '
Crown:
Agents for Overseas Governments
and Administrations . . . . 63
Courts .. .. • • 79, 80, 90
Dependencies .. 1, 25, 27, 63
Office, Edinburgh .. .. 59
491
Page
Crown, The see Monarchy and
Royal Family
Crystal Palace National Recreation
Centre .. . . .. . . 448
Currency .. .. .. .. 464
transactions 367, 371, 372, 373, 375
Customs and Excise:
Board of 46, 50, 55, 341, 343, 344-5
duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 207, 248
Cycle and motor cycle industry 206, 245
Cycling  452
D Dagenham .. .. .. .. 205
Dancing .. .. 21, 4x8, 419
English Folk Dance and Song
Society .. .. .. . . 418
Royal Ballet and School .. . . 419
Daresbury (nuclear physics) 321;, 330
Darlington .. .. .. 207,430
Dartford .. .. .. .. 2i;8
Data:
Exchange, Automatic .. . . 434
Processing  56, 318
Service, National .. 212,318
See also Computers and Post Office
Deaf .. .. .. 124, 140, 142
S631)8  45, 187
Death:
causes of .. .. 9, 23, 134, 303
duty see Taxation, estate duty
grant and allowances 127, 129, 130, 131
rate .. .. .. .. 8
sentence (Northern Ireland) . . 95
Deaths, registration of .. .. 7
Deer stalking .. .. .. .. 454
Defence .. .. . . 109-22
Boards . . .. .. . . no
Cadet forces .. .. 111-2
Chiefs of Staff Committee .. 110
Civil see Civil Defence
College, National .. .. .. 112
colleges  111-2
combat forces .. .. 113,115-9
Commands in, 113, 114, 117, n8
commissioned ranks .. 111,112
Committee on, and Overseas Policy 110
Council  55, no
deployment of forces .. 114-5
expenditure 110, 112, 113, 116, 117-8,
119-20, 122, 197, 338
horces vote .. .. • • 34
manpower .. .. 110—5, 120—1
Ministers of .. .. .. 110
Ministry of and Secretary of State
f°r 44, 50, 52, 55, 74, 104, 110,
119, 120, 209, 313, 320, 321, 330,
331, 393
National Defence Industries
Council .. .. .. . . j2o
nuclear power 109, 113, 115, 116, 117
329
Operational Analysis Establish¬
ment . . . . .. .. 120
Ordnance Factories, Royal .. 119
organisation (corps, branches, etc.)
110-11
overseas commitments 109, 113—5,
116, 117
Defence—contd.
planning and control .. 110-3
policy and commitments 109-10
c . . . “3-4
pre-Service organisations in, 112,
168
research and development 119-20,
3i9
reserve and auxiliary forces 112-3
resettlement service 393, 396-7
Secretary of State for see Ministry
of
Service management .. ..no
Scientific Advisory Council .. 120
Staff colleges .. .. .. 112
Strategic Command, Army 111, 117,
118
stragetic forces 114,115,116,117,
118, 121, 122
Studies, Royal College of .. 112
training in, 112
warning systems .. .. 113,118
weapons and equipment 113-4,119-
20, 200, 330
co-operative projects .. .. 119
export controls .. .. . . 369
Weapons Development Com¬
mittee
women’s services
120
121
See also Army, Royal Navy, Royal
Air Force and Research
Delegated legislation .. 39-40
Demography .. .. .. . .6-17
Dental services .. 136, 137, 145, 152
British Dental Association .. 145
dentists .... 136, 137, 145
(general Dental Council .. .. 145
Departments, Government see indi¬
vidual titles, Northern Ireland and
Scotland
Derby and Derbyshire 4, 16, 206, 218,
220
Design:
and Industries Association (dia) 212
awards for . . .. .. .. 211
Centres .. .. 19,211,212
Council of Industrial .. .. 211
Detention centres . . 96, 101, 102
Detergents .. . . 248, 249, 251
Devaluation see Sterling
Development:
areas and districts .. 213-5, 364
Commission . . .. 68, 215
Corporation for Wales .. 215, 369
councils . . . . . . .. 215
See also Economic and Research
492
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Development—contd.
organisation see Industry
plans (towns) . . • • I7I! I72-4
Devizes . . • • • • ■ • 3°4
Devon. . 2, 5, 205, 213, 257, 269, 453
Dewsbury .. • • • • 2°7> 253
Diesel traction . • 205, 289, 334
Dietitians .. • • • • • • I45
Dioceses see Church of England
Diplomatic Service .. . • 63, 369
Director of Public Prosecutions 54, 81
Disabled:
British Sports Association for the 447
Central Council for .. .. 124
employment of 142, 200, 389, 393—4
rehabilitation of . . 138, i42> 394
welfare services for 124, 133, i39>
140, 142
Disablement:
benefit .. •• I27> I3I> J42
pensions (war) .. • • ‘ ‘ ^
Resettlement Service 138, 393“4> 39®
Discount market and houses 349, 35°»
35i» 352. 370
Diseases, control of . . *34> I39> I4°
Distributive trades . . . • 381-8, 390
District councils (Scotland) 67, 68, 69,
70
Divorce Court .. • • 83, 84, 87
Divorce rate . • • • • • 10
Dock workers . . • • • • 294
National Dock Labour Board . . 294
Docks see Ports and
Dockyards, naval .. •• tI7» II9
Doctors:
appointed factory .. . • • • 4°4
Page
459
20
244
207,
Doctors—contd.
British Medical Association 145, 4°5
general practitioner services 136, i37>
139, 140, 141, 143
in industry . • • • 4°4> 4° 5
in National Health Service 136, 145,
327
Doggett’s Coat and Badge ..
Dogs . .
Domestic:
electrical appliances industry
help.. •• 18,70,140,141,395
utensils industry . . • • 205, 248
Doncaster
Dorset
Dover .. . .
Drainage authorities
Drama
schools and colleges
See also Theatres
Dramatic Art, Royal Academy of . . 410
Drax .. .. • • • • • ■ 225
Drinks industries 197, 204, 210, 254,
255-6, 39°
Drugs 139, 140, 250, 368
Committee on Safety of Medicines 140
Dry cleaning . . . • • • • • 385
Duchy of Lancaster .. .. 44, 91
Duke of Edinburgh’s:
Award Scheme . . • • . . 168
Prize for Elegant Design .. 211
Dumbarton .. . • • • • • 223
224
. . 220
3, 205,443
275-6
414, 415-6
.. 416
Dundee
Dunstable
Durham
Dyestuffs
160, 208, 240, 253, 432
 205
103, 160, 187, 207, 218
206, 248, 249
E
Earnings . . 18, 65, 71, 199, 398-400
Easington .. • • • • • • 229
East Anglia . . 5, I4> l6o, 205, 262, 266
Economic:
Development Committees i94> 209,
212, 271
Development Council, National
(nedc) .. • • • • I94> 209
integration with Europe see Euro¬
pean Communities
policy and planning 48, 57, i94-5>
209, 213-4, 271-2
Economy, national . . . • 192-9
gross national product 195, I96> I97>
198, 288
Group .... • • • • 49
incomes and prices i93> I94> I95
investment • • 196—7, 198
personal incomes and expenditure 199
problems and policies . . ..194
structure . . • • • • I95-9
See also Balance of Payments,
Finance, Industry and Trade
Edinburgh .. . • • • . • • 2°8
administrative departments in . . 58
airport .. • ■ • • 3I1[> 312
art, drama and music 414, 4I7, 4™
Assay Office . • • • • • 248
Botanic Garden, Royal . . • • 322
Court of Session . . . . 85, 87, 88
International Festival . . 4I4> 4*7
newspapers . • • • 43°, 432
Edinburgh—contd.
population . .
port. .
Royal Observatory
sport centre
universities
Education
administration
adult . . 5°. .
National Institute of
agricultural
15, 208
• •295
.. 325,331
..448
103, 160, 426
18,19,69,70,149-69
149-51
70,155,157-8, 426
.. 158
156,280-1
and Science, Department of and
Secretary of State for 47, 5°, 98, T49,
150, 153, 154, 155, 158, 160, 163,
169, 209, 287, 319-20, 327, 320,
33°,333,335, 4i3> 423, 424, 426
architectural . . • • 162, 424 5
art .. 152, 156, 162, 413, 4I4>423-4
broadcasting to schools 158-9, 439,442
building programme .. 155,424
Certificate of Secondary see exami¬
nations, below
colleges see Colleges
commercial and management 153, 15 5 >
157,160, 162, 212
curricula and courses 150,151, I52, i53>
156, 157, 158, 159, 166, 212, 424,
block release
correspondence . .
day release
sandwich
..156
157,160
..156
156,157, 162
INDEX
Page
Education—contd.
curricula and courses—contd.
secretarial .. . . .. 157
dramatic . . . . . . . . 416
evening institutes .. 156, 157, 413
examinations 151, 153, 154-5,156, 15?
financeof 72,148,149,150,151,1152,
153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160,
162,188
forestry 280,287
‘further’ 149, 155-8,159, 162, 319, 324
advanced courses .. 155,324
General Certificate of see examina¬
tions, above
grants see finance of, above
higher 149, 15°, 151, 155, 159-63,166
Inspectorate . . 149, 151, 154
local education authorities 70, 98, 142,
149, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 156,
I57,158,162, 163, 168
music .. .. 152,418,419
National Certificates and Diplomas
i56,157
physical 152,446-7
prisoners . . . . . . 98, 101
religious . . 151-2, 187, 190, 191
research on.. .. 151,155,163-4
scholarships and awards 70, 151, 156,
162-3, 164
schools . . 149, 150-7, 166, 173
building  150,155
comprehensive .. . . .. 153
Council for Curriculum Exami¬
nations .. 151,155,163
denominational 151-2, 188, 190, 191
fees . . . . . . 151,154
health and welfare 133, 148, 152, 153,
I54
independent (public) 149,150,151,
154
..154
150, 151, 153, 154
150-1
133,149,152
..152
125,152
154
Tribunal
leaving age
management
meals service
middle . .
nursery ..
preparatory
primary 149,150,151,152-3,155
pupil numbers .. 149,150,153,154
secondary 149,150,151,153, 158
special educational treatment 153—4
voluntary I49, 150, 151, 152, 155,
187
teachers 148, 150, 151, 153,154,158,
161,162,163,164,166
Inter-University Council for
Higher Education Overseas 165,
166
Overseas, National Council for
the Supply and Training of . . 166
training .. 150,153,161,162,163
Teaching Council, General 125, 162
technical and technological 149, 153,
156-7,159,163,324,325
See also Industry, education and
training for
trade unions and .. .. ..410
Urban Programme 125,147,152
visual aids in .. .. 158-9
Educational Foundation for .. 159
National Extension College .. 159
493
Page
Education—contd.
vocational .. 155,156,394,396-7
See also Universities
Educational:
Commission, US/UK .. . . 166
Development Overseas, Centre
for(cEDo) .. .. 166,445
Research, National Foundation for 163
Scientific and Cultural Organisa¬
tion (unesco) .. 163,164,334,417
Technology, National Council for 159
Eggs Authority . . .. .. 277
Egmanton .. .. .. . . 220
Eisteddfodau . . . . . . 417,428
Elections:
local government .. .. 53,68-9
parliamentary . . 31,33-4,3 5
Electrical:
and Allied Manufacturers’ Associa¬
tion, British .. .. .. 243
appliances industries .. 17,18,244
engineering see Engineering
machinery industry 206, 207, 243
Research Association .. . . 243
Electricity 57, 173, 210, 215, 216, 218,
222-7
area boards and councils .. 216, 222—3,
224,227
Authority, Northern Ireland Joint 223
Board for Northern Ireland . . 223
Board, South of Scotland 222, 223,
224,225, 226, 227
consumption . . 217,224,227
Council .. .. 222,223,227
Generating Board, Central 222, 223,
224,225, 226, 227
generation . . . . 222,223-6,329
manpower . . . . . . . . 222
power stations 222, 224-6, 227, 234
hydro-electric .. .. 216,225
nuclear .. 207,216,224,225-6,234
production .. . . .. 195, 209
research .. .. 227,321,329
Supply Research Council. . . . 227
transmission lines . . .. . . 226
Electronic equipment:
defence .. .. 119,120,321
industry 201,205,208,240,242,243
post office .. 314,315,316,317,318
Ellesmere Port . . . . . . 206
Emigration .. .. .. n-12
Employers’ organisations 203-4, 211, 398,
402,408,412
Employment . . 60, 61, 62, 193, 195, 196,
199, 201, 209, 210, 213, 214, 215,
294
Department of (de) and Secretary of
State for . . 44, 47, 51, 132, 138, 148,
194, 200, 209, 212, 214, 389, 392,
393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 399, 400,
401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 407, 410,
411, 412
exchanges and services 389, 392-401
‘fringe’ benefits .. .. .. 401
Manpower and Productivity
Service .. 212,395,406,407,411
Manpower Research Unit . . 391
National Joint Advisory Council .. 406
Occupational Guidance Services . . 393
of immigrants .. .. ••395
older workers .. .. 389,392
permits .. .. .. . . 395
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Employment—contd.
premiums, regional .. 214,215
redundancy .. 128,398,401
safety in .. •• •• 401-4
selective employment tax 53, 128, 345
sheltered . . . . • • • • 394
statistics (industrial) 219, 222, 228, 233,
235-60, 288, 289, 291, 292, 294,
389-412
training for. . .. • • 39T> 395~7
boards .. .. • • •• 391
centres .. .. •• • • 396
and productivity services 392~7
vocational guidance and training . . 394>
395-7
women 18, 389, 390, 398, 399,400
Youth, Service .. # • • _ • • 393
See also individual industries,
Labour, Unemployment and
Work: hours of
Engineering 197, 205, 206, 207, 208, 210,
234,235,238-42,320
aeronautical .. • • 246—7, 3x3
chemical . . •. • • 248-51
civil  201,234,402
electrical . . 201, 205, 206, 242—4, 326,
327,334
Institutions, Council of .. . • 324
Laboratory, National .. • • 326
marine 205,206,207,208,245,247
mechanical.. .. 238—42,334
Engineers, Association of Consulting 235
Engines, industrial .. . • • • 239
England:
area and counties .. . • • • 1
population, figures _ 7-II» I3~I7
See also Regions and individual
towns
English:
Association • • • • • • 42°
Opera Group . • • • .. 418
Environment, Department of
and Secretary of State for . . 44> 47»
51-2,67, 69,73, 76, 120, 134, i7°»
171, 172, 174, i75> i76, i77> I79>
180, 182, 194, 201, 209, 214, 230,
231, 234, 235, 300. 303, 3°4> 3°6,
320, 321, 326, 402, 413. 423. 424
Ministers for . . • • 44> 51
Environmental:
planning see Planning
pollution .. • • • • I76,321
protection . . •. • • . . 176
Studies, Centre for .. I74.32I
Page
Equal pay .. . • • • 399> 4°°
Equity see Law
Erskine bridge .. • • 234,301
Essex •• •• 160,268,269
Estate duty see Taxation
Estimates (Exchequer) 338-41.345
Eurocontrol .. .. •• • • 3I4
European:
Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) . • • • • • 334
Broadcasting Union (ebu) 444_5
Conservation Year 1970 .. .. 23
Communities . . . • • • 367
Economic Community (eec) 57, 361,
365.377
Free Trade Association (efta) 361, 366,
377
Industrial Federations, Council of 204
Nuclear Energy Agency .. 33°. 334
Organisation for Nuclear Research
(cern) .. .. 325.330.334
Space:
Conference .. •• •• 331
Research Organisation (esro) . . 325,
330,331,334
Vehicle Launcher Development
Organisation (eldo) .. 33°, 331
Evidence (rules) .. •• 81-2
Examining justices .. . • • • 79
Exchange control 5°, I93, 349. 367-8.
37i
Exchange Equalisation Account 347, 349
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. 434
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Expectation of life .. •• • • 9, IO
Expenditure:
committees . . • • 339.340-1
consumer . . 196,197,199
public authorities 125,197-9,337_49
reflationary measures . . 342_3
See also Defence, Finance, Re¬
search, Agriculture: subsidies,
and Housing: subsidies
Export 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 209,
237, 238, 359, 360-1, 367, 373,
380
Board, British .. • • • • 37°
controls .. • •_ 209, 368—70, 371
Council, British National .. .. 37°
Credits Guarantee Department
(ecgd) .. ■ • •• •• 369
licensing and restrictions 368-9, 37°
See also Trade and individual industries
F Factories:
building .. •• 173,213,214
Inspectorate 3°9, 401 > 4°2, 4°4, 4°5
legislative provisions . . 389,4°°
See also Employment and indi¬
vidual industries
Families:
average size of .. •• i°> J7
welfare services for 123, 125, 140, 141
Family:
allowances 53, I23, I25,126,13°, I3I
132
Division (High Court) . • ^3, 84
Income Supplement .. ..126
Family—contd.
Service Units .. •• 123,147
Welfare Association .. ..123
Farming see Agriculture
Farm schools (Scotland) .. 280-1
Farnborough .. • • • • 312
Fashion .. •• •• ..19
Fauna  5-6, 179
Fawley •• •• 221,222,224
Felixstowe .. • • • • 293,294
Fen district .. •• •• 5,262
Fencing . • • • • • • * 453
Ferrybridge  •• 2^5
Fertilisers 248, 249, 250, 268, 272, 283
INDEX
Page
Fertility trends see Population
Festival Hall, Royal .. . . 414,417
Field Sports Society, British . . 453
Film:
Archive, National .. .. ..421
British Picture Corporation, Asso¬
ciated .. .. .. .. 419
Censors, British Board of . . .. 420
EMI Film and Theatre Corpora¬
tion Ltd... .. .. .. 419
festivals .. .. .. .. 421
Finance Corporation, National .. 419
Fund Agency, British .. 420,421
Industrial and Scientific Film As¬
sociation, British . . • • 419
industry .. .. 204,419,420
Institute, British .. .. 420,421
Library, Central .. .. .. 420
production .. .. .. 419,421
Rank Organisation .. ..419
Theatre, National .. .. 420,421
Visnews Ltd. . . .. . . 445
Films:
distribution .. .. .. 419
documentary .. .. 419,420
educational . . . . • • 159
feature .. . . .. .. 419
foreign . . .. . . .. 420
licensing . . .. .. 420,421
of Scotland Committee .. .. 420
sponsorship .. .. .. 420
trade associations .. ..419
Finance .. .. .. 337-58
aid to overseas countries 52, 371,
377-80
banking  349“54
capital issues .. 347,349,351
capital payments and receipts .. 347
corporations .. .. 354-5, 370
currency reserves .. 372, 374, 375
Exchequer 49,55,58, 72, 73, 93, 108,
126, 136, 176, 182, 203, 219, 251,
272, 273, 274, 309, 337, 338, 339,
34i, 345, 348, 420, 427, 44°
See also Treasury
financial institutions (other than
banks)    349,354-8
financing of international trade 351-2,
364-6, 370-1
inflation, counter-measures 193, 342-3
local government 71-3,182, 196, 197,
198,199,337-8
National Loans Fund 337, 338, 339,
340,346,347
parliamentary control finance 36, 37,
, . 38,337-41
public corporations .. 326,337
Special Drawing Rights (sdrs) 372, 375
See also Balance of payments,
Budget, Estimates, Exchange
control, Expenditure, Income,
Investment, National Debt,
Revenue, Sterling, Taxation and
Trade
Fines (penalties) .. ..95,101,102
Finnart .. .. .. 221,295
Fire:
Brigade Councils .. .. 74,75
Officers’ Committee .. .. 76
prevention research .. .. 76
Protection Association .. . . 76
Research Group .. .. . . 76
495
Page
Fire—contd.
Research Organisation, Joint . . 76
Research Station . . .. .. 326
Service Staff College .. . . 76
Service Technical College . . 76
Services .. .. 70, 74-7, 173
Fishing:
fleets .. .. .. . . 282
freshwater . . .. 275, 283, 329
grounds . . .. .. 281-2
Herring Industry Advisory Council 283
Herring Industry Board . . 283-4
industry .. 205,207,281-4,381
processing .. 205,255,281-2
subsidies .. . . 283,284
ports .. 205,207,281,282,295
research .. .. 321, 329, 332
sport  283,454
White Fish Authority . . .. 284
White Fish Industry Advisory
Council .. . . .. .. 284
Fleet see Royal Navy
Fleet Air Arm .. .. ..no
Fleetwood .. .. 222,281,282
Flintshire .. .. .. .. 208
Float glass .. .. .. .. 257
Flora see Vegetation
Flour Milling and Baking Research
Association .. .. .. 326
Fog  5, 177
Folkestone .. .. .. 205,293
Food:
biscuits .. .. .. • • 25 5
bread .. .. .. .. 254
chocolate and confectionery 207, 255
consumption .. 19, 199, 254-5, 264
exports .. .. 255,282,361
home grown supplies 264, 265-9, 272
imports 192,206,261,272,282,359
industries 197, 204, 205, 207, 210,
254-7
Manufacturing Industries, Re¬
search Association .. ..326
ministerial responsibility for 49, 134,
261-2,271-2
purity .. 134-5,139.279,329,387
research .. .. . . 327,329
sales .. _ 381,383,384,385
See also Education: School Meals
Service and Welfare Foods Ser¬
vice
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao)   50,334
Football .. .. 21,152,449
pools .. .. 21,345,449
Rugby .. .. .. 459-60
Footpaths and bridleways .. 178,179
Footwear industry 205, 206, 208, 253, 254,
386
Shoe and Allied Trades Research
Association .. .. .. 254
Ford Foundation . . .. 164, 174
Foreign:
Affairs, Secretary of State for .. 52
and Commonwealth Office 44, 52,63,
287,335,370,445
Overseas Development Admini¬
stration (oda) . . 44, 52, 63
Exchange Market .. .. 351, 371
Service see Diplomatic Service
Foreigners:
employment of .. .. ••395
496
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Foreigners—contd.
naturalisation of . . . . • • 12
visitors . . .. ■ • • • 3^4
See also Overseas students
Forensic science .. •• ..107
Forest:
area 5,178,179,261,284-5,286,287
nature reserves .. .. i79>2%5
parks .. •• 178,285,287
Products Research Laboratory 287, 326
Research Station .. . . • ■ 287
Forestry . . . . • • 279,284-7
Commission 5, 52, 175, 178, 179, 285,
286,287, 329
committees and societies . . 286—7
education, training and research 280,
286,287, 329
Fund .. .. •• •• 286
Institute, Commonwealth 287, 329
Societies, Royal
Forth:
bridge
river and firth
Fort William . .
Foulness (airport)
..286
. • 3°i
2,208,293,295
.. 258
■. 312
Fowl pest
Fox hunting . .
Fraud Squad . .
Freezing (food)
Freight:
Corporation, National
Integration Council
Page
.. .. 278
• •453
.. 107
205,255, 282,283
297,298,299-
300,302
• 300
Fruit and vegetable:
Preservation Research Association 326
products and preserves . . 254, 255
Fruit, production and distribution . . 268,
269,276, 381
Fuel and Power .. ..215-30,321
Advisory Councils. . .. ..216
consumption 216,218,221,224,228
efficiency .. • • • • • • 230
sources of .. .• •• .. 215
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas,
Hydro-electric, Petroleum and
Research
Furniture Development Council . . 259
Furniture industry . . . • 204,259
Research Association . . • • 259
G
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic . . • • • • ■ • I3
Mod, National .. • . .. 418
Gainsborough .. • • • • 220
Gambling see Betting
Game Conservancy . . • • • • 454
Games industry . . • • • • 260
Game shooting . • • • 453_4
Gardens see Horticulture
Gas 57,173,210,215,217,218,221,
227-30
Area Boards .. • • 228, 229
by-products . . • • • • 229
Consultative Councils . . 216, 228
consumption .. 218,228,229,230
Council .. • • 228, 229, 230
natural 205, 215, 216, 218, 220, 228, 229
pipeline system .. • • • • 229
production .. X95i I97> 209, 228
research .. .. 229,230,321
turbines . . . • • • 225,246
Gateshead .. • • • • • • 207
Gatwick (airport) .. • • 311 > 312
Gauges industry . . • • • • 248
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(gatt) .. •• 364-S^S* 368
Register Offices . . • • 7> 59
Registrar .. .. •• 7> 55> 59
Geological Museum and Survey . . 333
Geology . . 2-3, 179, 222, 332, 333
321,332
• • 256
144,167
. . 207
• • 312
416, 422
• • 301
• • 443
• • 95
. . 211
Geophysics . .
Gin industry" . .
Girl Guides Association
Glamorgan
Glasgow:
airport and air services
art, drama and music
bridge
broadcasting studios
burgh court
design centre
Glasgow—contd.
fire service .. • • • • • • 74
Hampden Park . . • • • • 449
housing and rebuilding 173,174,186
industry . . • • 208, 239, 253, 256
newspapers .. •• 430>432
population . . • • i5> I6, i73> 208
transport .. • • ■ • 299,304
universities 103,160,161,426,455
See also Clydeside
Glass industry 195.206, 207,257,386
Research Association, British . . 258
Gloucester and Gloucestershire 205, 220,
293. 306,417
Glyndebourne (opera) .. ..418
Gold and convertible currency
reserves 350,368,371,372,373,374,
375
or-irl cilvpr wnrp. industry . . 24-8
Gold Market (London) .. • • 371
Golf  22,454-5
Goods and services see Industry,
production
Goods transport see Road haulage
Goonhilly •• •• •• 3x8,331
Government • • • • 25-77
Actuary, Department of .. • • 47
composition of .. • • 43_4
departments of .. 26,46-60,194
employment, training and pro¬
ductivity services . • 392-7
Loans Fund (ni) .. •• 73, J83
relations with industry 57, 203-4, 209,
325, 326,410,411
relations with overseas countries 52
Training Centres (gtc) . . 394, 396-7
See also Civil Service, Expendi¬
ture, Finance, Local Govern¬
ment Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Privy Council and
Research
Gramophone records 20, 416, 4x7, 427
INDEX
497
Page
Grangemouth .. .. 221,295
Grants see Education: finance,
Housing: finance, and Local
Government: finance
Gravesend .. .. .. . . 258
Great Britain:
area.. .. .. .. .. 1
definition .. .. . . .. 1
population .. .. . . 7» 13
Greater London Council see London
Great Seal .. .. 29,31,32,54
Green Belts . . . . . . .. 175
Greenfield . . . . .. .. 252
Greenock . . . . . . .. 432
Greenwich .. .. .. 1,112
Greyhound racing .. .. 21,458
Page
Grid, electricity .. .. . . 226
Grimsby 207,221,252,281,282,295
Grocery trade .. 381,383,384
Group medical schemes (factories) .. 405
Guardian’s allowance .. .. 130
Guernsey:
language .. .. .. .. 14
national insurance benefits .. 126
newspapers . . .. • • 432
population .. . . .. . . 13
States of .. . . .. ..31
See also Channel Islands
Guided weapons 115, 116, 117, 118, 120
Early Warning Stations .. .. 118
Gulbenkian Trust .. .. ..164
Gymnastics .. .. .. .. 455
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus
Hairdressing establishments
Halifax
Hall-mark (gold and silver) . .
Hamble
Hams Hall (generating plant)
Handicapped persons see Welfare
Hand tools industry . .
‘Hansard’
Harbours see Ports
Harrogate
Hartlepool
Harwich
Hatfield
Health
81,86
. • 386
207,253
.. 248
• • 313
.. 224
. . 248
• • 37
304,415
207,295
293,299,460
173,205
133-47
Advisory Committee, Industrial . . 405
and Social Security, Department
Of 44,47,53,125,133,134,139,147,
153,182,343,424
and welfare services 53, 136-7, 140-3
centres .. 137,140,141,143,144
control of infectious diseases 134,139,
140
Councils .. .. . . 136, 143
dangers .. .. .. .. 23
education .. . . .. . . 143
home nursing . . 70, 140, 141
in industry .. .. 401-5
in prisons . . .. . . . . 99
laboratories .. .. • • 139
public . . 69,134-5, 139, 140
research .. .. 133,136,321,327
schoolchildren .. .. 137,152
Service, National 53, 70, 99, 128, 132,
135-8, 139, 140, 142, 144, 145,
146, 327
administration .. .. 53, 135-6
charges .. .. 135,136^7,140
finance . . .. .. 136-7
general practitioner services 136,
137,139
hospital services 136, 137, 138, 139,
140,141, 143, 145
local services .. .. 136-43
mental services . . 135, 138, 140, 142
Northern Ireland .. 143-4
organisation . . .. . . 136
specialist services 53, 135,138,
139,140,142,143,145,279
visiting .. . . 140, 141, 144, 145
Supplementary Benefits Commis-
Health—contd.
sion, Department of .. ..125
Heathrow (airport) .. 221, 306, 311,312
Heating and Ventilating Research
Association .. .. 235,326
Heating appliances . . . . .. 241
Hebrides .. . . .. ..3,4
Helicopters .. 115,117,118,119,312
Henley on Thames
Herbarium (Kew)
Hereford (festival)
Hewett
Heysham
High Court of Justice
212,459
.. 322
..417
.. . . 220
221,293, 295
80, 81, 82, 83, 84,
85, 87, 89,90
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) .. . . . . . . 87
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland) 85, 86,
90, 92, 94
Highland Games .. .. . . 450
Highlands and Islands, Scotland 2, 3,4, 5,
7,208,267,269,285,450
Development Board .. ..215
Highway Code .. .. . . 304
Highway construction 69, 171, 233, 300,
301
High Wycombe .. .. .. 259
Hire purchase .. 343, 354, 386, 387
finance companies . . . . 387
HP Information Ltd. . . . . 387
Historical Manuscripts Commission 426
Historic buildings and monuments . . 171,
174-5,423,414
building preservation notices .. 174
Council .. .. . . . . 174
Monuments, Royal Commission on
174,175
Hobbies .. .. .. . . 20-1
Hockey   152,455
Holidays .. .. 18,22,290,401
Hollow-ware industry . . . . 248
Home Defence see Civil Defence
Home-Grown Cereals Authority . . 277
Home Office and Home Secretary 31, 44,
53, 66, 69, 74, 75, 76, 89, 90, 95,
96, 97, 100, 103, 104, 105, 139,
148,283,284,332
Homicide see Murder
Honours  29,45,53
Hop growing . . . . . . .. 269
Horsemanship . . .. 458-9
498
BRITAIN I972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Horserace Betting Levy Board .. 458
race courses .. .. .. 45^
Horse racing .. .. .. 21,457-8
Horticulture see Agriculture
Hosiery:
and Allied Trades Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. .• 253
and Knitwear Export Group,
British ..  253
and knitwear industry 206, 251,252
Hospital:
Boards, Regional .. 135, 136, 328, 424
Car Service .. .. . • 143
Schools  136, 153
Hospitals .. 13s, 136, 137. 138, 143
maternity services .. .. .. 138
Northern Ireland
number of
psychiatric
Scotland
staff. .
teaching
voluntary
voluntary help in ..
Hotels and Restaurants
Households . .
.. 143
..138
135,137.138
..138
137.138
136.138
..138
124,144
385,402
17-8
House of Commons 27, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39, 4°, 4L 43, 44, 45,
46, 49, 54, 81, 91, 92, 187, 203,
.322, 337, 338, 339, 34°, 34i
disqualification (clergy) .. 34,187
election to .. .. .. 33_4
financial control 36, 37, 38, 39, 338, 339
officers .. . . . . 33,36
party composition .. . • 35
privileges .. .. . . • • 34
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 27, 30, 32-3, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 46, 80, 81, 82,
84, 9°, 94
as Court of Appeal 80, 81, 82, 84, 85,
87, 90, 94
eligibility
officers
privileges
• • 32
32,33
• • 34
Page
Housework .. .. .. 17-18
Housing .. .. 69, 70, 71,180-6
administration 69, 70, 71, 72, 180, 181,
182.424
and Local Government, Ministry
of  5i
associations .. 180, 181, 185-6
construction and design 180, 182,183,
234.424
finance 71,181,182,183,184,185,186
home ownership 180, 182,183, 234
improvement .. .. .. 186
investment . . 181, 183-4, 196
ministerial responsibility for 51, 180,
181,182, 424
numbers of dwellings 17,18o, 182,
234
policy .. .. • • • • !82
privately rented .. .. 184-5
public authorities 69, 70, 71, 72,180,
181,182
rent rebates .. •• 182,183
rent restrictions .. .. 184-5
research and development 182,321
slum clearance .. 180,181,186
standards .. .. 181,184,424
town development schemes .. 174
Hovercraft 115, 118, 120, 213, 246, 295-6,
334
British Rail Hovercraft Ltd. 296, 298
Huddersfield .. .. • • • • 207
Hull 15,160,207,281,282,293,295,
3i6,443
Human relations in industry 398, 405-6
Humber and Humberside 14, 206, 207,
237,262,295,307
Hunt Committee, National .. .. 457
Hunting .. .... . • 453
Hydraulics Research Station 232, 326
Hydro-electric power 208, 216, 222, 223,
224,225
Board, North of Scotland 222, 223,
224,225, 226, 227
See also Electricity
Hydrological research .. 232—3, 332
I ITA see Independent Television
Authority
Immigration . . • • 7, n_i2, 123, 125,
148
Community Relations Commission 148
Immingham .. . . 207, 293, 295
Immunisation . . .. 7°, I4°
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. .. 200,
201
Imports .. 192,193,194» 359-6°
licensing and restrictions 209, 368, 369
See also individual industries and
Trade
Improvement grants:
agricultural .. .. 273-4
housing . . .. 181, 185, 186
Income:
Government .. .. 337-41 * * *
personal .. .. •. 18,199
source of .. .. .. •• *99
See also Earnings
Incomes and prices .. .. 193, x95
Income Tax see Taxation
Independent Television:
Authority (ita) 159,430 > 438, 439“
40,441-2,443, 444, 445
Companies Association . . . . 444
Educational Development Over¬
seas, Centre for (cedo) . . 166, 445
newspapers: relations with 42 *9, 43°,
44°
News .. . • • • 44°, 443
programme companies 159,439,44°
Indictable offences .. 81, 84, 85, 86
Industrial:
and Commercial Finance Corpora¬
tion Ltd. (icfc) .. . • 354,355
and trade fairs .. . • • • 37°
Artists and Designers, Society of. . 211
associations . . • • 203-4
building 172, 173, i83, 209, 213, 214,
233-5
Councils, Joint .. . • • • 4°6
Court  411,412
design .. • • • • 211—2, 369
Council of .. •• 211,387
INDEX
Page
Industrial—contd.
disputes .. .. 398,410,411
engines manufacture .. .. 239
Estates Corporations .. ..213
Federations, Council of European 204
films . . .. .. . . 420
Fuel Efficiency Service, National 230
Health Advisory Committee .. 405
information .. .. . . 369
injuries insurance and benefits 53, 125,
126,127, 131-2
negotiating machinery .. 410-11
plant and steelworks manufacture 240
relations 51,195,209,211,212,332
Commission on (era) 398, 407, 412
Division for .. .. ..410
Practice, Code of .. . . 407
Research Unit . . .. .. 332
research establishments .. .. 326
Safety Advisory Council .. . . 403
training boards 289, 391, 395-6, 403,
T , 434
Industry 192,194, 195, 196, 197, 200-60
advisory councils and committees 194,
212,369,370
association . . . . .. 203-4
Central Training Council (ctc) .. 396
Confederation of British (cbi) 204, 343,
403,405,406,408
development areas and districts 213-5
development organisations 213-5, 369
distribution policy. . .. 172,213-5
education and training for 153,156,
157, 159,211,212,391,394, 395-7
National Council for Educa¬
tional Technology .. ..159
Finance Corporation for . . 354-5
grants and loans to 203, 212, 213, 214,
215
health and welfare services 404-5
human relations in . . .. 398
investment in see Investment
location .. .. 172,204-8,213-5
management training 162,164,194,
2x1,212,213
British Institute of .. ..212
manufacturing 195, 197, 200-1, 206,
209,210,213,214,235-60,390
ministerial responsibility .. .. 44
National Joint Advisory Council .. 406
organisation .. .. 200-15
ownership .. . . .. 200-4
production and productivity in 196,
200, 209-12, 235
British Productivity Council .. 420
relations with Government 57, 203-4,
209, 325, 326, 406
restrictive practices, control of 201-2,
209
safety measures .. .. 401-4
structure .. .. . . 200-1
training for 156, 159, 209, 212, 214,
395-7
See also Employment, Exports, in¬
dividual industries, Public cor¬
porations, Research and Trade
Infectious diseases:
control of . .
mortality from
Inflation see Finance
Information:
and advice to exporters
70, 134, 138, 140
9
369
499
Page
Information—contd.
Central Office of .. 47, 53-4, 420
services (telephone) .. .•317
services overseas . . 54, 335, 369, 370
Injury benefit (industrial injuries) 131-2
Inland Revenue:
Board of 54, 55, 72, 89, 343, 344, 348
sources of see Taxation
Inland transport .. 288, 296-306
Inland waterways . . 288, 297, 306-7
development .. .. .. 307
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland . . 93
Inns of Court .. . . 92, 93
Inquests .. .. .. 88, 92
Insecticides .. . . .. 250, 334
Inspectorates:
agricultural .. .. .. 402
constabulary .. .. .. 105
factory .. 389, 401, 402, 404, 405
fire service .. .. .. • • 75
mines and quarries .. .. 402
railway employment . • .. 402
schools . . .. .. .. 149
wages .. .. .. .. 407
Institutes and Institutions see relevant
subjects
Instrument Landing System (ils) . . 314
Insurance .. 76, 206, 354, 356-8
•• 357
369-70
357-8
•• 357
318, 330
292
brokers
export credit
international services
marine
See also National Insurance
Intelsat
Inter-Governmental Maritime Con¬
sultative Organisation (imco)
Internal Trade see Trade
International:
Agency for Research on Cancer .. 334
Atomic Energy Agency .. 330, 334
Biological Programme .. ■ • 323
Convention for Prevention of
Pollution of Sea by Oil . . 292
Council of Scientific Unions (icsu) 323,
331
Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol)
Development Association (ida)
Fellowship Schemes
Festival of University Theatre
Labour Organisation (ilo) 397, 408
Machine Tools Exhibition .. 239
Monetary Fund 364, 368, 372, 375,
376
Special Drawing Rights (sdr)
108
380
323
416
372,
375
417
445
445
316
Music Council
Telecommunication Union (itu)
Television Federation (Intertel) .
Telex Exchange, London
Invention, National Reference
Library for Science and .. 333, 425
Invergorden .. .. .. .. 208
Inverkip .. .. . . 224, 225
Investment . . . . 196-7, 198, 213
in fuel and power industries 216, 218,
219, 227, 229
grants .. .. 194, 214, 220, 377
overseas
in Britain
private
public
193, 196, 376, 377
196, 197, 376
196, 197. 376-7
196, 197
5°°
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Investment—contd.
trusts . . . • 354, 356, 358, 370
See also individual industries and
Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich . . • . • • 205, 233
Ireland, Northern {see also subject
headings):
area and counties .. . . .. 1
art galleries and museums 421, 422
budget .. . • • • • • 348
Civil Service . . . • 60, 63
Courts of Law .. . . • • 87-8
Economic Council .. .. 215
education . . 149, 15°, I5I, I52, 153,
154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 163
Fire Authority and Services 74, 75,
76, 77
forest parks . . • • • • 178
forestry . . .. • • • • 287
General Health Services Board .. 143
Government 25, 41, 59-60, 63, 163,
209, 271
Exchequer and Audit Depart¬
ment . . .. 59, io8, 348
Ministry of Agriculture 59, 178,
271, 273, 274, 276, 279, 280, 283,
287,329
Ministry of Commerce 59-60, 209,
215, 369, 392
Ministry of Community Rela¬
tions .. . • • • .. 60
Ministry of Development 60, 67,
73, 172, 178, 179, 180, 183, 230,
232, 307, 321, 424
Ministry of Education 59,149,151,
158, 163, 167, 393, 4i3, 446
Ministry of Finance 60, 72, 175,
348, 4i3, 424
Ministry of Health and Social
Services 60, 125, 134, 135, t43,
144, 389, 392, 412
Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission . . . . 59, I25
Ministry of Home Affairs 59, 74,
88, 91, 94, 96, 97, i°°> 103> 108,
147, 271
Prime Minister’s Department. . 59
Governor . . . • 27, 41, 59, 91, IC,8
health and welfare services 60, 134,
143-4, 405
holidays, statutory . . .. . . 401
Hospitals Authority . . i39, r43
Housing Executive 67, 181, 183
Housing Trust .. . . 181, 183
industrial safety . . • • • • 4°5
industry I73> 208, 209, 214-55 223,
240, 243, 247, 250, 253
Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council . . • • • • • • I45
Land Registry . . • • .. 60
language . . . • • • 7, I2, 13
law courts .. • • • • 87, 88, 91
Page
Ireland, Northern—contd.
libraries .. . . • • • • 427
local government . . 67, 68, 69, 71, 72,
73
music, opera and ballet . . 4I6, 4X8
national insurance. . . . 126, 348
national parks .. .. .. 178
new towns .. .. . • • • *73
Newspapers, Associated .. . • 436
Parliament .. .. 25, 41, 59, 209
Parliamentary Draftsmen, Office of 60
planning .. .. • • • • I7°
police . . . • ■ • • • io8
population . . • • 7, I3_I6, 389, 392
press .. . . 432> 433, 436
public finance .. .. 348-9
Public Record Office .. .. 60
registers .. . • • • 7, 60, 147
relations with UK Government .. 31,
4L 53, 59
representation in UK Parliament 25,41
Road Fund . . .. . • • • 3°7
roads .. .• •• 3°7-8
Tourist Board .. • • • • 364
transport . . .. • • 3°7_8
Transport Holding Company . . 3°7
unemployment . . .. 196, 392
universities and colleges 150, 158, 163
. . 232
• • 395
1, 25
12
33, 68
. 126
11, 12
Government 25
..367
• • 53
water supply
workers
See also Belfast and Ulster
Ireland, Republic of. .
citizens’ status in UK
citizens’ voting rights in UK
insurance reciprocity
population: migration
relations with UK
trade with UK
war pensioners
Iron and Steel:
industry 57, 206, 207, 208, 218, 236-
8, 241
Steel Corporation, British 200, 237,
294, 321
Iron Castings . . . . • • 236, 238
Isaac Newton optical telescope .. 331
Isle of Grain . . . . 221, 224, 225
Isle of Man:
airport
area
fisheries
language
legislature ..
national insurance
newspapers
population . .
races (tt) . .
relationship with UK Govern¬
ment and Crown 25, 26, 31, 42, 53
Tynwald Court . . • • • • 31
311
1
281
7, i3
25, 3i
126
432
3, i4
456
war pensions
Isles of Scilly ..
Isle of Wight ..
• • 53
1
1, 3, 4, 460
J Jams and marmalades industry .. 255
Jarrow .. • • • • • • 2°7
Jersey:
language .. .• • • ‘
national insurance benefits .. 126
Jersey—contd.
newspapers .. • • • • 432
population .. .. • • • • !3
States of .. • • • • • • 31
See also Channel Islands
INDEX
Page
205, 248
Jewellery industry
Jewish:
schools
Welfare Board
Jewry ..
Council of Christians and Jews ..
Jockey Club ..
Jodrell Laboratory . .
Joint Services Staff College..
Journalists:
Institute of (ioj) ..
National Council for the Training
of (nctj) . . .. .. 434,
National Union of (nuj) ..
See also Press
Judge Advocate General’s Depart¬
ment   55
. 191
. 124
190-1
. 191
• 457
. 322
. 112
436
435
436
90
501
Page
Judges 79, 80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
90, 91-2
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council . . . . . . 42-3. 55
Judicial procedure 79, 82-4, 85-6, 87,
88-9, 89-90, 90-1, 338
Judiciary see Law
Judo 455
Jury see Law
Justices of the Peace 55, 79, 85, 87,
91-2, 96
Jute industry . . . . . . 208, 253
Juvenile Courts 79, 88, 101, 102, 103,
146
Juvenile delinquency see Young
Offenders
K Kennedy scholarships .. . . 166
Kent 160, 222, 258, 262, 266, 268, 269, 292
Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens .. 322
Kidderminster .. .. 206, 253
Kilmarnock . . .. .. .. 253
Kimmeridge . . .. .. . . 220
King George’s Jubilee Trust . . 168
King’s Lynn 415, 417
Kingsnorth .. .. . . . . 224
Kingston upon Hull see Hull
Kirkintilloch .. . . .. . . 226
Knitwear .. . . 206, 208, 252-3
L Labour .. .. 294, 389-412
arbitration and conciliation 410-n
deployment of .. . . 390-1
industrial relations 401, 406-12
Ministry of .. .. .. 294, 389
mobility of . . .. .. .. 395
protective legislation 294, 397-8, 399,
400, 401, 402
unemployment .. 192, 193, 194, 195,
196, 213
working conditions .. 397-402
See also Employment, Trade
Unions, Wages and Work:
hours of
Labour Party 35, 39, 410
Lace industry .. .. 206, 253
Lacrosse .. .. .. 152,455-6
Lancashire 14-16, 80, 91, 173, 206, 218,
219, 221, 239, 240, 248, 251, 254,
262, 268, 295, 302
See also coalfields, cotton, Liver¬
pool and Manchester
Lancaster .. .. .. .. 160
Duchy of .. .. .. 44, 91
Land:
acquisition and disposal .. .. 176
reclamation . . . . . . 176
Registry 52, 55. 60
use 5, 170, 171, 172, 173, 176, 209,
261, 321, 332
See also Agriculture
Lands:
Improvement Company . . . . 274
Tribunals . . . . 72, 89, 93, 94
Valuation Appeal Court . . 72, 94
Language 7, 12-13, 22, 125, 152, 159,
161
Larne . . .. .. .. .. 243
Laundries and launderettes . . . . 385
Law .. .. . . . . 78-95
arrest, law of . . .. 81, 85
Law—contd.
burgh courts
Prosecutor
civil proceedings
Commission
common
courts (criminal and civil)
.. 85
.. 85
84-5, 87, 92, 93
55. 9i, 95
31, 78, 88
79-90, 92,
« 94
80, 83, 85
criminal appeals . .
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Board . . .. . . .. 89
criminal proceedings 81-2, 85-6, 92,
93. 94
equity system . . .. . . 78
evidence, rules of . . 81-2, 86, 92
General Council of the Bar .. 93
Habeas Corpus . . . . 81, 86
Judges’ Rules . . . . 81, 86
judiciary . . 26, 29, 55, 82, 85, 90-1
jury.. .. 82,84,86,87,88,91,93
legal aid and advice .. 81, 93-5
legal profession . . .. .. 92-3
Council of Legal Education . . 92
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Department .. .. 54
Officers of the Crown .. 44, 54, 59
penalties . . .. .. . . 95-6
press (legal requirements) 436-7
prosecutions 79, 81, 82, 84, 85-6, 87
Reform Committee .. . . 95
Society  89, 93, 95
Society of Northern Ireland,
Incorporated . . .. 93. 94
Society of Scotland . . 93, 94
Supreme Court Committee of the 94
sources of . . .. .. .. 78
Statute Law Committee .. . . 56
trials and verdicts see prosecutions
above
Lawn Tennis.. .. .. 152,456
Lawyers . . . . . . 93, 95
502
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Learned societies 319, 322-4, 333, 426
Leatherhead (laboratories) .. . . 227
Leather industry . . 210, 253, 254
British Leather Manufacturers’
Research Association .. . . 254
Lee Conservancy Catchment Board 231
Lee Valley . . .. .. iVL 268
Leeds 15, 16, 160, 207, 254, 306, 415,
422, 426, 430, 443
Legal system see Law
Legislation see Law
Leicester and Leicestershire 15, 16, 157,
160, 206, 220, 240, 254, 422
Leisure activities .. . . 18-23
See also Encouragement of the
Arts, Recreation and Sport
Leith (port) .. .. . • • • 275
Leman Bank .
Letters patent
Leyland
Liberal Party
Libraries
.. 220
29, 3°, 38, 43
.. 206
• • 35
58, i73» 320, 322, 324, 333,
4i3, 414. 425-7
Aslib . .  333
private collections.. .. 425,426
public .. 20, 413, 414, 425, 426-7
school .. .. •• # • 426
Standing Conference of National
and University
(sconul) ..
university ..
Library:
Advisory Councils
associations
co-operation
National Central . .
National:
of Scotland
of Wales ..
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft
animals
broadcast receiving
cinemas and films
driving
drugs
export
game and gun
import
issue of, by Post Office
Libraries
• •427
425, 426, 427
.. 426
..427
333. 427
.. 425, 427
58, 425
57, 425
.. 308
3i5,368
438, 439
.. 420
305, 315
.. 368
368-9, 370
453, 460
368, 369
3i5
315
motor vehicles 22,23, 296,301,302,343
. • 368
456, 458
.. 316
• • 438
plants
race courses
telephone systems (local)
television transmitting
Life:
assurance . . .. • • • • 357
expectation of . . . . • • 9>10
imprisonment . . . • 95, 97
peerages .. .. • • • • 32
Lifeboats . . . . • • • • 292
Royal National Life-boat Institu¬
tion .. • • • • • • 292
Lighthouses .. .. • • • • 292
Lincolnshire 5, 207, 220, 262, 266, 268,
4i5
Linen industry .. 208, 251, 253
Literary societies and prizes 425, 428
Literature .. . • • • 425-8
associations and societies .. 425
festivals . . .. • • 425, 428
Royal Society of .. . . • • 428
• • 37i
• • 37i
.. 83
79, 80
173, 186
Page
Liverpool:
Corn Exchange
Cotton Exchange ..
Court of Passage ..
Crown Court
housing
industries . . .. 206, 211, 251, 256
museum and art gallery . . . . 422
music .. . . .. •• A1!
newspapers . . .. • • 432
population .. . . 15, 16, 206
port of . . 206, 251, 293, 294, 295
container terminal .. .. 294
Recorder of .. . . . . 80
University .. . . .. 160, 426
Livestock see Agriculture
Llandarcy .. .. .. 221,295
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping .. 290
Lloyd’s, Society of .. 290, 291, 357
Local Government . . . . 26, 66-73
authorities, types of .. . • 67-8
councils:
borough .. 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73,
181
burgh .. .. 68, 69, 70, 73, 74
county and county borough 67, 68,
69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 170, 181,
300, 345
London see London
parish, rural and urban district 67,
68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 181
town .. .. 68, 69, 71, 73, 74
elections . . . . • • 53, 68-9
employment in .. . . • • 71
finance 70, 7X-3, 182, 183, 184, 186,
196, 197, 198, 199, 337
functions and services .. 69-70
grants . . .. 72, 199, 214, 337
internal organisation .. ..70-1
labour relations .. .. .. 412
ministerial responsibility .. . .51-2
National Joint Councils .. 71, 412
relations with central Government 53,
67, 147, 148
responsibility for:
amenities 69, 133, I35> I73, x74
arts, encouragement of 70, 413, 414,
416, 421
blind and handicapped 70, 123, 142
child care 70, 102, 123, 140, 141,
146-7
education see Education
fire services .. 69, 70, 74-7
health 69, 70, 134, 135, 139-43, 4°4
housing and planning 69, 70, 71,
135, 142, 170-1, 172, 180, 181,
182,183, 184,186, 424
licensing of films . . 420, 421
mentally ill .. 7°, I23, r4i
public libraries . . . . 7°, 426
roads . . .. 69, 71, 135, 3°°
sport .. . • • • 446> 447
water supply, purity of 70, 71, 133,
135
welfare 69, 70, 133, i4°-3, I47, 4°4
youth services . . .. 167, 168
urban programme . . 125, 147, 152
See also Environment, Department of
Locomotives:
industry .. . . • • 200, 245-6
types in use .. • • •• 298
Locust research . . • • • • 335
INDEX
Page
Lockton .. .. .. .. 220
London:
airports .. .. 222,311,313
art, drama, music 414, 415, 416, 417,
418, 419, 420, 421, 423
schools and colleges . . . . 416
Assay Office .. .. .. 248
borough councils .. 68, 71, 72, 73
Bridge .. . . . . . . 301
City of 27, 68, 69, 71, 79, 134, 140,
181, 349, 414
area .. .. .. .. 69
Common Council of the 73, 105, 181
Corporation .. .. .. 69
Mayor’s Court . . .. 83
commodity exchanges .. .. 371
courts of law .. .. 79, 83
financial and trading centre 350, 351,
352, 355, 356, 357, 371-2
fire authority .. .. .. 74
fish market.. .. .. 283,381
food markets .. .. . . 381
Gold Market . . .. . . 371
Graduate School of Business Studies
160,212
Greater London 15, 16, 67, 68, 70,
79, 148, 172, 173, 204-5, 304, 432
Greater London Council (glc) 68, 69
73, 74, 181, 305, 414, 415, 423, 448
helicopter terminal .. ..312
housing and planning 170, 173, 174,
175, 180, 181, 185
industries 204-5, 238, 239, 245, 248,
254, 256, 419
libraries .. .. 333, 425, 426
Metal Exchange .. .. . . 371
Metropolitan Water Board .. 231
museums and art galleries 422, 423, 425
newspapers .. . . 430, 432
police .. 104, 105, 106, 107, 148
population .. 15, 16, 148, 172, 304
port of and docks .. 204, 292, 293, 294
School of Economics see Univer¬
sities, below
Stock Exchange .. .. 355, 356
taxicabs .. .. .. .. 305
503
Page
London—contd.
telephone information service . . 317
traffic .. . . .. 302, 305
transport .. 297, 302, 303, 304-6
Transport Board (ltb) 297, 302, 305
Transport Executive .. . . 305
Universities . . 103, 160, 161, 423
libraries .. .. .. . . 426
water supply .. . . ..231
Zoo  332
Londonderry 77, 173, 222, 223, 422
Recorder of .. .. . . 88
Longannet .. .. .. .. 225
Long Term Reserve (Army) .. 112
Lord:
Advocate . . 44, 49, 59, 85, 86, 91
Advocate’s Department . . 49, 59
Chancellor 29, 32, 33, 43, 44, 54, 80,
83, 84, 88, 89, 90, 91', 92, 93, 95,
187
as Speaker of the House of
Lords  32, 54
Chancellor’s Departments 54-5
Chief Justice (England) 45, 80, 83, 84,
91, 97
Chief Justice (Northern Ireland) 87
High Commissioner .. 45, 189
Justice Clerk . . 85, 87, 91, 92
Justice General .. . . 85, 91, 97
Lieutenants of Counties .. 45, 91
President of the Council . . 42, 44
President of the Court of Session 85,
87, 88, 91, 92
Lords:
Privy Seal .. .. .. .. 44
Commissioner of Justiciary .. 85
Commissioners (Treasury) 44, 49
House of see House of Lords
Justices of Appeal 45, 80, 84, 87, 91
of Appeal .. . . 32, 43, 45, 84, 91
Spiritual .. .. .. 27, 32
Temporal .. .. .. 27, 32
Lowestoft .. .. 205, 281, 460
Luncheon voucher schemes . . 405
Lutheran churches . . .. .. 191
Luton .. .. .. 205,312
Machine tool industries see Tools
Machine Tool Trades Association . . 238
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’ courts 79,
80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 88, 90, 91, 94,
102, 106
Mail order sales .. .. 383, 385
Direct Sales and Service Associa¬
tion
Malting industry
Management see Industry
Manchester:
airport
art galleries and museums
broadcasting studios
Business School . .
Crown Court
design centre
housing
industries
385
256
312,314
.. 422
•• 443
160, 212
79, 80
.. 211
173, 186
206, 221, 222, 243, 251,
254, 256
Institute of Science and Tech-
Manchester—contd.
nology
music
newspapers
population
port of
Recorder of
Ship Canal.
University
research at
. . 160
.. 417,418
430, 432
15, 16, 173, 206
293, 294, 295
80
206, 295
103, 160, 331, 426
33i
Man-made fibres see Synthetic fibres
Manpower 209, 210, 212, 218-9, 220,
389-92
and Productivity Service 212, 395,
406, 407, 410
Economics, Office of . . 194, 401
Qualified .. .. .. .. 325
Research Unit (mru) .. . . 391
See also Employment
Mansfield .. .. .. . . 206
Manslaughter . . .. 88, 89, 95
Manufacturers’ associations .. 204
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Manufacturing establishments, size
of . . .. .. .. 200-1
Manufacturing industries see Industry
and individual industries
Marchwood (laboratories) .. . . 227
Marine engineering see Engineering
and Shipbuilding
Marine safety and welfare . . 289, 321
Marine Survey and Mercantile
Marine Offices . . .. . • 289
Maritime Board, National .. 290, 291
Market and street traders .. .. 382
Market gardening see Agriculture
Marketing:
Boards, agricultural see Agriculture
Institute of .. .. • • 212
Markets:
coconut oil futures
commodity. .
discount
exchange . .
fish and fish meal .
food (London)
gold
insurance . .
soya bean oil futures
Marriage:
guidance centres . .
rates
registration
Marshall Scholarships
Master of Rolls
Maternity allowance .. ,. _ . _
Maternity services 123, 137, 138, 140-1
Matrimonial Causes Rule Committee 90
Mayor’s and City of London Court 83
Mayors and Lord Mayors . . 27, 41, 68
Meals, provision of:
for old people .. . • 124, 141
for school children 133, i49> 152
Meat and fish products 255, 268, 272
Meat and Livestock Commission .. 268,
277
Mechanical engineering
handling equipment
Medical:
Association, British
Council, General . .
Practices Committee
private insurance schemes
profession see Doctors
publications
research .. i34> 146, 327, 33°. 334
Council 51, 139, 146, 3i9» 321, 324.
327-8, 330, 334, 405, 406
National Institute for . . . . 328
Page
..371
••37i
••352
29L 351) 37i
283,381
..381
• •37i
356-7
••37i
. . 123
10
.. 7
.. 164
.. 84, 88, 91
127, 129, 130, 131
.238-42, 327
240, 293
US, 4°5
89, 14s
• • 137
.. 144
336
services:
in industry
in prisons
for ships
social workers
404-5
 99
 318
..124, 138, 139, 141,
143, I45
supplies see Pharmaceuticals
Medicines Commission .. .. 279
Medway .. . . • • 205, 301
Mental health services . . 124, 142
National Association for Mental
Health 124, 144
Merchant:
banks .. • • 349> SSL 37°
Fleet  288, 289
seafarers .. .. • • 288-90
Merchant—contd.
seafarers—contd.
Established Service Scheme .. 290,
291
Establishment Board .. 290, 291
Training Board .. .. . . 290
shipbuilding .. .. .. 247
Merseyside 15, 16, 173, 206, 213, 222,
245, 293, 295, 3°2, 390, 415
tunnel . . .. .. 234, 301
Merthyr Tydfil .. .. . . 207
Metal Exchange . . .. • • 371
Metal manufacture 205, 206, 208, 210,
236-8, 247
Meteorological Office 50, 232, 321-2
Meteorology . . .. .. 321, 332
Metric system . . . . 320, 463-4
Metrication Board . . . . .. 320
Metropolitan Police Force 104, 105, 107,
108
Metropolitan Water Board .. . . 231
Microbiological Establishment .. 327
Midlands 148, 173, 205, 206, 213, 214,
218, 219, 222, 238, 239, 245, 248,
252, 254, 262, 267, 295, 302, 415
population . . .. . • i4-I6, 148
Midwifery .. 70, 138, 140, 141, 145
Midwives:
Board, Central .. .. .. 145
Royal College of .. .. • • 145
Migration .. .. • • n-12, 15
Milford Haven 208, 221, 222, 281, 292,
295
Military Courts see Courts-martial
Milk:
for children and mothers .. .. 141
marketing . . . . 266, 272, 273
production. . .. 262, 266-7
in schools . . .. . • .. 152
Mineral oil refining equipment . . 241
Mines and quarries:
employment in 200, 201, 218, 219,
39°,399
industry 176, 201, 209, 210, 213, 216-
20, 238
Inspectorate . . . . . . 4°2
research . . .. 220, 321, 326
safety measures . . 321, 326, 402
See also Coal
Mining Research Establishment .. 220
Ministers (of the Crown) 26, 29, 38, 39,
43-6, 67, 400
ministerial responsibility 29, 46, 59-
60, 203, 209
of State .. • • • • . v 44
See also Prime Minister and indivi¬
dual government departments
Missiles see Defence: weapons
Monarchy
accession ..
ceremonial
coronation . .
Privy Council
relations with:
armed forces
churches. .
Commonwealth
Home Office
25, 26-30
.. 27
.. 30
.. 27
27, 29, 3 L 41-3
. . 29
29, 187, 189
26, 27, 30, 42, 43
53
judiciary 25, 26, 29, 88, 90, 91, 92
Parliament 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35,
38, 39, 41; 43. 44. 45. 53. 338
Royal Prerogatives . . 29, 42, 53
INDEX
505
Page
Monarchy—contd.
Royal Proclamations . . 29, 31, 42
Royal title .. .. .. 26, 27
succession .. . . .. 26, 27, 41
See also Royal Family
Monmouthshire i, 5, 13, 157, 207, 439
Monopolies .. .. 201, 202, 430
Commission . . 194, 202, 430
Morley .. .. .. .. 207
Mortality see Death, causes of
Motor:
cycle racing .. .. .. 456
dealers and repair services 385-6
Industry Research Association .. 245
Manufacturers and Traders,
Society of (smmt) .. . . 245
racing  456
shows . . .. .. .. 370
vehicles:
industry .. 201, 205, 206, 208, 238,
245, 327
numbers licensed 22-3, 296, 301,
302
parking . . . . 106, 174, 304
taxation  343, 345
tests .. .. . . .. 304
See also Roads, transport
Page
Motorways .. .. .. .. 301
Mountaineering .. .. 448, 456-7
Mountains . . .. .. . . 2, 3
Murder .. .. 86, 88, 90, 95-6
Museums 58, 70, 322, 332, 333, 413,
414, 421, 422, 423
and Galleries, Standing Commis¬
sion on .. .. .. 421, 422
Association. . .. .. .. 422
Folk .. .. , . .. 422
private .. .. .. . . 422
Music .. .. 416, 417-8
Amateur Standing Conference for 418
choral societies
colleges and schools
concerts
Council, National ..
County, Committees
festivals
folk
libraries
orchestras
‘pop’
..417
418, 419
21, 416, 417, 419
..417
. . 418
417-8
416, 418, 422
417, 427
416, 417, 418
21, 416, 419
Schools Association, Rural . . 418
Societies, National Federation of 417,
418
Muslims .. . . .. .. 191
N Natal care see Welfare: children,
mothers
National:
Dept .. . . 339, 348, 388
Commissioners .. .. .. 354
Office  47, 354
Northern Ireland .. • • 348
Economy see Economy and Finance
Gallery .. .. .. .. 422
Insurance .. 53, 123, 125, 126-33
benefits .. 53, 126, 129-31, 338
contributions 126, 127-9, I35, 337
Fund •• 337,339,347
graduated pension scheme 127, 128,
129
reciprocal agreements .. 126, 135
stamps .. .. .. .. 128
supplementary benefits 53, 125, 126,
127, 130, 131, 132
Commission .. 125, 132, 137, 182
Joint Advisory Council ,. . . 194
product, gross 195, 196, 197, 198, 288,
359,378
Trusts .. .. 171, 175, 413, 422
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having National
as first word of their title
Nationalised industries 26, 197, 203, 204,
216, 326, 337, 339, 340, 342, 345,
, , 347
labour relations of .. ..412
Select Committee on the 39, 203
See also individual industries
Nationality .. .. .. ,. 12
Natural:
beauty, areas of .. .. 177-8
Environment Research Council
(nerc) .. 51, 179, 320, 321, 332
History, British Museum 332, 422,
425
Naturalisation . . . . 12, 53
Nature:
Conservancy .. 177, 179, 332
conservation .. .. 175-9, 332
voluntary organisations . . 179
Council for.. .. .. 23, 179
reserves .. . . .. .. 179
Navigational Aids 244, 314, 318, 321
Navy see Defence, Ministry of,
Merchant Fleet and Royal Navy
Netball .. .. .. 152, 457
Newburgh .. .. .. . . 223
Newcastle upon Tyne 15, 16, 160, 207,
„ , m 256, 295, 4i7, 423, 43°, 443
See also Tyneside
New Forest .. .. .. . . 178
Newhaven .. . . .. . . 205
New Opera Company . . .. 418
Newport (Mon.) . . 208, 237, 295, 432
News agencies
Newspaper:
Editors, Guild of British
owners
Press Directory
Publishers Association
Society
Newspapers ..
Newsprint, supply of
New towns . .
Commission for .. . . .. . I%}
Development Corporations 172-3, 347
Noise:
abatement . .
Abatement Society of
Advisory Council on
control of ..
Non-ferrous metals:
industry . . .. 201, 205, 238, 241
Research Association .. 238, 326
Northampton .. . . 173, 206
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) 109, III, II3-4, 115, 116, 118
433-4
.. 436
429-30
.. 429
433, 435
435, 436
258, 430-3
258, 429
171, 172-4
173
135, 177, 32i
. . 23
23, 177, 32i
3n,3i4
Page
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Northern Ireland see Ireland,
Northern
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board (nsheb) .. .. 222-7
Northumberland . . 178, 207, 218
Norwich .. 16, 205, 254, 415, 422, 443
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire 15,
160, 206, 218, 220, 240, 245, 253,
256, 416, 443, 448
Nuclear energy:
establishments .. .. 329-3°
international agencies .. 330, 334
for marine propulsion . . 117, 321
power stations 207, 215, 216, 223,
224, 225-6, 227, 234, 241, 329
reactors .. .. 208, 225-6, 329
research . . . . 227, 329-3°
responsibility for . . . . 329, 330
weapons and equipment see Defence
Nuclear energy—contd.
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nuclear test ban treaty . . .. 109
Nuffield Foundation .. 144, 146, 164, 327
Nurseries . . .. . . 125, 141
Nursing and nurses .. 138, 141, 145, 393
in armed forces . . .. ..in
associations . . .. . . 145
General Nursing Council . . 145
in the home . . 140, 141, 144
homes . . . . 138, 142, 144
Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service .. ..in
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army
Nursing Corps . . . . ..in
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval
Nursing Service .. ..in
Royal College of Nursing 145, 405
Nylon industry . . .. . . 207
o
Observatory:
Royal Edinburgh ..
Royal Greenwich ..
Obstetricians ..
Occupational therapists
Oceanography
Offenders, treatment of
See also After-Care
Office:
building
machinery industry
Management, Institute of
Officer cadet schools . .
Oil:
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by
Old Bailey
Oldham
Old people:
housing for
National Corporation for the Care
of   •• ••144
proportion in population . . 10, 11
welfare 70, 123, 124, 135, 138, 14°.
325,331
• • 1, 325, 33i
.. 141
138, 142,145
• •332
95-103
172, 209, 214
195, 208, 240
.. 212
111-2
292-3
79, 80
. . 206
142
in work . . . • • • 389, 392
See also Pensions
Old People’s Welfare Council,
National (Age Concern) . . .-144
Olympic Games 447, 449, 45°, 453, 459,
460, 462
British Olympic Association 447, 455,
460
Open University .. 98, 160, 161
Opera and opera companies 21, 418-9
Royal Opera House .. 4I8, 4W
training .. • • • • 418-9
Ophthalmic services 136, 137-8, 143, I45
Opposition, parliamentary 35, 36, 4°,
339
Opticians 136, 137, 138, 139, 143, 145
General Optical Council .. • • 145
Orders in Council . . 29, 42, 43, 80
Ordnance Survey . . .. • • 52
Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (oecd) 334,
_ 364, 379, 395, 501
Orienteering (wayfinding) . . . . 457
Orkney Islands .. . • 1, 67, 275
Output see Industry, production
Outward Bound Trust . . 168, 457
Overseas:
Appointment Bureaux .. . . 166
banks .. . • • • 35°, 351
constructional work .. .. 235
dependent territories, public ser¬
vices .. .. •• .• 63
Development Administration (oda)
see Foreign and Commonwealth
Office
scientific relations . . .. •• 334
Service Aid Scheme (osas) . . 379
students . . • • • • J64 5
Affairs, UK Council for .. 165
welfare .. . • • • • •
Trade see Trade
Oxford .. • • • • I6, 205
Air Training School .. • • 313
art schools .. .. • • ■ • 423
Bodleian Library .. .. • • 425
Commonwealth Forestry Institute 287,
329
museums .. • • • • 333, 422
sport .. • • 452, 459, 460
University 42, 103, 160, 161, 164, 287,
452, 460
Press (and Clarendon Press) .. 428
P PAYE (income tax scheme) 129, 343
Packaging . . • • • • 258, 386
Paint industry .. 207, 248, 250
Paper and board industry 205, 206, 208,
210, 258-9, 286, 386
Paper and board industry contd.
research .. .• • • • • 258
Parks:
Countryside Commissions . - 177
forest . • • • • • x78, 285
INDEX
Page
Parks—contd.
national .. .. 177-8, 287
Northern Ireland .. .. 178, 287
Scotland .. .. .. 177, 178
Parliament 25, 26, 29, 30-41, 42, 45, 46,
47, 78, 81, no, 173, 187, 203, 308,
337. 338, 339> 340, 34i, 348, 400,
438, 439, 444
bills, parliamentary 29, 31, 37-8, 49,
56, 338
money bills . . .. 38, 338
private bills . . .. 37, 38, 69
procedure .. .. 37-8, 49
public bills .. • • 37, 38, 39
Royal Assent to 29, 33, 38, 338, 341
committees. . 38-9, 203, 322, 339
control of:
armed forces
finance . .
Government in power
local authorities. .
public corporations
dissolution of
.. no
36, 37, 38
35-6, 40-1
.. 67
202-3
• • 29, 30, 31
• • 31
3i, 33-4, 35
.. 36
30-1, 37-8, 46, 49
25, 41
35, 36, 4°, 339
• • 31,34-6
• • 37
• • 34
36-40
29, 31-2
.. 40
30, 31, 34,
38, 39, 4i
relationship with the Church 187, 188
sessions .. .. .. 31, 32
standing orders . . .. 36, 39
State opening of . . .. .. 30
Statutory Instruments .. 39, 40
Whips .. .. . . 36, 44, 49
See also House of Commons and
House of Lords
Parliamentary:
and Scientific Committee .. 322
duration of. .
elections
functions . .
legislation ..
Northern Ireland
Opposition. .
party system
private members ..
privileges ..
procedure . .
prorogation of
questions to ministers
relations with Monarchy
Commissioner
Counsel, Office of. .
Secretaries . .
Parole Board . .
Patent Office Library
Paymaster General . .
Paymaster General’s Office
Pegwell Bay . .
40, 41, 339
. . 49
44, 46, 48, 49
• • 97
• .338
44, 5L 55, 4i3
• • 55
.. 295
Peers  29, 32, 34, 37
Pembroke and Pembrokeshire 3, 221,
224, 266
Penal system . . . . . . 79, 95-103
Advisory Council .. .. • • 95
Pennine Way .. . . .. . . 178
Pensions:
appeal tribunals
graduated pension scheme
invalidity allowance 127
old age . . 123, 125, 127
payment of, by Post Office
public service
retirement . . 123, 125, 127, 128, 129,
130,131
war .. 53, 55, 89, 123, 125, 133, 137
.. 89
127, 128,
129, 130
129,130
129, 130
• • 3i5
55, 65
5°7
Page
Pensions—contd.
widows 125, 127, 129, 130, 131, 132,
!33
Periodical Publishers Association .. 436
Periodicals . . 20, 201, 258, 429, 433
Permanent Boundary Commissions 33
Personnel management .. 212, 405-6
Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemi¬
cals, Advisory Committee on . . 279
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme 279
Pest Infestation Control Laboratory 278,
328
Peterborough . . 157, 173, 174, 205, 257
Petroleum and petroleum products 200,
205, 210, 215, 216, 217, 218, 220-2,
241,251,294,295,299,345
chemicals industry 197, 206, 222, 248
equipment industry .. 208, 241
imports and consumption 216, 220,
221, 360
indigenous production . . 220, 361
pipelines . . .. .. 221-2
refineries and refining 201, 205, 206,
208, 221, 249, 295
research . . .. . . .. 222
revenue duty .. .. 344, 365
tankers 220, 221, 247, 288, 290, 295
terminals . . .. .. 293, 295
Pharmaceuticals 140, 145, 206, 248, 250,
Committee on Safety of Medicines 140
Pharmaceutical Society of Britain . . 145
Pharmacists .. • • 136, 137, 138, 145
Philanthropic organisations . . .. 164
Photographic equipment .. . . 242
Physical recreation see Recreation
Physiotherapists . . .. 138, 145
Pig industry 262, 264, 267-8, 272, 277
Pilotage .. .. .. .. 292
Pipelines:
gas .. . . .. .. .. 229
oil .. .. .. 221, 222, 296
Pitlochry .. .. .. .. 226
Planning:
development areas and schemes 170-1,
174, 213-5, 364
enquiry commissions .. . . 171
public participation .. 170, 171
regional .. .. .. . . 172
town and country 69, 71, 170-9, 214,
321
Planning Association . . .. 171
Plant health 49, 278, 322, 328, 329, 368
Pathology Laboratory . . 278, 328
Plastics .. 208, 248, 249, 386
Playing fields.. . . 152, 168, 173, 447-8
Association, National . . 168, 447-8
Plimsoll line .. . . .. . . 289
Plungar . . . . .. .. 220
Plymouth . . . . .. 443, 460
Poetry festivals and societies 425, 428
Polaris vessels . . 113, 114, 115, 116
Police . . 69, 70, 71, 72, 81, 103-8, 173
Authorities.. .. .. 104-5
cadets . . .. .. .. 106
Council for Great Britain . . 105
Gazettes . . . . .. .. 107
Management and Planning Group 107
Research Services Branch . . 107
Scientific Development Branch . . 107
women . . .. .. . . 105
5°8
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Political:
party broadcasts
party system
Pollution, prevention of:
air
rivers
sea (by oil). .
water supply
Polo . .
Polytechnics
Pony club
Poole . .
‘Pop’ music
Population
7°. 135, 177, 32i, 329
 177
. . 176, 233, 292, 321
177, 231, 233, 275-6,
321, 326,332
 457
155, 162, 163, 325, 426
 459
205, 460
. .20, 21, 436
7,8,173,174.192, 204-8
age distribution .. .. 8, 10-11
birth and death rates .. 8-9, 150
censuses . . 7-8, i3-7> tSo, 187
and surveys, Office of .. 7> 55
density . . 8, 15, 16, 72, 170, 192
expectation of life . . .. 9> 10
fertility trends .. • • 8, 10
households.. .. •• 17—8
increase in . . .. . • 8, 13-6
leisure .. .. • • 18-23
migration .. . • • • 11—12, 148
mortality, causes of .. • • 9
nationalities .. . • • • 12
regional distribution i4_6, 204-8
Royal Commission on .. . • 8
sex ratio .. .. •• ..9-10
social organisation . . I7_24
trends .. . • • • 8-9, 16
urbanisation . . . • I4> I5» x6
vital statistics .. •• ..7-12
working 10, n, 192, 200, 214,
Port of London Authority .. 233, 293
Portrait Galleries, National .. . . 422
Ports and docks 51, 134, 205, 206, 207,
208, 281, 293-5, 297
authorities . . . • i34> 293> 342
Docks and Harbours Authori¬
ties Association .. • • 293
Council, National. . . • • • 293
container facilities.. 293, 294, 299
development .. • • 293-4
Dock Labour Board, National .. 294
ownership . . .. • • • • 293
Portsmouth .. . • • • I6, 205
Port Talbot .. . . 237, 294, 295
Postal services . . i73> 288, 3I4~5
Postmaster General . . • • 3I5> 3I6
Post Office 244, 314-8, 322, 331, 437
broadcasting responsibilities 438, 443,
444
cable and wireless services 315, 31!
counter services .. • • • • 315
‘Datapost’ .. .. , •• 3l5
Data Processing Service, National 2x2,
318
Datel Services . . • • • • 3J6
finance .. . • • • • • 3J4
mail services .. •• 3I4-5
mechanisation .. 3I4, 3I5, 3I6
National Giro .. 3I4, 3I5, 35°, 351
organisation .. •• •• 3I4
Postal Consultancy Service .. 3I5
private circuits .. •• •• 3t7
radio tower, London .. • • 3l7
research .. .. 3l7> 318, 322,331
satellites .. •• •• 3I8, 331
specialised telephone services . . 317
Page Page
Post Office—contd.
. 444 telegraph services . . . . ..3x5
. 34-6 vehicles .. . . .. • • 315
See also Telecommunications
Posts and Telecommunications,
Minister of and Ministry of 55-6, 289,
314,330,331,430,438,439,443,444
Potato production and marketing 262,
264, 266, 272, 273, 277, 329
Pottery industry . . 206, 257, 329
Poultry industry . . 264, 268, 271, 273
329
352
176,
55
23, 170, 413
.. 170
171, 176-7
.. 170
78, 286,287
429-37
433, 434
430, 436
435“6
430, 436-7
• • 430
429-30, 43i
429, 430
• • 430
434-5
429, 435
206, 252, 293,313
311, 312, 313
. . 101
.. 266, 272-3
.. .. 202
193, 194, 195
on
Power stations
Premium Savings Bonds
Preservation:
councils and societies
of buildings
of coastal areas
of rural amenities .
of trees
Press ..
Association Ltd. .
Council
institutions..
legal requirements
‘National’ ..
ownership ..
Royal Commissions
television and
training for journalism
Thomson Foundation
Preston
Prestwick (airport) .
Preventive detention
Price:
guarantees (agricultural)
restrictions by traders
Prices and Incomes ..   , ..
Prime Minister 29, 32, 35, 36, 42, 43,
44-5, 48, 49, 65, 66, 90, 91, xxo,
187, 194, 195
Printing:
and Kindred Trades Federation. . 436
and Publishing Industry Training
Board .. .. .. •• 434
industry 56, 200, 204, 205, 206, 208,
2X0, 258
Prisons .. . • • • 96, 97-100
chaplains .. .. . • • • 99
education . . .. . • 98, 99
medical service . . .. .-98-9
National Association of Prison
Visitors .. .. • • • • 99
privileges and discipline .. .. 99
training and employment . . .. 98
welfare and after-care .. 99-100
Privy Council 27, 29, 31, 4I-3> 45
Committees .. . • • • 42-3
Counsellors .. .. 42, 45
Prize Courts .. .. . • • • 43
Probation . . 95, 96, 99, IOO> 101
and After-Care Council . . 100, 124
officers .. • • • • 99, 100
Procurator General .. . • • • 5 6
Department of .. .. • • 56
Procurators Fiscal .... 85, 88
Production and productivity see
Industry
Production Engineering Advisory
Service .. . • • • • • 334
Professional and Executive Register 392
Psychiatric social work 124, 138, 139, 145
in prisons .. .. • • • • 99
INDEX
5°9
Accounts Committee 39, 339, 340
authorities 196, 197-9, 201, 337, 380,
412
Building and Works, Ministry of. . 51
corporations 198, 200, 202, 203, 319,
326, 334, 339, 340, 341, 412
Expenditure (General) Sub-
Committee .. .. .. 341
See also Nationalisation and
individual corporations
libraries . . 20, 413, 414, 425, 426-7
Prosecutions, Director of. . 54, 81, 85
Record Office .. 45, 55, 422, 426
Page
Public—contd.
relations .. .. .. .. 387
Services of Overseas Dependent
Territories .. .. .. 63
Trustee Office .. .. • • 55
utilities see Gas, Electricity and
Water
Works Loans Board 47, 182, 347
Publishers’ Association . . . . 428
Publishing . . .. 56, 210, 258, 428
Puisne judges .. .. 83,91
Pumps and industrial valves .. 241
Purchase tax see Taxation
Q Quakers see Churches
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying industry . . .. .. 201
Quarter Sessions 79-80, 84, 91, 94, 96
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Elizabeth Hall .. .. 417
Queen’s:
Bench Division (England and
Wales) .. .. .. 80, 83, 88
Queen’s—contd.
Bench Division (Northern Ireland) 87
Counsel .. .. .. • • 93
Courts . . .. .. .. 91
Printer .. .. .. .. 56
Prize (shooting) .. .. .. 460
Proctor . . .. .. 54, 56
.. 148
83, 148
•• 332
R Race Relations
Board
Research Unit
Racing see relevant subjects
Radar.. .. .. 116,118,243
Radcliffe Observatory .. •• 331
Radio:
and Space Research Station 325, 331
astronomy .. .. .. ..331
communications .. • • 318,331
See also Broadcasting, Naviga¬
tional aids and Satellites
industry . . 243-4, 383, 386, 444
Interference, UK Committee of
the International Special Com¬
mittee on (cispr) .. . . 445
telegraphy
telescopes ..
Radiochemical Centre Ltd
Radiography ..
Radioisotopes
Radiological Protection Board
. . 289
.. 331
329, 33°
139, 145
242, 334
33°
Railways 200, 218, 296, 297-300, 303
Board, British 245, 293, 296, 297, 298,
299, 3°o, 305
development
diesel traction
electrification
freight services
grants
hotels
motorail
293
296, 298, 299
.. 298
298, 299
296, 298, 299
. . 298
..297
299
National Freight Corporation . . 297,
298, 299-300
Northern Ireland
operations . .
organisation
passenger service
safety measures
statistics
Technical Centre
underground (London)
.•307
298-300
. . 297
288, 297, 298
. . 402
298, 299
..299
3°5. 306
Railways—contd.
vehicles industry .. 205, 207, 245-6
workshops .. .. .. .. 299
Rainfall .. .. .. .. 4
Rates .. .. 72-3, 185, 198, 337, 343
water .. .. .. ..231
Raw materials, trade in 194, 206, 359,
370, 380
Rayon industry . . .. .. 252
Reactors see Nuclear Energy
Reading .. .. 103, 160, 422, 423
Reciprocity (social services) .. 126
Recorders (law) .. 79, 80, 88, 91
Recreation 18-23, I74> t75> I77. US
facilities for .. .. 446-7
Physical .. .. .. 168, 446-7
Central Council of (ccpr) 168, 447,
450, 457
Scottish Council of (scpr) .. 447
See also Clubs, Leisure and Sports
Red Cross Society, British 124, 143, 144
Red Deer Commission .. .. 271
Reference Library for Science and
Invention, National .. 333, 425
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods .. .. • • "2.S1
Refrigeration machinery .. 208, 241
Regent, appointment of .. .. 30
Regional development .. .. 209
Regional Newspapers .. 430, 432
Regions .. .. .. 14, 204-8
administration .. .. 14-6
area and population .. 14-6
Registrar:
General of Shipping and Seamen 289
of Restrictive Trading Agreements 202
of Trade Unions and Employers
Associations .. .. .. 407
Registrars:
General .. .. 7. 55. 59, 147
of births, deaths and marriages .. 7
Rehabilitation see Disablement
5io
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Religion see Churches and also Broad¬
casting and Education
Religious communities . . . . 191
Religious freedom .. . . . . 187
Remand homes . . . . 96, 101
Remploy Ltd. . . . . 200, 394
Rent restrictions . . .. 184-5
Rent tribunals .. . . 89, 185
Resale price maintenance . . 202, 388
Rescue services, sea and air 291, 292, 318
Research, scientific . . .. 319-3 6
advisory councils and committees 319,
320, 321, 323, 326, 329
agricultural 270, 277, 278, 279, 280,
324, 328-9, 333. 334
aircraft 119-20, 246, 312, 320, 327
application of results . . 333-4. 335
associations 212, 235, 239, 242, 325,
326
Conference of Industrial Re¬
search . . • • •• 326
astronomy .. . . . • • • 331
biological . . 322, 326, 327, 328, 332
botanical .. .. • • . . 322
building and civil engineering . . 182,
235, 321, 424
chemical .. .. . • • • 327
Commonwealth 326, 327, 331, 334,
335
communications .. 320,321,322
councils 163, 209, 319, 320, 324, 325,
326, 332
Council, Science (src) 51, 320, 325,
330, 33i
criminology . . 103, 106, 107
defence .. .. 119-20,320,330
Development Corporation,
National (nrdc) . . 320, 334
177-8, 329,332
120, 321, 327
326, 327, 329, 333
174. 332
320, 325, 326
3i9. 324. 326, 330
Page
ecological
electronics . .
engineering
environmental
establishments
expenditure on „
fellowships and studentships 163, 323,
324, 328, 332, 335
76
284, 321, 329
327. 329
287, 329, 332
216, 220, 222, 227,
230, 321
 259
321, 332, 333
Research, scientific—contd.
radio-astronomy see Astronomy
results, information on . . 333-4. 335
roads . . . . . . 3OI> 320
social  321, 332
space .. .. 320, 325, 330-1
technological .. 319.320,325
telecommunications . . 244, 322
television and radio .. . . 444
textiles  251, 327
tropical products .. . . • • 335
in universities and technical col¬
leges 161, 163-4, 3i9, 320, 325, 333
veterinary . . 267, 277, 278, 279, 328
water supplies .. . . .. 326
zoological . . . . . . . • 332
201-2, 209, 388
.. 202
381-6
• • 433, 445
434
fire prevention
fisheries
food
forestry
fuel and power
furniture
geological .. - - „       
Government responsibility for 319-36
industry 320, 324, 325, 326, 332, 333
See also individual industries
inventions . . .. • • • • 324
land use and planning .. . • 321
lectureships and awards . . 323, 324
medical . . 134, 146, 327> 33°, 334
meteorological . . 5°, 32t, 322
mining . . • • • • 220, 321
Natural Environment Research
Council . . 179, 320, 332
nuclear . . 227, 321, 325, 329-30
pest control . . • • • • 328
petroleum .. • • • • 222, 327
pharmaceuticals . . . . •. 250
plant .• •• •• 322, 328
private institutes for . . ••327
radio aids .. .. • • • • 321
Restrictive practices
court
Retail trade . .
Reuters Ltd. ..
computerised systems
Revenue 338, 341, 342, 343-5, 348, 365,
366
Rhodes Scholarships .. . . 164
Rhondda .. .■ • • • • 207
Riding .. .. 22, 458-9, 488
Rifle shooting .. . • 460-1
Rights of way .. . . • • 178
River authorities . . 231-3, 275-6, 283
Road:
haulage . . 288, 296, 297, 299, 302
National Freight Corporation . . 297,
298, 299-300, 302
passenger transport 288, 296, 302—3
authorities . . • • • • 297
Research Laboratory 301, 320, 321
Services, British (brs) .. 297, 302
Roads.. .. 52, 58,173, 215, 300-4
classification . . 300, 304, 307
development and construction 69, 171,
300-1, 320
motorways .. . . • • 307-8
Northern Ireland . . .. • • 3°7
safety . . 69, 303-4, 320, 402
transport .. . • 296, 301-3, 304-5
Rochdale . . . . • • • • 206
Rockefeller Foundation . . . . 164
Roman Catholic Church see Catholic
and Church
207, 208, 253
 237
.. 448, 459
Rope-making.
Rotherham
Rowing
Royal:
Air Force
no, in, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116, 118, 121
. • 112
115-6
114, ”5
College ..
nuclear strategic forces
Regiment
reserve and auxiliary forces
staff colleges
Volunteer Reserve
See also Defence
Commissions:
appointment and functions of
Environmental Pollution 23,
113
112
113
47-8
177,
321
Fine Art . . • • 421, 424
Historical Monuments .. i74> !75
Industrial Relations 398, 4°7, 4I2
Population .. • • • • 8
Press .. • • • • •• 432
Dockyards .. .. •• II7, IJ9
INDEX
Royal—contd.
Family
Fleet Auxiliary Service
Institution . .
Marines
Reserve ..
Medals (science) ..
Military Academy..
Mint
Naval Auxiliary Service
College ..
Reserve ..
Staff College
Navy no, in, 112, 113
Page
27, 28, 30
.. 117
322, 323-4
no, 115
. . 112
•• 323
.. 112
350
. . 112
. . 112
.. 112
111-2
114,II5>
47,
116-7, 121
See also Defence
Observer Corps .. .. ..113
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
Society .. 322-3, 324, 331, 334, 335
of Arts .. .. 211,322,323
See relevant subject matter for
511
Page
Royal—contd.
organisations, etc., having Royal
as first word of their title
Rubber industry . . 205, 206, 259
Rugby . . . . .. 206, 243
football . . . . . . 459-60
Rule committees . . . . 54, 90
Rules of the Supreme Court . . 90
Runcorn .. .. 173, 206, 222
Rural:
amenities, preservation of 171-2
community councils . . 215, 448
Councils .. .. . . .. 215
districts:
councils . . . . . . 67, 134
population . . .. .. 16
industries .. . . .. . . 215
Music Schools Association . . 418
Preservation Societies . . 171-2
Rutherford High Energy
Laboratory.. .. .. 325,330
Sadler’s Wells Theatre .. . . 418
Safety:
Council, British . . .. .. 403
in Mines Research Establishment
(smre) .. . . 220, 326, 403
measures .. .. .. 401-4, 405
training centres .. .. . . 403
See also Agricultural: workers,
Civil Aviation, Mines and
quarries, Railways and Roads
Sailing . . . . 22, 448, 460
St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Service .. . . . . .. 143
St. Helens . . . . . . .. 206
St. John Ambulance Association and
Brigade .. .. 124, 143, 144
Salford .. .. . . . . 160
Hundred Court . . . . . . 83
Salmon fishing . . 283, 329, 454
Salt industry .. .. . . . . 206
Salvation Army .. .. 124, 190
Samaritans . . . . .. .. 123
Satellites 318, 329, 330, 331, 444, 445
Save as You Earn (save) . . . . 353
Savings 55, 198, 199, 344, 347, 352-4
banks
bonds
contractual. .
Department for, National
55, 352-4
352-3
• • 353
55, 3i5,
352, 353
• • 55
. . 198
46, 55, 347, 352-4
55, 344, 352
- • 352
••353
•• 352
Director of. .
and investment
National
Certificates. .
Committee. .
Register
stamps
Scholarships see Education
Schools see Education
Science:
and Invention, National Reference
Library for .. . . 333, 425
and Technology:
Central Advisory Council for .. 319
Council of, Institutes . . .. 324
Imperial College of . . .. 160
Science—contd.
Institute of .. .. .. 160
National Lending Library for. . 333,
425
Select Committee on .. .. 322
Department of Education and see
Education
Museum . . .. 333, 422, 423
promotion of . . 209, 319-36
publications . . . . 323, 333
Research Council (src) 51, 320, 325,
33°,33i
See also Research and Universities
Scientific:
and industrial instruments industry 207,
242, 326, 327
and Technical Information, Office
for (osti) .. .. 320, 333
co-operation:
between industry and univer¬
sities .. . . 319, 320, 324
Commonwealth Scientific Com¬
mittee .. . . . . .. 335
Commonwealth Scientific Liai¬
son Offices .. .. •• 335
government and industry 3x9, 323,
324, 325
with overseas countries 320, 323,
326, 328, 330, 334, 335
Film Association, British Indus¬
trial and . . .. .. .. 419
museums . . . . . . 332, 422
Policy, Council for (csp) 51, 319, 320
research see Research
Scientists:
number employed. . .. .. 325
training of . . 161, 319, 324, 325, 335
Scooters see Cycle and motor cycle
industry
Scotland {see also subject headings):
area and counties . . .. .. 1
broadcasting councils . . . . 439
economic planning . . 57, 215
education 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155,
I57> I58, 160, 162
512
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Scotland—contd.
Government departments ..58-9
Agriculture and Fisheries 57, 58,
271, 283, 285, 322, 328, 329
Development 57, 58, 67, 182, 303,
424
Education 57, 58, 98, 147, 163, 413,
416, 418, 423, 424, 447
Home and Health 57, 58, 76, 103,
134. 139,321
Information Office .. .. 58
Lord Advocate’s .. 44, 49, 59
Record Office .. .. • - 59
Registers of Scotland .. .. 59
industry 208, 213, 215, 218, 219, 221,
223, 237, 242, 245, 247, 251, 252,
253, 258
language 7. r3
Minister of State for .. 44, 57
museums and art galleries 58, 413,
414, 422, 423, 424
music and opera .. .. 417, 418
National Library of .. 58, 425
Parliamentary Draftsmen for .. 59
population .. .. 7, 11, i3-i7> 208
press .. .. 430. 432, 433
Secretary of State for 25, 52, 58, 69,
73. 74, 75, 89, 90, 9i, 92, 96, 97,
103, 104, 105, 135, 136, 147, 149,
170, 172, 174, 175, 177, 180, 216,
223, 230, 232, 233, 234, 271, 283,
284, 285, 300, 303, 330, 413, 424
unemployment .. .. .. 196
Scotland Yard .. .. .. 107
Scottish:
Academy of Music and Drama,
Royal .. .. .. . - 4!6
Central Library .. .. .. 427
Community Drama Association .. 416
Council (Development and In¬
dustry) .. .. .. 215,369
Council for Small Industries in
Rural Areas .. .. •• 215
Daily Newspaper Society 435—6
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 39
Health Services Council .. .. 136
Land Court .. 87, 94, 276
Newspaper Proprietors Associa¬
tion .. .• •• •• 436
Office, definition of . - 57, 58
Omnibus Group .. -. . • 297
Opera Company .. -. .. 418
River Purification Advisory Com¬
mittee .. .. ;. •• 233
Special Housing Association .. 181
Standing Committee (parliament¬
ary) .. .. .. •• 39
Tourist Board .. .. .. 364
Transport Group .. 297, 298, 303
Universities .. 42, 160, 426
Scouts .. .. .. 144, j67
Scunthorpe .. .. .. 207, 237
Seamen:
conditions of employment .. 289
number and qualifications 288, 289—90
Secretaries of State see relevant
Ministries
Seismic prospecting .. • • . • 220
Select Committees see Parhament,
committees
Selection, Committee of (parlia¬
mentary) .. - - -. -• 39
Page
Selective Employment Tax 53, 128, 214,
215, 341, 342, 343, 345
Service trades .. .. 385-6
Severn bridge .. .. .. 301
Severn, river .. .. .. .. 3
Sevemside .. .. .. .. 222
Sewerage 52, 60, 69, 71, 133, 135, 173,
231, 232, 233
Sheffield 15, 16, 160, 207, 237, 248, 258
Shellhaven .. .. .. . . 221
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts .. 85, 86, 87,
90, 94, 103
Shetland Islands .. 1, 4, 67, 275, 281
Shipbuilding:
British Ship Research Association 247
Enquiry Committee .. .. 247
Industry Board .. .. .. 247
and Marine Engineering .. 205, 206,
207, 208, 247, 288-9
Shipowners .. .. .. 290, 291
Shippers’ Council, British .. . . 291
Shipping .. .. 288-96, 326
and Seamen, Registrar-General of 289
Chamber of .. .. .. 291
chartering .. .. .. .. 291
coastal .. .. 289, 294, 296
companies and lines .. .. 290
conferences.. .. .. 289,291
cross-channel services .. 295, 298
earnings of .. .. .. 364
employers’ and employees’ organi¬
sations .. .. .. •• 291
employment of .. .. 288, 289
exports .. .. .. •. 247
Federation, British .. .. 291
fishing vessels .. .. .. 282
on inland waterways .. 306, 307
insurance .. .. 290, 356, 357
liners, passenger .. 205, 289, 290
Lloyd’s Register of .. .. 290
medical advice, service for .. 318
merchant fleet, composition 288, 289
merchant seafarers .. 289-90
Navy see Royal Navy
ore terminals .. .. . • 295
organisations .. .. 290, 291
ports .. 205, 206, 207, 208, 293-5
radio communications .. .. 318
relations with Government .. 289
safety .. ..289,291,292,402
tankers and terminals 220, 221, 247,
288, 289, 290, 293, 294, 295
tonnage .. .. 247, 288, 289
traffic control .. .. • • 292
tramps .. . • • • 289, 290
weather reports for .. • • S1^
Shooting: game and target 453-4, 460-1
Shops..
cash and carry
independent
mobile
multiple stores
number of ..
‘out of town’
self-service ..
sales promotion
supermarkets
turnover
Sickness benefit
Silver ware
Silviculture see Forestry
Skating
381-5, 401, 402
• .384
381, 382,384
..384
381, 382,383, 384
383,384
••384
• • 384, 385
.. 382, 384-5
.. 384
.. 382,383-4
127, 128, 129,130
.. 248
461
INDEX
Page
Ski-ing .. .. .. 22, 461
Slum clearance .. 70, 180, 181, 186
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smoke control .. .. 135, 177
Soap production .. 206, 248, 251
Soccer see Football
Social:
Science Research Council 51, 163,
320, 332 406
Research Unit .. .. .. 332
Security  125-33
Department of Health and Social
Security see Health
expenditure on .. .. ..123
reciprocal agreements with other
countries .. .. .. 126
Services .. 123, 124-32, 136, 147
Service .. .. .. 123-4,139
Secretary of State for . .53, 89, 135,
136, 147, 33°,337
training of social workers .. 124
Central Council for Educa¬
tion and Training in Social
Work .. .. .. 124
voluntary organisations 123-4, 125,
Welfare .. .. .. 123-48
See also Health Service, National
and National Insurance
Soft drinks industry .. .. .. 256
Solicitor General .. .. 44, 54
Solicitor General for Scotland 44, 59
Solicitors .. .. 91, 92, 93, 94, 95
Southampton.. 103, 160, 205, 221, 250,
292, 293, 294, 295, 422, 443
South Downs Way .. .. .. 178
South-East Asia Treaty
Organisation (seato) .. 109,115
South of Scotland Electricity Board
see Electricity
South Shields .. .. .. 207
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space Research:
Committee on (cospar) .. • • 331
Management Unit .. ..331
Station, Radio and .. .. 325
Space Technology Programme,
National .. .. .. ..331
See also Research
Speaker:
House of Commons 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 40, 338, 339
House of Lords .. 32, 34, 36, 54
Special constables
Special Orders Committee
Speech therapists
Speed limits ..
Spenborough..
Sport ..
facilities for
Sports..
Centres, National ..
Council
equipment industry
See also Recreation
106
40
145
303
207
446-62
446-7
21-2
.. 448
177, 446, 447
.. 260
513
Page
Squash rackets .. .. ..461
Staff colleges (armed forces) 111-2
Stafford and Staffordshire 205, 206, 218,
243, 257
Stag hunting 453
Staines .. .. .. .. 221
Stamp duty see Taxation
Stamp trading .. .. 382, 384-5
Standard of living .. 18-20, 192, 193
Standing Committees see Parliament
committees
Stanlow .. .. 221,222,295
Stansted (airport) .. .. 311,312
State see Monarchy and Parhament:
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 47, 56,
200, 427
Statistics:
abstracts and digests of .. .. 209
application of data .. .. 1
See also subject matter
Statutory boards .. .. .. 26
Statutory bodies .. .. 202, 204
Statutory Instruments .. 39, 40
Statutory Publications Office .. 56
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelwork plant industry .. .. 241
Sterling and sterling area 193, 363, 364,
367, 368, 371-2, 376
devaluation .. .. 193, 197
Stock Exchanges 73, 354, 355-6, 358, 370
Stockport .. .. .. .. 206
Stoke-on-Trent .. 15, 205, 237, 257
Stranraer .. .. .. .. 293
Strathclyde University (Glasgow) .. 103,
160, 161
Street traders .. .. .. 382
Strikes and lock-outs .. .. 411
Students 18, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160,
161, 162, 163, 164-5,I88
from overseas .. .. 164-5, 380
travel grants .. .. .. 166
See also Education and Universities
Submarines 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119
Subpoena see Law
Subsidies, see Agriculture, Housing
and Transport
Sugar 206, 254, 255, 273
Agreement, Commonwealth .. 273
beet.. .. ..266,272,273,281
research and education .. 281
British Sugar Corporation 266, 273
Sunbury-on-Thames .. .. 222
Sunday Mirror Children’s Exhibition 423
Sunderland .. .. .. .. 207
Supply Sendees .- 338,339,345,348
Supreme Court of Judicature 87, 90, 94
Supreme Court of Judicature in
Northern Ireland .. .. 87, 88, 94
Surtax see Taxation
Swansea .. 208, 221, 293, 295, 432
Swimming .. .. .. .. 461
Swindon .. .. .. 174, 205
Synthetic fibres 206, 208, 251, 252, 326
Synthetic rubber 205, 208, 248, 249, 259
X Table tennis .. .. .. 462
Tankers and terminals see Shipping
Tanning .. .. .. .. 254
Tariff policy .. .. 364, 365, 366
Tate Gallery .. .. .. 422, 423
Taxation 38, 54, 125, 126, 128, 129, 194,
197, 198, 199, 337, 338, 343-5
betting duties .. .. .. 345
5H
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
T axation—contd.
capital gains tax .. 54, 343> 344
corporation tax 54, 341, 342, 343, 344
customs and excise duties 50, 343,
344-5. 365
double taxation agreements .. 344
estate duty . • 54, 343. 344. 423
expenditure, taxes on 197, 198, 199,
343
for non-residents .. .. • • 344
income tax 54, 125, 199, 341, 342, 343“4
relief and exemptions .. 125, 126
Special Commissioners of
indirect, and subsidies
local see Rates
motor vehicles .. .. 343
Northern Ireland
PAYE
personal tax
purchase tax
89
345
345
.-348
129, 343
• • 342
341, 343, 345, 365
342, 344
54, 343
54, 342, 343, 344
• •342
.•3°5
•. 223
301
selective employment tax (set) .. 53,
128, 214, 215, 34i, 342, 343, 345
short-term gains
stamp duties
surtax
value-added tax
Taxicabs (London)
Tayside
bridge
Teachers see Education
Technical:
assistance . . 164, 165, 166, 211, 379~8o
assistance programmes, British 164-5
British Volunteer Programme .. 380
education see Education
Technology:
Ministry of 56, 119, 209, 229, 320, 326
See also Education, Research,
Science, Universities and rele¬
vant industries
Teesside 15, 207, 221, 222, 293, 295
Telecommunications:
equipment industry 242, 243, 244
Posts and, Minister of see Posts
and Telecommunications
private . . .. • • • • 31?
satellites .. .. 318, 33°, 331
submarine cables .. •• 31?
telegraphs .. .. •• *73, 3*5
telephones . . .. 173,
specialised services .. .. 317
Telex    315-6
Telegraph and telephone equipment
industry .. . • • • 208, 244
Television see Broadcasting, Inde¬
pendent Television and Licences
Tennis see Lawn and Table
Tenpin bowling .. • • • • 462
Territorial and Army \olunteer
Reserve (t & avr) .. • • .. 112
Textile industries 192, 197, 201, 206,
207, 208, 210, 251-3
machinery industry . . 208, 240
research .. .. • • ..251
Thames:
Conservancy .. . • ..231
river 2, 3, 205, 221, 222, 233, 262
tunnels .. .. • • • • 3°i
Theatres .. . • • • 21, 4I5_6
amateur .. . . • • • • 4t6
for young people .. .. .. 416
National Theatre .. 4I4> 4I5» 4X6
Page
Theatres—contd.
repertory .. - - - - 4I5, 4J6
Shakespeare Theatre Company,
Royi .. .. - - • • 415
See also Drama
Thermonuclear research see Nuclear
energy
Thomas Cook and Son .. .. 297
Thornton .. .. -. - • 222
Thorpe Marsh .. .. . - 224
Tilbury .. . - . - • • 294
Tilling Bus Group .. .. .. 297
Timber:
Advisory Committee on Utilisa¬
tion of Home Grown .. . . 287
Growers’ Organisation .. 286, 287
Home Grown, Advisory Com¬
mittee on (hgtac) .. 286-7
industry' .. 207, 259, 260, 284-5
Research Association .. .. 326
Tinplate industry .. 207, 237, 386
Tobacco 19, 197, 201, 205, 206, 208,
210, 254, 256-7, 328, 390
revenue duty .. 256, 344, 365
Toilet preparations industry 248, 251
Tools industries:
exhibition .. -. • • • - 239
hand .. -. • • • • 248
machine .. .. 201, 206, 207, 239
Research Association
small (engineers) ..
‘Top Ten’ (Twenty)
Totalisators ..
Tourist:
Authority, British
information
trade
Town and country
Planning
Townswomen’s Guilds
Toy industry'.
Tractors
Trade
associations
Board of
239
.. 248
.. 20
- - 458
364, 420
-•3i7
205, 364
planning see
22
208, 260
207, 239, 240, 245, 270
192-5, 209, 359-88
203-4
  . -. 56, 209, 214, 283
and Industry, Department of (dti) 44,
54, 56-7, 74, 194, 202, 209, 211, 212,
213, 214,216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 222,
223,224,227, 228,239,283,289, 290,
291,308, 309, 311, 312, 313, 314, 3i9,
320, 321,326, 329, 330, 33i, 334, 356,
365,368,369,370,377,386,402,403,
419, 420, 430
ministerial responsibihty .. 44
internal .. • - • * 209, 380-8
overseas .. . - • - 359-72
airborne .. -. - - .. 311
area distribution - - 361—3
balance of payments 193, 194, 288
composition . - - • 359-61
exports .. 192, 193, 194, 195, i96,
197, 359,360-1,363,364, 366, 367,
368, 369, 370
financing of .. - - 370-1
Government assistance to 369-?°
imports 192, 193, i94> 359-6o, 362,
363, 365, 366, 367, 368
invisible transactions .. 363-4
markets .. .. 369, 37°, 371
tariffs .. . - 364, 365, 366
value and volume of .. • • 359
re-exports .. . • • • 311 > 369
INDEX
515
Page
Page
Trade—contd.
restrictive practices, control of 201—2
retail .. .. . - 381—8
wholesale .. .. . - -. 381
See also individual industries and
Investment
Trade fairs .. .. .. 54> 37°
‘British Weeks’ .. .. 54, 370
Trades Union Congress 403, 405, 406,
409-10, 412
Scottish .. .. .. .. 410
Trade Unions 106, 194, 389, 397, 398,
409, 410
affiliations .. .. .. .. 410
Civil Service .. .. 65,411
educational facilities .. .. 410
political fund .. .. .. 410
press .. .. - - - • 436
Trading Agreements:
Registrar of Restrictive .. .. 202
with the Republic of Ireland .. 366
Traffic:
Advisory Unit .. .. .. 304
air .. - - - - -. - • 3I3
canals 206, 288, 296, 297, 306, 307
congestion .. .. - - 304, 320
control .. 170,292,304,313,320
Uondon .. .. .. 305-6
Northern Ireland .. .. 307-8
ports .. .. -. 293, 294
rail and road 296, 298. 299, 300-1,
302, 303,320
sea .. .. 288, 289, 290, 292, 294-6
wardens .. .. .. 106, 304
Training schemes for industry 156, 160,
211,214,392-7
Central Training Council .. 396
Industrial Training Service .. 396
Training Within Industry (twi) 396, 403
Tranmere .. .. .. .. 221
Transport .. .. .. 288-318
administrative reorganisation .. 296
air .. .. .. 288, 308-14
Authorities, Passenger (pta) 297, 302,
303
Boards .. .. 297, 298, 300, 345
Commission, British (etc) 297, 298,
302, 305, 306
Docks Board, British .. 293, 297
Government policy .. 297, 298
Holding Company 297, 299, 302, 303
Northern Ireland .. .. 307
Hotels, British .. .. 297, 298
hovercraft .. .. .. 295-6, 334
inland waterways .. .. 288, 296
London .. 297, 302, 303, 304-6
T ransport—contd.
ministerial responsibility .. .. 51
Ministry of 51, 297, 300, 302, 304
nationalised .. 51,296,297
National Bus Company 297, 303
National Freight Corporation 297,
298, 299-300, 302, 307
Scottish Transport Group 297, 298,
Northern Ireland
planning
police
private
rail ..
research
road
safety measures
3°3
307-8
.. 174
.. 104
.. 22
296, 297-300, 305-6
296, 320
296, 297, 300-6, 388
52, 291-2, 303-4.
320, 402, 403
sea .. .. .. .. 388-9
subsidies .. .. 298, 303, 305
Tribunal .. .. .. .. 89
See also Civil Aviation and
Shipping
Travel see Tourist trade
Treason .. .. .. 86, 89
Treasure trove .. .. .. 92
Treasury 36, 43, 44, 47, 48, 49, 54, 194,
203, 209, 215, 223, 339-40, 341,
347,348, 368, 423, 428
bills. . .. 348, 349, 351, 352, 376
Chief Secretary to
Counsel
Solicitor’s Department
Treatment of Offenders
Trent navigation
Tribunals:
administrative
Civil Service Arbitration
Council on..
Independent Schools
Industrial Court ..
lands
mental health
rent
Scottish Land Court
transport ..
• • 49
.. 81
47, 56
95-103
• • 307
..88-9
411-2
55, 89
• • 154
411, 412
89.93, 276
.. 142
89,185
87.94, 276
.. 89
Trinity House, Corporation of .. 292
Tropical Medicine Research Board 327
Tropical Products Institute. . • • 335
Trustee Savings Banks .. 352, 354
Tunnels see Bridges and
Tyneside and Tyne ports 15, 207, 238,
243, 247, 295, 302
tunnel .. .. .. • • 301
See also Newcastle upon Tyne
u
Ulster:
colleges .. .. .. 163, 424
Constabulary, Royal .. .. 108
museums and art galleries 422, 424
Orchestra .. .. .. .. 417
Savings .. .. .. 60, 352
Transport Holding Company .. 307
New University (Coleraine) 158, 160,
163
Ulsterbus Ltd. .. .. .. 307
Underground railways 234, 305, 306
Unemployment 192, 193, 194, 195, 196,
213, 391-2
benefit (insurance) 125, 128, 129, 130
United Kingdom:
area and composition. . .. 1, 25, 26
citizenship .. .. .. 12
geography .. .. .. .. 1-6
United Nations organisations:
Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment (unctad) .. 365, 366, 377
contributions to .. .. .. 380
Page
516
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
United Nations organisations—contd.
Educational, Scientific and Cul¬
tural Organisation (unesco) 163,
165, 334
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao) .. .. 50, 165, 334
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation . . 292
International Telecommunication
Union (itu) .. .. .. 445
relations with 50, 109-10, 165, 334,
377, 445
Technical Assistance . . 165, 379-80
World Health Organisation (who)
53, 165, 328, 334,
United Press International . . 434, 445
United States:
educational and research co¬
operation 164, 166, 331, 333, 334
financial aid from .. 360, 363, 375
private investment in UK . . 376
Unit Trusts 35°, 356
Universities . . 45, 103, 149, 150, 158,
159-61, 162, 163, 165, 212, 280,
287, 319, 322, 324-5, 328
agricultural degree courses . . 280
building programme .. 160,163
Central Council on Admission .. 161
degrees, diplomas and certificates 103,
160-1, 162, 163, 280, 423-4
departments of education 157, 162, 163
drama clubs and societies .. 416
extra-mural courses 157, 158, 161, 324
Film Council, British .. . . 421
Universities—contd.
finance . . .. 149, 159, 160, 163
forestry courses .. .. .. 287
halls of residence . . .. .. 161
medical and dental schools 136, 145,
161
museums and libraries 333, 422, 426
new .. . . .. .. .. 161
Open .. .. 98, 160, 161
presses . . .. .. .. 428
Privy Council committees for .. 42
research 161, 174, 319, 324, 325, 328,
33i,332
scholarships and research fellow¬
ships 163, 164, 323, 324, 328, 332
Special Commonwealth Awards . . 166
sport .. 450, 455, 456, 457, 461
staff.. .. .. .. 158, 161
students 18, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164
technological education in 159, 160,
161, 162, 163, 325
See also individual universities
University:
colleges . . .. . . 159, 160
Grants Committee 51, 146, 150, 159,
160, 163, 319, 320, 324, 327
interchange schemes .. 166, 336
Officer Training Corps .. .. 112
Unmarried mothers .. 123, 141, 144
Urban:
district councils .. .. 68, 134
population .. .. . . 15,
Programme .. 125, 147, 152
V
VTOL (vertical take-off and landing) 118,
246
Vaccination .. .. . • 7°, I4°
Valuation for rating .. . . 54, 72~3
Valves, industrial .. . . 241-2
Vegetable oil processing . . .. 207
Vegetables:
crops 262, 264, 266, 268, 276, 381
processing . . .. . . ■ • 255
Vegetation . . .. • • 5, I79, 322
Vehicles industries 201, 205, 206, 208,
Vending machines, automatic
Ventilation equipment
Veterinary:
education and science
Laboratory, Central
service and research
surgeons
244-6
383, 384,
385
.. 241
.•458
278, 328
267 277, 278,
279, 328
• .277
Victoria and Albert Museum 413, 422,
423, 425
Village colleges .. . . 157-8
Virological laboratories .. .. 139
Visnews Ltd. . . .. . . 445
Visual arts .. .. .. 42i“4
Vital statistics .. .. ..7-12
Vocational guidance and training 98, xoi,
393, 394, 395-7
Volley ball . . .. .. . • 462
Voluntary organisations:
child care .. . . . . 123-4, x47
education . . 149, 150, 151, 155, 165
prisoners’ aid .. .. 99, 100
welfare 123-4, 133, 140, 142, 143,
144, 146, 147
youth services . . .. 167-9
Voting:
in House of Commons .. 33-4, 37
in House of Lords .. . . 37
in local government elections 68-9
in parliamentary elections . . 33-4
w Wages:
Board and Councils .. 407, 408
Inspectorate . . .. • ■ 4°7
and salaries 18, 65, 194, 290, 398-400
equal pay .. 18, 399, 400
negotiations .. .. 4°7, 4°8
statutory regulations .. 397, 398
Wakefield ‘ 207
Wales:
administration .. 25, 44, 47, 49, 57
Wales—contd.
area and counties . . . . .. 1
broadcasting councils . . • • 439
Development Corporation for .. 369
holidays, statutory .. . . 401
industry 207-8, 213, 218, 219, 222-3,
237, 238, 245, 248, 252
language . . . . .. 7, 13, 152
Minister of State for . . 25, 44, 49
National Library of .. 57, 425
INDEX
Page
51?
Page
Wales—contd.
National Museum of . . 57, 422
National Youth Orchestra .. 419
population . . 7, 8, 13-17, 207, 208
press  432, 433
Secretary of State for 25, 49, 52, 57,
73, 135, 146, 149, 170, 172, 174,
175, 177, 180, 230, 231, 234, 271,
283, 284, 285, 300, 303, 4x3, 424
Tourist Board .. .. .. 364
unemployment .. .. . . 196
University of .. .. 160, 423
See also subject headings
Wallsend .. . . .. . . 207
Walton-on-Thames .. . . .. 221
War pensioners 53, 55, 89, 123, 125,
133,136
Warrington . . .. .. 173, 206
Warwickshire .. 205, 218, 448, 459
Warwick University . . . . 160, 435
Watch committees (police) .. .. 104
Water:
Boards and authorities .. 231-2
Committee, Central Advisory .. 231
Scottish, Advisory .. .. 232
Conservancies, Thames and Lee 231
Development Board, Central Scot¬
land .. .. .. .. 232
fluoridation .. . . • • 135
Metropolitan Water Board . . 231
pollution . . 177, 231, 233, 321, 326
power see Electricity, hydro-electric
rate .. .. .. ..231
Research .. .. 232, 233, 329
Association .. .. 232, 326
•• 233
231, 232
.. 462
230-3
• •3-5
. . 318
50, 317, 318
. . 250
. . 462
233, 320, 387
Laboratory, Pollution
Resources Board ..
ski-ing
sources of ..
supply 17, 70, 71, 133, 135, 173, 195,
209, 210, 230-3
Waterways Board, British 293, 297, 306,
3°7
Weapons see Defence
Weather
bulletins for ships
forecast services ..
Weedkillers ..
Weight lifting
Weights and measures
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled 53, 70, 124,
138, 140, 142, 393-4
centres .. .. .. .. 133
children 102, 103, 136, 140, 141, 153-4
family . . 123, 125, 126, 140, 141
foods service .. .. 124, 141
immigrants .. 123, 125, 148
industrial . . .. . . 404-5
mentally ill. . 70, 135, 138, 140, 142
mothers .. .. .. 136, 140
old people .. 70, 123, 124, 138, 140,
141-2
overseas students .. . . . . 165
prisoners and probationers 99-100,127
services 53, 139-43
war pensioners . . 53, 55, 133, 137
See also National Insurance and
Health
Welsh:
Council .. .. .. • • 57
Grand Committee .. .. 39
Welsh—contd.
language .. .. .. 7, 13, 152
National Recreation Centre .. 448
National Opera Company . . 4x8
Office 25, 44, 57, 67, 134, 147, 150,
154, 177, 179, 231, 303, 321, 413
See also Wales, Secretary of
State for
Planning Board .. .. . . 57
Wembley Stadium . . .. 449, 455
Wesleyan Reform Union .. .. 189
West Drayton .. .. -.313
West Sole .. .. .. .. 220
West Thurrock .. .. .. 224
Weybridge . . .. 205, 278, 328
Whisky industry . . .. 208, 256
Whitechapel Art Gallery .. .. 423
Whitley Councils .. ..65,71,411
Whole House, Committee of .. 38
Wholesale trade .. .. .. 381
Widnes . . . . .. .. 206
Widows’ benefits and pensions 125, 127,
129, 130, 131, 132, 133
Wigan. . . . . . .. .. 206
Wires and cables (insulated)
industry .. . . 205, 206, 244
Wolverhampton .. .. 15,205
Women:
in Armed Forces .. .. m, 121
employment 18, 389, 390, 398, 399,
400, 404
equal pay for .. .. 399, 400
in Fire Service .. .. • • 75
housewives.. .. .. 389,390
periodicals for . . . . • • 433
in police force .. .. .. 105
in the Church .. .. 188, 189
proportion in population .. . . 9-11
Women’s:
Institutes .. .. .. 22, 157
Royal Air Force . . .. .. 111
Royal Army Corps .. . . 111
Royal Naval Service .. . . 111
Royal Voluntary Service 124, 143, 144
Rural Institutes . . .. .. 22
Woodland owners’ associations . . 286
Woodlands 5, 175, 176, 261, 284-5, 286,
287
Approved, Scheme .. .. 286
Dedication of, Scheme .. .. 286
Small Wood Scheme .. .. 286
Woodstock (Kent) .. .. .. 222
Wool 206, 207, 251-2, 267, 272, 273,
277
Exchange, London .. . . 371
Industries Research Association 252
Marketing Board, British . . 273
See also Knitwear and Textile
industries
Worcester and Worcestershire 205, 206,
269, 417
Work, hours of .. .. 18, 400
See also Employment and Labour
Workers:
manual .. .. 18, 19, 398-400
professional, managerial and
clerical .. . . 212, 392, 400
Workers’ Educational Association 157,
158
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes 22
Works councils .. .. .. 406
5i8
BRITAIN 1972: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
World Data Centres .. ..331
World Health Organisation (who) 53,
165, 328, 334
Page
Worsted industry 244, 245, 246, 289-92
Wrestling .. . . .. .. 462
Wrexham . . . . . . . . 208
Y Yachting .. .. .. .. 460
Yarmouth .. .. .. . • 205
York .. .. 160, 175, 207, 415, 422
Province of .. .. 187, 188
Yorkshire . .14, 15, 16, 206, 207, 218,
220, 221, 237, 239, 240, 248, 251,
253, 254, 268, 294, 29s, 4i5, 425
East Riding .. 207, 262, 268
North Riding .. .. .. 207
West Riding .. .. . . 206
See also individual industries and
towns
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca) .. .. 124, 157, 168
Young offenders 23, 79, 96, 100—3, *46
Young Volunteer Force Foundation 144,
169
Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion (ywca) .. .. .. 124
Youth:
and Sports Council
Ireland) ..
centres and clubs ..
employment:
Executive, Central
Service and Councils
Hostels Associations
leaders
orchestras ..
organisations:
pre-service
voluntarv
(Northern
..446
157, 167, 168
• •393
• •393
• • 457
158, 168
..419
.. .. 168
167, 168, 169, 446, 447
services . . .. . - 167-9
Standing Conference of National
Voluntary Youth Organisations
(SCNVYO). . .. .. 167-8
State and voluntary partnership .. 167
Theatre, National .. .. 416
Z Zebra crossings
Zoological Gardens
.. 303 Zoological Society .. .. .. 332
.. 332 Zoos and safari parks .. .. 332
Printed in England for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
by W & J Mackay Ltd, Chatham
DMD 501723 K164
SEN 11 700109 o
FUEL AND POWER
Dounreay
Fasnakyle
0 6
Cruachan
▲ A Natural Gasfields
—Natural Gas Pipelines
Under construction
Proposed
T Imported Gas Terminal
t Oil Refineries (over 1 million
tons annual capacity)
0 Under construction
== Crude Oil Pipelines
a Pumped Storage Schemes
Coalfields
■ Conventional
Power Stations (over 1000
MW capacity)
□ Under construction
• Nuclear Power Stations
O Under construction
♦ AEA Power Producing
Reactors
Hydro-Electric Power
Stations (over 45 MW
capacity)
0 20 40 60 80 100 Miles
Sloy
Finnart
Inverkip
Fiddler's Ferry
Stanlow
Tranmere
Wylfa
Ffestiniog
Trawsfynydd
Rugeley 'B'
Ironbridge
Rheidol
Berkeley
Oldbury
Milford Haven
Angle Bay
Pembroke
Llandarcy
Aberthaw 'B'
0 40 80 120 Kilometres
Cottam
Ratcliffe-upon-Soar
Sizewell
Didcot
Tilbury B'
Shell Haven
Bradwell
Coryton
Canvey I.
I. of Grain
Kmgsnorth
W. Thurrock
Dungeness A'
Dungeness 'B'
Fawley
Wmfnth
■Hmkley Point 'B'
Hmkley Point 'A'
Rannoch
Errochty
Clume
Lochay
Hunterston A'
Hunterston B'
Longannet
Grangemouth
Cockenzie
Chapelcross
Blyth 'B'
Wmdscale
Calder Hall
Seaton Carew
Billingham
Teesport
Heysham
Lockton
Ferrybridge 'C
Eggborough
Drax
Thorpe Marsh
West Burton A'
Killingholme
■Easington
West Sole
Viking
Alndefatigable
Leman Bank
Hewett
MOTORWAYS AND PRINCIPAL
TRUNK ROADS
Motorways
Under construction
Projected
Existing Trunk Roads
0 20 40 60 80 100 Miles
i 1 1 i 1 »
0 40 80 120 Kilometres
“John o’Groats
Inverness
Aberdeen
Fort William
Berwick-upon-Tweed
Carlisle
Penrith
Lancaster
Newcastle upon Tyne
Middlesbrough
Manchester
Leeds
Scarborough
York
Doncaster
Kingston upon Hull
Grimsby
Sheffield
Lincoln
Nottingham
Norwich
Great Yarmouth
Leicester
Birmingham
Coventry
Cambridge
Gloucester
Oxford
London
Penzance Plymouth
Exeter
Southampton
