Foreign 8c
Commonwealth
Office
Britain 1991
An official handbook
Physical features
Isles of Scilly
English Channel
^Tyneside
Preston,
Blackpool!
Liverpool
Birkenhead®
:tingham
Leicester
Luton
^outhend
Medway Towns
Aldershoi
Portsmouth Bri9hton
Bournemouth
Population density
and major urban areas
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Population density
(persons per sq km)
v over 1500
CT- • 750-1500
450-749
V-. 'V
250-449
150-249
75-149
under 75
Major urban areas
over 500,000
population
over 200,000-499,000
population
100,000-199,000
population
Glasgow
(as of 1981 census)
^Plymouth
60 miles
The density of population is shown by county
for England and Wales, by region for Scotland,
and by Education and Library Board areas for
Northern Ireland.
Urban areas are defined as continuous
built-up sites; they include transport
and mining and quarrying areas and
any areas completely surrounded
by built-up sites. Most of the
named urban areas are
designated by the
largest town
within them.
■J
Britain 1991
An official handbook
I
•r
Foreign Sc
Commonwealth
Office
Britain 1991
An official handbook
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
LONDON: HMSO
© Crown copyright 1991
First published 1991
ISBN 0 11 701550 4
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London. SW8 5DT.
Telephone orders 071-873 9090
General enquiries 071-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London. WC1V 6HB 071-873 0011 (counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham. B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol. BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester. M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh. EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181
HMSO’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers
O*
ja|
A
Contents
Page
Introduction ix
1 Land and People 1
Introduction \
The Four Lands 4
The Social Framework 21
2 Government 35
The Monarchy 35
Parliament 39
The Privy Council 5 j
Her Majesty’s Government 52
Government Departments 55
The Civil Service 63
Local Government 67
Fire Services 73
3 Overseas Relations 77
Membership of the European Community 78
The Commonwealth 88
International Peace and Security 92
Britain and the United Nations 97
Other International Organisations 98
Development Co-operation 99
4 Defence 195
Finance and Management 111
Defence Procurement HI
Civil Defence H2
5 Justice and the Law 115
Criminal Justice 115
Civil Justice 138
Administration of the Law 141
6 Social Welfare I45
National Health Service 146
Personal Social Services 162
Voluntary Social Services 167
Social Security 170
7 Education 177
The Youth Service 202
8 Planning, Urban Regeneration and Housing 205
Planning 205
Urban Regeneration 208
Housing 215
9 Environmental Protection 223
Conservation 223
Control of Pollution 229
10 Religion
11 National Economy
12 Framework of Industry and Commerce
Introduction
Performance
Organisation and Ownership
Government Policies and Legislation
Functioning and Regulation of Markets
Research and Innovation
13 Manufacturing Industry
Introduction
The Sectors of Manufacturing
14 Construction and Service Industries
Introduction
Construction
Service Industries
15 Energy and Natural Resources
Energy
Non-fuel Minerals
Water
16 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
17 Transport and Communications
Inland Transport
Ports
Shipping
Civil Aviation
Communications
18 Employment
19 Public Finance
20 Banking and Financial Institutions
21 Overseas Trade
22 Promotion of Science and Technology
23 Promotion of the Arts
24 The Press
25 Television and Radio
26 Sport and Recreation
239
245
255
255
255
257
261
269
275
279
279
282
299
299
300
302
311
311
329
331
335
335
346
348
351
351
362
364
366
369
377
397
409
423
435
451
469
481
493
Appendix 1 513
Currency 513
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures 513
Thermometrical T able 514
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1991 514
Appendix 2 515
Guide to Sources 515
Index 517
Diagrams
Availability of Certain Durable Goods 28
The Royal Family 36
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General Government 1990-91 404
Assets of Selected Groups of Financial Institutions 1983 and 1988 410
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1989 425
Maps
Physical features
Population density and major urban areas
Major conservation and recreation areas
Motorways and major trunk roads
Britain
The European Community
Urban Policy Initiatives
The Assisted Areas
Oil
Gas
Coal
Electricity
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Main Railway Passenger Routes
endpapers
6
79
210-11
267
315
318
320
323
330
359
between pp 70 and 71
between pp 134 and 135
between pp 230 and 231
between pp 326 and 327
between pp 390 and 391
between pp 454 and 455
Photographs
Parliamentary Democracy
Waterfronts
Commonwealth Institute
Overseas Aid
Defence
Universities
Architecture
Parks and Gardens
Protecting the Environment
Industrial Technology
Service Industries
Exports
Forestry
Computer Applications
Transport
Communications
Libraries
Broadcasting
Acknowledgments for use of photographs appear on p 536.
Introduction
Britain 1991 is the forty-second handbook in the series. It is widely known as
an established work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference
facilities provided by British information services in many countries. It is sold
by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office throughout the world.
Britain 1991 describes many features in the life of the country, including the
workings of the Government and other major institutions. It does not
attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they
refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for many
administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which comprises
England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom (which is the same
as Britain, that is, Great Britain and Northern Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1991 is compiled with the co¬
operation of other government departments and agencies, and of many
other organisations. Sources of more detailed and more topical information
(including statistics) are mentioned in the text and a guide to official sources
is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to August/
September 1990.
1 Land and People
Physical
Features
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and
Northern Ireland, and is one of the 12 member states of the European
Community. Its full name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term
for a group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe.
The largest of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales
and Scotland). The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish
Republic. Off the southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the
extreme south west are the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey.
Western Scotland is fringed by the large archipelago known as the Hebrides
and to the north east of the Scottish mainland are Orkney and Shetland. All
these have administrative ties with the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the
Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France are
largely self-governing, and are not part of the United Kingdom.
With an area of some 242,400 sq km (93,600 sq miles), Britain is about the
same size as New Zealand or Uganda, and half the size of France. It is just
under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south coast to the extreme north
of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles) across in the widest part.
The prime meridian of 0° passes through the old observatory at Greenwich
in London.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow, usually less than 90 m
(300 ft), because the islands lie on the continental shelf. The shallow waters,
warmed by the North Atlantic current, are important because they provide
breeding grounds for fish.
The climate is generally mild and temperate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. It is subject to frequent
changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C (90°F) or
below —10°C (14°F). Near sea-level in the west the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C (46°F) in the Hebrides to 11°C (52°F) in the extreme south
west of England; latitude for latitude, it is slightly lower in the east. The
mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetland),
ranges from 3°C (37°F) during the winter (December, January and February)
to 11°C (52°F) during the summer (June, July and August); the
corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south, are 5°C
(41°F) and 16°C (61°F). The average annual rainfall is more than 1,600 mm
(over 60 inches) in the mountainous areas of the west and north but less than
800 mm (30 inches) over central and eastern parts. Rain is fairly well
distributed throughout the year, but, on average, March to June are the
driest months and September to January the wettest. The distribution of
sunshine shows a general decrease from south to north, a decrease from the
coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During May, June and July (the
months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of sunshine varies from
five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of Wight; during
the months of shortest daylight (November, December and January)
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of an hour a day in northern
Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
2
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
The word ‘Britain’ derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming
from a Celtic original. Although in the prehistoric time-scale the Celts were
relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which had
produced such notable monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and
Stonehenge), it is only with them that Britain emerges into recorded history,
and the term ‘Celtic’ is often used rather generally to distinguish the early
inhabitants of the British Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following expeditions by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc, Britain was
invaded by the Romans in ad 43 under the Emperor Claudius. An ordered
civilisation was established under their rule for over 300 years, except in the
territory north of Hadrian’s Wall (the wall across northern England built on
the orders of Hadrian, Roman Emperor from ad 117 to 138) and in some
western areas. Christian missionaries arrived not only in Roman Britain but
also in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a period
of increasing disorder during which the island began to be raided from
northern Europe, mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from
Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles that the name ‘England’
derives. In the following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and a
number of small kingdoms were established (with the Britons maintaining an
independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and Cornwall).
Among these kingdoms, more powerful ones emerged, claiming over¬
lordship over the whole country, first in the north (Northumbria), then in
the midlands (Mercia) and finally in the south (Wessex). However, further
raids and settlement by the Vikings from Scandinavia occurred, although in
the tenth century the Wessex dynasty defeated the invading Danes and
established a wide-ranging authority in England. A second wave of Danish
invasions, however, led to the establishment of a Danish dynasty in England
between 1017 and 1042, when the Wessex line was restored. The period
between 1042 and 1066 saw the growing influence of the Normans,
inhabitants of a duchy in northern France established by the Vikings and
owing only nominal allegiance to the French king.
This culminated in the last successful invasion of England in 1066,
following a disputed succession to the English throne. Duke William of
Normandy enforced his claims by defeating the English at the Battle of
Hastings in 1066. There was considerable settlement by Normans and others
from France, French became the language of the nobility for the next three
centuries and the legal and, to some extent, social structure was influenced
by that prevailing across the Channel. Over the years the English monarchy
began to establish its authority over increasingly wide areas of the British
Isles.
Wales had remained a Celtic stronghold, although often within the
English sphere of influence. Conflict among the various Welsh princes was
frequent and unity was achieved only temporarily. However, with the death
in battle in 1282 of Prince Llywelyn, Edward I launched a successful
campaign to bring Wales under English rule. Wales was placed for the most
part under the same laws as England and in 1301 Edward’s heir was created
Prince of Wales, a title which has subsequently been bestowed upon the
eldest son of the Sovereign. Continued strong Welsh national feeling was
indicated by the rising led by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the
fifteenth century, but a new dimension to the situation was provided by the
accession to the English throne in 1485 of Henry VII of the Welsh House of
Tudor. The Acts of Union of 1536 and 1542 united England and Wales
administratively, politically and legally.
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
Scotland
Ireland
Scotland was inhabited by the people known as Piets, but in the sixth century
the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the area of Scotland now known
as Argyll. Lothian was English in population, and Welsh Britons moved
north from the invading English into Strathclyde. A united kingdom
emerged in the ninth century while Scotland, like England, was
endeavouring to defend itself against the Vikings. The establishment of a
powerful monarchy in England, however, was to pose an intermittent but
considerable threat to Scottish independence throughout the Middle Ages.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, as a result of
the Reformation (see p 5), old national antagonisms had become less im¬
portant than religious differences. Elizabeth I died in 1603 and, as she had
no children, was succeeded by James VI of Scotland, who was the next in line
to the throne. He ascended the English throne as James I of England.
England, Wales and Scotland were henceforth known as Great Britain.
Apart from the union of the monarchies, however, England and Scotland
remained separate during the seventeenth century, except for an enforced
unification by Oliver Cromwell early in the period of the Commonwealth
(1649-60), after he had defeated royalist forces in Scotland. By the
beginning of the following century political and economic arguments for a
closer union were apparent in both countries. Eventually, in 1707, both sides
agreed on the formation of a single parliament for Great Britain, although
Scotland retained (and still has) its own system of law and church settlement.
The Union was put under strain when Queen Anne died in 1714 and
the Protestant George, Elector of Hanover (descended from a daughter of
James I), succeeded to the British throne. Two unsuccessful ‘Jacobite’
rebellions, aiming to restore the Catholic Stuarts, took place in 1715 and
1745, drawing much support from Scotland.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that
in Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era.
Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the Vikings, who
dominated the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the
overlordship of which he had been granted by the Pope, who was anxious to
bring the Irish church into full obedience to Rome. Although a large part of
the country came under the control of Anglo-Norman magnates, little direct
authority was exercised from England during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in
Ireland. Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541
arose from his desire to apply the Reformation settlement and thereafter the
religious issue was to produce far-reaching consequences. During the reign
of Elizabeth I, a series of campaigns was waged against Irish insurgents. The
main focus of the resistance was the northern province of Ulster and, with its
collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by immigrants from
Scotland and England. Settlement by immigrants elsewhere in Ireland was
on a lesser scale.
The English civil war of 1642 to 1652 led to further risings in Ireland,
which were crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660
was followed by the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne
in 1685, and there was more fighting after his deposition three years later in
favour of his nephew and son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange and
his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace; towards
its end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve stability.
In 1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given
4
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
legislative independence; the only constitutional tie with Great Britain was
the Crown. The Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-
Irish minority, who had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land,
and Catholics were excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive
rebellion in 1798 and the prospect of intervention by France (with which
Great Britain was at war almost continuously between 1793 and 1815) the
Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with what, from 1801, was to
be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British
politics during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government
introduced a Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament
authority over most internal matters while reserving to Britain control over
external affairs. This led to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the
Bill. It was not until 1914 that Home Rule was enacted by the Government of
Ireland Act. Its implementation was, however, prevented by the threat of
armed resistance on the part of the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the
outbreak of the first world war.
Although a nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, a
guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA) began operations
against the British administration at the end of the first world war. In the
face of the conflicting political aspirations of unionists and nationalists, the
Government of Ireland Act 1920 provided for the establishment of two
Home Rule parliaments, one in Dublin and the other in Belfast. The Act was
implemented in 1921 in Northern Ireland, when six of the nine counties of
the province of Ulster received their own Parliament and remained
represented in, and subject to the supreme authority of, the British
Parliament. In the South the IRA continued to fight for independence from
the British administration. After the signature of a truce in June 1921
negotiations with southern Irish leaders led to the Anglo-Irish Treaty of
December 1921, establishing the Irish Free State with dominion status. The
Free State, a self-governing state outside the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, became a republic in 1949.
Channel Islands Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
and Isle of Man Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of
their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were part of the
Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been
dependent territories of the Crown since the Norman Conquest. The Isle of
Man was under the nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266, when it was
ceded to Scotland, subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period,
but eventually coming under the direct administration of the Crown in 1765.
Today the territories have their own legislative assemblies and systems of
local administration and of law, and their own courts. The British
Government is responsible for their defence, their international relations
and, ultimately, their good government.
The position of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man in the European
Community is broadly that the islands remain outside the Community
except for customs purposes and for certain aspects of the Common
Agricultural Policy.
The Four Lands
In the following pages there are brief descriptions of a number of aspects of
social, economic and political life for each of the four countries, England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, with some additional material on the
LAND AND PEOPLE
5
ENGLAND
political situation in Northern Ireland. Statistics on the four lands are con¬
tained in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: General Statistics
Northern United
England Wales Scotland Ireland Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1989 estimate) 47,689
2,873 5,091
1,583 57,236
Area
(sq km)
Population density
(persons per sq km)
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1988)
Employees in
employment
(’000, June 1989)
Percentage of
employees in:a
(June 1989)
agriculture, forestry and
fishing
energy and water supply
manufacturing
construction
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, seasonally
adjusted, June 1990)
130,439 20,766 77,080 14,147 242,432
366
1-2
20
23-2
4-5
69-1
6-2
138
19,290 980
20
31
24-8
4-5
65-7
7-8
66
6,958 5,709 6,387
1,959
1- 4
2- 9
21-3
6-4
68-0
9-3
112
5,173
3-9
1-5
20-2
50
69-4
151
236
6,795
515 22,745
1-3
21
230
4-7
68-9
6-3
"May not add up to 100 because of rounding.
England is predominantly a lowland country, although there are upland
regions in the north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the
Yorkshire moorlands) and in the south west in Devon and Cornwall. The
greatest concentrations of population are in the London and Thames
estuary areas, the West Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities, the
Midlands conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbations on
the rivers Tyne and Tees, and along the Channel coast.
The Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic
Church at the time of the Reformation, is the Established Church in
England; the Sovereign must always be a member of the Church and
appoints its two archbishops and 42 other diocesan bishops.
The English language is descended from the German tongue spoken by
the Anglo-Saxons in the fifth and sixth centuries, subsequently being
influenced by Latin and Norse vocabulary, and then transformed with the
settlement by the Normans from France. English is spoken throughout
Britain
Western,
Atlantic
Ocean
J NORTHERN
<1 IRELAND
f
V Belfast
\ i 1
IRISH
REPUBLIC
1. Greater Manchester
2. Nottinghamshire
3. Shropshire
4. West Midlands
5. Warwickshire
6. Northamptonshire
7. Bedfordshire
8. Hertfordshire
9. Buckinghamshire
10. Greater London
11. West Glamorgan
12. Mid Glamorgan
13. South Glamorgan
Isles of Scillv
Shetland Islands
SCOTLAND
Highland
Grampian
Orkney Islands
SCOTLAND' ■
Tayside
50 100 150 km
_j i 1
 1  1
100 miles
Fife
\ Central
Lothian
Strathclyde
LOinidii y
Borders ^
/V
*••• / Northumberland
Dumfries and
a\/ *•.
Tyf^^l Wear
International boundaries
Country boundaries
County boundaries
(regional boundaries
in Scotland)
Cumbria V Durham .•"(
North Sea
North Yorkshire
Irish Sea
Lancashire West '•
Yorkshire
Humberside
ENGLAND
:: Clwyd
Gwynedd
< "••.(Staffordshire
WALES
Dyfed
te...-": f. ‘^Yorkshire'" ;
ire
    ^
• •" ) \ Norfolk
^*3 ... Leicester .•••"•
t •••;> .••■'Cambridge'-’.
;• Powys p ■:'■■ ■ :• 6 C; Sutfolk
• Hereford and ••. 3 ." 7 ••• . ■
Worcester :'r': r--./ """ ’■ 
} y 9 8 Essex
.* ■ (AimiractarchirQ • ^ /
Gwent i%cestershi,e-:. Oxford"''•••• ’••:"'
•  .
.'•• Berkshire
Avon ;. y/jitspire ;...•  
.. __ Somerset .•••.
Devon   Dorset
•." SurreyKent
’• Hampshire   ■’ '  ••-. ...
*. / FPQt
. West "'East AtJB
• Sussex •;•' Sussex, ,
Cornwall
Channel Islands
■m, ~
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
Government
The Economy
Britain and in many other countries. A study has suggested that it is used as
an official language in over 60 countries, more than any other international
language.
England has no government minister or department exclusively responsible
for its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland. Instead, responsibility is shared among a
number of government departments, whose responsibilities in some cases
also cover aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 523 Members
of Parliament for England in the House of Commons, and arrangements are
made for the discussion of regional affairs. Of the two major political parties,
the Conservatives find their support chiefly in suburban and rural areas and
have a large majority of the parliamentary seats in the southern half of
England and in East Anglia, while the Labour Party derives its main support
from urban industrialised areas. In June 1990 England had 356 Conser¬
vative Members of Parliament, 156 Labour, 7 Liberal Democrat, 3 Social
Democrat and the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Local government is administered through a two-tier system of counties
subdivided into districts, except in London, where local government is the
responsibility of 32 borough councils and the Corporation of the City of
London; and in the metropolitan areas, where local government is carried
out by the metropolitan district councils.
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are defined, principally for statistical
purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East
Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. Many
government statistics are also available with the South East (much the most
populous region) subdivided into Greater London and the Rest of the South
East. These regions play no part in local government and frequently do not
coincide with the regional units adopted by central government depart¬
ments.
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other,
parliamentary and European Community legislation. Common law stems
from the work of the king’s judges after the Norman Conquest of 1066, who
sought to bring together into a single body of legal principles the various
local customs of the Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent,
and the practice of reporting on cases began in the thirteenth century.
Equity law derives from the practice of petitioning the King’s Chancellor in
cases not covered by common law. The English legal system is therefore
distinct from many of those of Western Europe, which have codes deriving
from Roman law.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and
the chief manufacture was woollen cloth. London, as the capital city and a
major port and mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south¬
western England and West Yorkshire) were the most populous and
prosperous regions. In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
however, rapid growth took place in the Midlands, the north west, Yorkshire
and the north east. Coalfields and iron ore deposits in these areas permitted
Britain to become the first industrialised nation, basing its wealth on
coalmining, on the manufacture of iron and steel, heavy machinery and
textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade. East Anglia and the West Country,
remote from areas of industrial development, were affected by agricultural
depression and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century a second period of industrialisation, based on new
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of
transport, has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and
industrial development in England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern
industrial centres saw their traditional industries weakened owing to
fluctuations in world trade and competition from other industrialising
countries and, in some cases, from substitute products. London, its
surrounding counties and the West Midlands generally benefited from the
newer, more mobile, industries. These included chemicals (such as
pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres), electrical and electronic
engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building, instrument en¬
gineering, aluminium and rubber manufacture and manufacture of a wide
range of consumer goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco pro¬
ducts as well as durables.
In the second half of the century economic trends and population growth
have tended to favour smaller towns and rural areas, particularly those in
parts of southern England and East Anglia. Employment in service
industries accounts for an increasing share of total employment, expansion
being particularly marked in financial and business services. New businesses
in the service sector are being created at a rapid rate, and this growth is
linked to a marked rise in self-employment. New forms of service activity
have been developing; for example, the growth of computer services and
information systems.
London is one of the world’s leading centres of banking, insurance and
other financial services. Decentralisation of some office services from the
capital and improvements in road systems have led to an expansion in the
service sector and high technology industries in the surrounding regions.
There has been an increase in retailing activity, with the trend towards large
shopping developments on the outskirts of towns, designed for shoppers
with cars. London and the neighbouring counties account for half of central
government services and a significant proportion of non-food wholesale
distribution in England. After London and the South East (where 77 per
cent of employees are engaged in the service sector), the South West has the
next highest concentration of service industries.
East Anglia has been the fastest-growing English region in both pop¬
ulation and employment since the 1960s. Although largely agricultural, high-
technology industry has in recent years developed throughout the region.
One significant example is the Cambridge Science Park, containing a
number of science-based companies and research organisations with close
collaborative links with the University. Food processing, diesel engines,
electronics and instrument engineering are the strongest industries. Other
particular growth points have been Peterborough and the east coast ports,
which benefit from their relative proximity to the northern European
Community countries and from recent improvements to the road and rail
network.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the North
West, Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the
largest concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important
area for products of all kinds, including food and drink (especially brewing),
instrument engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing,
furniture and printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern
counties are pharmaceuticals, pumps, valves and compressors, and
instrument engineering. Microelectronics and computer hardware and
software are important (particularly along the ‘M4 corridor’ in Berkshire, in
Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), as are motor vehicles, aerospace,
building materials, timber, paper and plastics products. The North West has
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
significant activity in food processing, chemicals, textile machinery, insulated
wires and cables, computers, motor vehicles, aerospace, clothing and glass
making. The world’s largest flat glass maker, Pilkington, is based in
St Helens. Lancashire is the centre of the cotton and allied textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel
tubes, iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical
engineering, motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with about 70 per cent of
Britain’s ceramics industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production.
Of the other regions, Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of
cocoa, chocolate and confectionery production, iron and steel (particularly
tool and special steel), machine tools, textile machinery, woollen and worsted
goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool textiles), carpets,
clothing and glass containers. The North has general chemicals, iron and
steel, process plant, marine engineering, and clothing; the East Midlands
has steel tubes, iron castings, about two-thirds of Britain’s hosiery and
knitted goods industry, and footwear; and the South West has food and
drink processing, aerospace, a range of engineering industries and paper
products.
A number of industrial areas (in the North, the North West, Yorkshire and
Humberside and the West Midlands) which suffered as a result of the decline
in traditional manufacturing employment are benefiting from the
Government’s regional industrial policy. This aims to reduce regional
disparities in employment opportunities by making investment incentives
available in the areas of greatest need, especially those which have been
dependent on declining industries. Policies to encourage enterprise have
been intensified under the Enterprise Initiative, launched in 1988 and aimed
particularly at small- and medium-sized businesses. Its objective is to increase
competitiveness by improving management skills in key areas, thus ex¬
panding opportunities for wealth creation.
In agriculture, the number of mixed holdings has been falling, as part of a
general tendency towards greater specialisation. Dairying is most common in
the west of England; sheep and cattle are reared in the hilly and moorland
areas of northern and south-western England; and arable farming, pig and
poultry farming and horticulture are concentrated in the east and south.
Horticulture is also important in the West Midlands. The principal fishing
ports are on the east coast and in the South West.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and has access to
offshore oil and gas reserves. About two-thirds of Britain’s deep-mined coal
is produced in the Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire and
Warwickshire coalfields. The world’s first large-scale nuclear power station
was established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 1956, while substantial
investment in reprocessing capacity is being undertaken nearby. Other
nuclear power stations are on coastal sites, including several around the
coasts of southern England. Important mineral deposits in England include
aggregates for the construction industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock),
industrial minerals (including clay, salt from the North West and china clay
from Cornwall) and iron ore from the East Midlands and Humberside.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and
comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the cities of
the Midlands, the North and North West and the South West, the London
orbital route, and over 30 shorter motorways. In 1989 the Government
announced that the motorway and trunk road programme was to be more
than doubled to £12,000 million; a number of motorways are to be widened
to accommodate the increasing levels of road traffic.
Considerable investment is in progress in the railways, both to improve
10
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
WALES
inter-city services and to provide new rolling-stock for local services. In 1988
construction work started on a cross-Channel railway tunnel. This will link
Britain directly with the European rail system and also take motorists across
on a drive-on, drive-off vehicle shuttle service using specially designed
shuttle trains. Services through the tunnel are planned to start in 1993.
The major airports are Heathrow (the busiest international airport in the
world) and Gatwick, both serving London; and Manchester, Luton and
Birmingham. A new passenger terminal is due to open in 1991 in connection
with the first phase of the development of Stansted as London’s third
airport.
Tourism and the leisure industries have expanded considerably in recent
years. Over half of expenditure by overseas visitors in Britain takes place in
London, although areas outside London, encouraged by government
policies to expand tourism in the regions, are becoming increasingly popular
with overseas tourists. The South West is the most popular region for
domestic tourism. Each region has its own particular attraction for tourists.
For example, a number of areas, including Northumberland and Cumbria
(whose peaks include Scafell, England’s highest point, at 978 m, 3,210 ft),
have hills and lakes which attract walkers, climbers and riders.
Among London’s main cultural features are over 100 theatrical venues,
including some 50 in the ‘West End’, together with fringe and suburban
theatres; about a dozen major centres for music concerts, ballet and opera;
four major art galleries; a dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller
galleries and museums); and around 100 West End, local and independent
cinemas. Much the same broad range of cultural interests is reflected in
many other cities and towns.
There are many tourist attractions in England. Of those charging for
admission, Madame Tussaud’s (an exhibition in London of waxworks of
famous people), Alton Towers (near Cheadle in Staffordshire) and the
Tower of London received most visitors in 1988 (over 2 million each). Of
those with free admission, Blackpool Pleasure Beach (6-5 million visitors),
the British Museum in London and Albert Dock in Liverpool (over 4 million
each) were the most popular.
Social clubs in most towns and cities attract well-known entertainers. In
addition, many rural or outdoor recreations are strongly supported and
there is active interest in numerous games and sports, many of which were
devised in Britain.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition
of sightseeing visits to the many country houses, gardens and unspoilt rural
and coastal areas. There are seven national parks, six forest parks, 34
designated ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’, ten environmentally
sensitive areas, almost 200 country parks approved by the Countryside
Commission, over 6,000 conservation areas, 800 km (500 miles) of
designated heritage coastline and about 2,000 historic buildings and over
3,000 gardens listed by the English Tourist Board. Newer developments
include the opening of safari and wildlife parks and a growing number of
‘theme’ parks, all offering family activities and entertainments. Many regions
and towns have associations with the great English writers and artists, such as
William Shakespeare (Stratford-upon-Avon), William Wordsworth (the Lake
District), Arnold Bennett (Stoke-on-Trent), the Bronte sisters (Yorkshire),
Thomas Hardy (Dorset) and John Constable (Essex).
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high
plateau and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river
»
LAND AND PEOPLE
11
valleys. The highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north west; the
highest peak is Snowdon (1,085 m, 3,560 ft). The lower-lying ground is
largely confined to the relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of
the river valleys. The main areas of settlement are in the southern valleys
and coastal areas, where two-thirds of the population live. The chief ur¬
ban centres are Cardiff, Swansea, Newport and Wrexham. Wales is a
principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, was invested by the
Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon Castle in 1969, when
he was 20.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken, according to the 1981
census, by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west.
The Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures adopted since the 1960s
have helped to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin. They
include recognising the equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts,
the encouragement of bilingual education in schools, and the extended use
of Welsh for official purposes and in broadcasting. Welsh-language
television programmes are transmitted in Wales by Sianel 4 Cymru (Channel
4 Wales). A Welsh Language Board was established in 1988 to advise on
matters relating to the Welsh language.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the
Methodist and Baptist churches. Methodism in particular spread rapidly in
Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a popular
movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in
industrial communities.
Government The country returns 38 Members of Parliament and there are special
arrangements for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years the
industrial communities of Wales have tended to support the Labour Party in
elections, ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. Wales has 25 Labour
Members of Parliament, 7 Conservative, 3 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist)
and 3 Liberal Democrat. Substantial administrative autonomy is centred on
the Secretary of State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet and has
wide-ranging responsibilities relating to the economy, welfare services and
the provision of amenities. The headquarters of the administration is the
Welsh Office in Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In 1979
proposals for the establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to
take over policy-making and executive powers from central government
were rejected in a referendum held in Wales. Local government is exercised
through a system of elected authorities similar to that in England, and the
legal system is identical with the English one.
The Economy 4 he south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the
industrial revolution in the middle of the nineteenth century. However, the
economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel and tinplate, and
contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s, resulting in severe
employment problems and substantial emigration.
Notable features of the past three decades have been the continuing
contraction of coalmining and iron and steel production (although Wales
still accounts for about one-third of Britain’s steel production), the advent of
a more diverse range of manufacturing industries and the growth of service
industries. Wales is developing as an important centre for electronics in
Britain, and several new high-technology businesses in electronics and
related industries have been established. Inward investment by overseas
companies has been considerable, and there are over 280 overseas-owned or
12
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
associated firms in Wales, employing about 55,000 people and accounting
for around one in five jobs in the manufacturing sector. The financial and
business services sector is expanding rapidly, as companies such as
Rothschild’s, the Trustee Savings Bank and the National Provident
Institution have relocated major parts of their operation to Wales, providing
support for industrial development. Government relocation has also bene¬
fited employment in Wales; for example, in late 1989 the Government’s
Property Services Agency decided to expand its Cardiff-based functions,
creating 200 new jobs. The Welsh unemployment rate fell faster in 1989
than that of any other area of Britain.
South Wales remains the principal industrial area, but new industries and
firms have been introduced in north-east Wales, around Wrexham and
Deeside, and light industry has also been attracted to the towns in the rural
areas in mid- and north Wales. A development corporation was set up in
1987 to stimulate the regeneration of the Cardiff Bay area, and in 1988 the
Government announced a programme designed to improve economic,
environmental and social conditions in the south Wales valleys. Regional aid
in the valleys has covered projects involving 11,800 new jobs and private
investment of about £300 million in the first three years of the programme.
The Welsh Development Agency is investing about £76 million in factory
building, and it is expected that a total of 960 hectares (2,400 acres) of
derelict land in the valleys will be cleared. More than 1,000 companies based
in Wales have made use of business reviews and consultants’ advisory
services under the Government’s Enterprise Wales initiative, launched in
1988. An investment of £14 million in environmental improvement schemes
was announced by the Government in August 1990.
Agriculture occupies about 80 per cent of the land area, the main activities
being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the
lowlands. Wales accounts for about 13 per cent of Forestry Commission area
in Britain and over 20 per cent of Forestry Commission timber production.
Wales produces about 6 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal and 10 per
cent of opencast production, including all of its anthracite. The biggest
pumped-storage power station in Europe is at Dinorwig, while there are
nuclear power stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd.
Good communications exist in the south, with motorway links across the
Severn Bridge to southern England and the Midlands, and high-speed rail
services to a number of destinations in England. The A55, the main road
along the north Wales coast, is being upgraded and a second crossing of the
Severn is planned. Transatlantic flights to New York from Cardiff-Wales
airport were introduced in 1989.
There has been expansion in the tourist and catering trades and in some
areas of public administration. With its coastal resorts, and three national
parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the Pembrokeshire Coast), as
well as other areas of picturesque hill, lake and mountain country, Wales
attracts many tourists, especially for outdoor holidays.
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest
in Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh
National Opera has an international reputation. The special festivals of
Wales, known as eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. T he
largest is the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in
Welsh, and consisting of competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry.
The town of Llangollen has extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all
over the world in the annual International Musical Eisteddfod. Famous
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
SCOTLAND
Government
modern Welsh artists have included the opera singers Sir Geraint Evans and
Dame Gwyneth Jones. An active local press includes a number of Welsh
language publications. Great interest is aroused by the annual rugby football
competition in which sides from Wales, England, Scotland, Ireland and
France take part.
Proposals under the Environmental Protection Bill would result in the
creation of a new body, the Countryside Council for Wales. This would
combine the functions of the Nature Conservancy Council and the
Countryside Commission in Wales.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services and
education (except at university level) are provided mainly through the local
authorities. Educational provision is similar to that in England, except for
the use of Welsh in some schools, particularly in the Welsh-speaking, largely
rural, areas. The collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises
six member institutions.
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total
area of the country; the central lowlands, containing three-quarters of the
population and most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland; and
the southern uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on
England. The highest mountains are the Grampians in the central
highlands, with Ben Nevis (1,343 m, 4,406 ft) the highest peak. The chief
cities are the capital, Edinburgh; the main industrial centre, Glasgow; and
the two regional centres, Aberdeen and Dundee.
The period from 1750 onwards has seen considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. However, the rate slowed
markedly in the 1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and
there was inward migration to the north east of Scotland, although the
outflow of people from Strathclyde has continued at a lower level. In the mid¬
nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-scale
immigration from Ireland.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was
also one of stability and economic progress, and of achievements in many
fields. Among famous Scots were David Hume, Robert Burns, Sir Walter
Scott, Adam Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord
Kelvin, Alexander Graham Bell, James Clerk Maxwell and Marie Slopes.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690,
has complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in form, being governed by a
hierarchy of church courts, each of which includes lay people.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the
British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for
Scotland where appropriate. The 72 Scottish seats in the House of Commons
are represented by 48 Labour Members of Parliament, 10 Conservative,
9 Liberal Democrat, 4 Scottish National and 1 Independent Labour. Since
1959 Scotland, like Wales, has had a majority of Labour Members of
Parliament. Administrative tasks relating to a wide range of economic and
social functions are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, a
member of the Cabinet, working through the Scottish Office, with its
administrative headquarters in Edinburgh and an office in London. A
proposal for an elected assembly for Scotland, on which a referendum was
held in 1979, failed to gain the support of the required 40 per cent of the
14
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
electorate to bring it into effect, even though a majority of those voting gave
it their approval. Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis
broadly similar to that in England and Wales but established by separate
legislation. However, the three islands councils (for Orkney, Shetland and
the Western Isles) are single-tier authorities.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in
civil law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales,
stemming, in part, from the adoption of elements of other European legal
systems, based on Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
Scotland has experienced the same pressure on its traditional industries as
the north of England and Wales. However, over the past decades its
economy has been transformed, with a developing oil and gas industry, and
investment by overseas companies making significant contributions to the
growth of modern, technologically based industries. Under the Enterprise
and New Towns (Scotland) Act 1990, the training, enterprise functions
and environmental improvement activities administered by the Scottish
Development Agency and the Training Agency will be brought together in a
new agency known as Scottish Enterprise. Similarly, Highlands and Islands
Enterprise will from April 1991 be formed by merging the functions of the
Highlands and Islands Development Board and the Training Agency. Both
bodies will be expected to contract with a network of employer-led local
enterprise companies throughout Scotland, which will assess the needs of
their local economies and promote appropriate economic development and
environmental and training support to allow their localities to thrive.
The electronics sector has greatly contributed to the recent development
of Scottish manufacturing industry, providing 13 per cent of its employment
and 18 per cent of its output and investment. Between 1979 and 1989
Scottish electronics output more than quadrupled. The industry has
particular strengths in communications and defence equipment, electronic
data processing and control, and industrial instrumentation; the
manufacture of electronic components accounts for much of the sector’s
activity. By mid-1988 about 230 plants were employing some 45,200
workers, one of the biggest concentrations of the electronics industry in
Western Europe. Scotland accounts for more than half of Britain’s output of
integrated circuits and for over 10 per cent of European output. Many of the
world’s leading electronics companies manufacture in Scotland. The needs
of large equipment and component makers are serviced by an extensive
network of smaller companies supplying both components and support
facilities.
Since the early 1970s the Scottish economy has also benefited from the
growth of offshore-related industries following the discovery of oil and gas
under the northern North Sea. Up to about 100,000 jobs are estimated to
have arisen directly or indirectly as a result of North Sea activities.
Traditional industries, such as coal, steel and shipbuilding, have ex¬
perienced a long-term decline in employment. Other traditional manu¬
factures, such as high-quality tweeds and other textiles, and food and drink
products, remain important. There are over 100 whisky distilleries in
Scotland and the industry is a major export earner, with exports of almost
£1,500 million in 1989.
Northern and north-east Scotland (particularly Aberdeen) have benefited
most from offshore developments. However, Strathclyde, by far the most
populous region, has experienced serious industrial decline and population
loss, particularly in Glasgow. In the remainder of the central belt and in the
five new towns (East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
Cultural and
Social Life
Cumbernauld, which have benefited from inward investment and the
growth of the electronics industry), trends have generally been more
favourable. In Lothian the large concentration of financial and other service
industries centred on Edinburgh has been a helpful influence. Problems of
inner city dereliction and decay and peripheral housing estates in Scotland
are being tackled with urban renewal projects designed to stimulate
economic development and improve the local environment.
Scotland has about one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but 71 per
cent consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 11 per cent of the
agricultural area is used for crops, and 58 per cent of this is under barley.
Scotland accounts for nearly half of Britain’s forest area and for over one-
third of timber production; the bulk of new planting in Britain takes place in
Scotland, most of it in the upland and mountain areas. Fishing remains an
important activity; more than 75 per cent of total landings of fish in Britain
are made at Scottish ports.
In Scotland nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher
proportion of energy than in any other part of Britain. Once Scotland’s fifth
nuclear power station—the 1,400 megawatt Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor at
Torness (Lothian)—comes fully on stream, about 60 per cent of Scotland’s
electricity requirements will be met by nuclear power. Hydro-power and
other renewables contribute about 15 per cent of Scottish electricity needs.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in
many areas, particularly in the north and north east, owing to the stimulus of
the offshore oil industry, of road- and bridge-building programmes and the
improvement of ferry links to the Scottish islands. The offshore oil industry
has also encouraged expansion in financial and business services, which have
traditionally been strong in Scotland and are now one of the fastest-growing
sectors of the Scottish economy. Tourism, which makes a significant
contribution to the economy and to employment in Scotland as a whole, is
estimated to generate, both directly and indirectly, nearly 132,000jobs.
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
International Festival, one of the world’s leading cultural events. Notable
performing arts bodies are the Scottish National Orchestra, Scottish Opera,
Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque Ensemble and
the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses excellent
collections of the fine and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries of
Scotland, the Royal Museums of Scotland and the City of Glasgow Museum
and Art Galleries (including the Burrell collection, opened in 1983). The
Government announced in 1989 that it would be funding the construction of
a new Museum of Scotland, to be sited in Edinburgh. Glasgow was desig¬
nated as European City of Culture for 1990.
Scots Gaelic is the indigenous language, with its own literary background.
A language of ancient Celtic origin, it is spoken by some 80,000 people,
mainly in the islands and north west of Scotland.
An active press includes six national daily morning newspapers, six local
evening newspapers and four national Sunday newspapers. Television
programmes are produced by BBC Scotland and by three independent
companies, covering the highland, lowland and border regions. BBC Radio
Scotland covers most of the population.
The educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland,
helping many Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences. There
are eight universities, of which four (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and
Edinburgh) were established in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, while
the other four have been established since 1964.
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government
Background to
Civil Disturbances
Direct Rule and
Political Initiatives
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Over 57 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, a higher
proportion than in either England or Wales. The tenure pattern in Scotland is
very different from that in the rest of Britain, with 42 per cent of housing
rented from the public sector, compared with 25 per cent for Great Britain as a
whole. As in the rest of Britain, there has been a noticeable growth in owner-
occupied housing in recent years.
Scotland’s cultural and historic associations, its varied scenic beauty, and the
opportunities for sport and recreation are particular attractions. Golf originated
in Scotland, and courses at St Andrews, Gleneagles, Turnberry, Muirfield,
Troon and Prestwick are internationally renowned. Skiing is growing in
importance, with centres at Aviemore, Glenshee, Glen Coe, Aonach Mhor and
the Lecht, and further developments are planned. Under the Environmental
Protection Bill, a separate Nature Conservancy Council would be created for
Scotland; the existing council covers all of Great Britain.
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It
has a 488-km (303-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish Republic.
At its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (381 sq km, 147
sq miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough,
including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan.
The Mourne Mountains, rising sharply in the south east, include Slieve
Donard, Northern Ireland’s highest peak (852 m, 2,796 ft).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants of
Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the
seventeenth century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional
loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder,
over a third, are Irish in origin and mainly Roman Catholic; many of them are
nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic.
For 50 years from 1921 Northern Ireland had its own devolved Parliament in
which the mainly Protestant Unionists consistently formed the majority and
therefore constituted the Government after successive elections. Nationalists,
who are predominantly Roman Catholic, resented this domination and their
effective exclusion from political office. An active and articulate civil rights
movement emerged during the late 1960s. Reforms were made but sectarian
disturbances developed, which required the introduction of the Army in 1969
to support the police in keeping the peace. Subsequently, sectarian divisions
were exploited by the actions of terrorists from both sides, but most notably by
the Provisional Irish Republican Army, who claimed to be protecting the
Roman Catholic minority.
From 1969 the Northern Ireland Government enacted reforms aimed at
securing the minority’s right to an effective voice in public bodies. A police
authority representative of all sections of the community was created and
commissioners became responsible for investigating complaints of mal¬
administration, including discrimination, against government departments and
local authorities. A central housing executive became responsible for all public
sector house-building and the allocation of houses according to need. Local
government was restructured and electoral law, including the franchise and the
arrangements for reviewing electoral boundaries, was reformed.
Despite this reform programme, the inter-communal violence continued and
the British Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism and
achieving political progress would be for it to take over responsibility for law
and order in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland Government felt unable
to accept this and resigned; in 1972 direct rule began, with a United
LAND AND PEOPLE
17
Kingdom Cabinet minister becoming responsible for the functions
previously exercised by the Northern Ireland Government.
Several attempts have been made to secure a stable and effective devolved
government supported by both sides of the community. The most recent was
the election in 1982 of a new 78-member Assembly charged with
responsibility for making proposals to devolve powers on a basis which
would command widespread acceptance throughout the community. It also
performed scrutinising and consultative functions by commenting upon
draft legislation and initiating reports on such matters as industry and
education. Some members refused to take their seats on election. The
unionist parties, who had a majority in the Assembly, decided not to fulfil the
Assembly’s statutory functions in March 1986 in protest at the Anglo-Irish
Agreement (see below), and in June 1986 the Government dissolved the
Assembly.
The Government’s policy continues to be based on two fundamental
principles. First, that there will be no change in Northern Ireland’s con¬
stitutional status as part of the United Kingdom without the consent of a
majority of people in Northern Ireland. A ‘border poll’ in 1973 showed that
a clear majority wished to remain part of the United Kingdom, and in
subsequent elections parties which support that position have continued to
receive the majority of votes. Secondly, the Government continues to believe
that a devolved form of administration would best meet Northern Ireland’s
needs, provided that it is acceptable to both parts of the community. To this
end dialogue has been continuing since late 1989 between government and
the local constitutional political parties to explore the extent of the common
ground that now appears to exist between them. The Government hopes
that this approach will be a prelude to discussions about arrangements for
the transfer of powers and responsibilities to locally elected representatives.
Northern Ireland returns 17 members to the United Kingdom Parliament.
In the last general election in 1987 the seats (and votes) were distributed as
follows: Ulster Unionist 9 (37-8 per cent), Democratic Unionist 3 (11-7 per
cent), Ulster Popular Unionist 1 (2-5 per cent), Social Democratic and
Labour 3 (2 M per cent), and Sinn Fein 1 (11-4 per cent); the last-mentioned
member has not taken his seat. The Alliance Party received 10 per cent of
the votes but no seats.
The Anglo-Irish In November 1985 the United Kingdom and the Irish Republic concluded
Agreement the Anglo-Irish Agreement, aimed at promoting peace and stability in
Northern Ireland. The Agreement is binding in international law. It affirms
that ‘any change in the status of Northern Ireland would only come about
with the consent of a majority of the people of Northern Ireland’ but
recognises that the majority wish is for no change in status. The Agreement
says that, ‘if in the future a majority of the people of Northern Ireland
clearly wish for and formally consent to the establishment of a united
Ireland’, both governments ‘will introduce and support in the respective
Parliaments legislation to give effect to that wish’.
Under the Agreement an Intergovernmental Conference has been
established to deal on a regular basis with political, security and legal matters
and with the promotion of cross border co-operation. As specified in the
Agreement, the Irish Government can use the machinery of the Conference
to put forward its views on matters relating to Northern Ireland provided
that these are not the responsibility of a devolved administration. The
Conference, however, has no executive role or decision-making powers, as
the Agreement makes clear: ‘There is no derogation from the sovereignty of
either the United Kingdom Government or the Irish Government, and each
18
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Human Rights
and Security
Policy
retains responsibility for the decisions and administration of government
within its own jurisdiction.’ A review of the Conference, carried out by both
governments and completed in 1989, agreed that it had proved its value and
that it would be developed further.
The Agreement was generally welcomed by the minority community, but
there is considerable antipathy among Unionists. Their representatives
maintain that the Agreement infringes the sovereignty of the British
Government over Northern Ireland and that it is a step towards a united
Ireland. The Government believes that this opposition is misguided, as
sovereignty over Northern Ireland is not affected by the Agreement (see
above). In its view, the Agreement offers benefits to both traditions in
Northern Ireland without detracting from the rights of either.
The Government is committed to the protection of human rights in
Northern Ireland. Britain is a signatory to the European Convention on
Human Rights and allows individual petition. Legislation passed in 1973
outlaws discrimination by public bodies, including the Government, on the
grounds of religious belief or political opinion. It also set up the independent
Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights, which advises the
Government on the effectiveness of anti-discrimination legislation and on
other human rights issues. In 1987 a central community relations unit was
established within the Government to advise on all aspects of relations
between the two traditions in Northern Ireland. Its main roles are to advise
on the impact of government policies and programmes on community
relations and to bring forward ideas on future action.
Discrimination in employment by public and private employers is also
illegal and the Fair Employment Agency was established in 1976 to
investigate complaints and enforce fair practices. The Fair Employment
(Northern Ireland) Act 1989 outlawed indirect discrimination and replaced
the Agency by a Fair Employment Commission responsible for investigating
employment practices and issuing legally enforceable directions requiring an
employer to take specific measures. The Act requires employers actively to
promote and practise equality of opportunity and to submit annual returns
on the religious composition of their workforces to the Commission. A new
Fair Emplovment Tribunal adjudicates on complaints about religious or
political discrimination and has the power to enforce the Commission’s
directions. New sanctions against employers in breach of their statutory
obligations include the withholding of government grants and public sector
contracts. A code of practice has been drawn up to provide advice to
employers, trade unions, employment agencies and employees to help them
comply with the Act.
While terrorism continues, certain emergency powers are in force. These
include special powers of arrest in respect of certain serious crimes, non-jury
courts to try those offences, and the proscription of organisations involved in
terrorism. There has been much concern to reconcile these powers as far as
possible with respect for individual liberties, and the powers are balanced by
specific safeguards. The measures are temporary, need annual renewal by
Parliament and are subject to annual independent review.
Most traditional rights, including freedom from persecution and freedom
of speech, remain in force. However, in the belief that terrorists should not
be allowed to draw support and sustenance from access to television and
radio, the Government has banned the broadcasting of direct statements by
representatives of proscribed organisations or their supporters.
The security forces are accountable to the law; if they break it, their
members are liable to prosecution like any other members of the
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
community. In addition, there is an independent police complaints
commission to supervise police investigations into more serious complaints
and, at its discretion, the investigation of others. Northern Ireland’s legal
system, and the safeguards it enshrines, are broadly similar to those in
England and Wales.
The use of violence as a means of overcoming political differences has
been condemned by the overwhelming majority of people living in Northern
Ireland and, although terrorism continues, the overall level of violence is
much lower than in the early 1970s. Since 1969 nearly 2,800 people have
been killed as a result of the terrorist campaign. The police take the primary
role in maintaining order; the Army’s task is one of assisting the civil
authorities, and the number of soldiers on service has been considerably
reduced. Terrorists are brought to justice through the courts and are tried
for criminal offences and not political beliefs.
The Economy Population and industry are concentrated on the eastern seaboard, while the
rest of Northern Ireland remains predominantly rural and reliant mainly
upon agriculture for its livelihood. Since the end of the second world war two
dominant trends have been apparent in the economy. First, employment in
the traditionally important industries (shipbuilding, linen and agriculture)
has declined. Secondly, there has been fast growth in the numbers seeking
work, reflecting the relatively high rate of natural increase of the population,
which is only partly offset by emigration from the province. These trends
have combined to produce an unemployment rate in Northern Ireland
persistently higher than in any other region in Britain. Between June 1987
and June 1990 the unemployment rate fell from 18 percent to 13-6 per cent.
As with other developed economies, there has been a switch in emphasis
from agriculture and manufacturing towards services. However, agriculture
(predominantly livestock and livestock products) still accounts for 7 per cent
of civil employment, over three times the proportion in Britain as a whole.
Belfast has Britain’s largest shipyard, and aerospace engineering is one of
Northern Ireland’s biggest manufacturing industries. Other industrial
activities include the manufacture of textile machinery and a wide range of
engineering products, tobacco and clothing. There has also been extensive
development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronics, tele¬
communications equipment, carpets, synthetic rubber, and food processing
and packaging. The linen industry is currently enjoying a revival and farms
are experimenting with growing flax.
Governments have offered more generous incentives than are available in
the rest of the country to encourage new investment both from within
Britain and from overseas. In 1989-90 the various industrial development
agencies promoted almost 11,100 jobs in manufacturing, craft and tradeable
services; total investment associated with these jobs was over £464-4 million.
The establishment of enterprise zones in Belfast and Londonderry and the
designation of Aldergrove airport as a freeport serve as additional incentives
to investment.
In 1988 the Making Belfast Work initiative was launched to address the
particular social, economic and environmental problems in the most
disadvantaged areas of Belfast. For a five-year period which started in 1988-
89, an additional £92-5 million has been allocated to create jobs and
businesses, and to improve levels of skill, the physical environment, and
health and living conditions. The Government is seeking to help local
communities help themselves and to enlist the support of the private sector.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate
output, productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap
20
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
between living standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest ofBritain.
Manufacturing output increased by 8 per cent between 1983 and 1988 while
output per employee hour rose by 7 per cent over this period. Gross
domestic product per person rose from just under two-thirds of the British
average in 1963 to some 76 per cent in 1988. Average earnings in 1989 were
around 86 per cent of those in Great Britain.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the
rest of the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with
England, Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those
in Great Britain, to meet the cost of security measures and to compensate for
the natural disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the British
Government’s subvention to Northern Ireland in 1989-90 was £1,711
million.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement expressed the intention of both signatories to
promote the economic and social development of those areas which had
suffered from the instability of recent years and to try to secure international
support for this work. In 1986 the British and Irish Governments signed an
agreement setting up the International Fund for Ireland and donations have
been received from the United States, Canada, New Zealand and the
European Community. The Fund will have committed over £133 million by
the end of 1990 to projects covering business enterprise, tourism, agriculture
and fisheries, urban development, training and exchanges overseas,
industrial promotion, and science and technology. Two investment
companies, one on each side of the border, provide venture capital to new
businesses. Three-quarters of the Fund is being spent in Northern Ireland
and the rest in the Irish Republic’s border counties.
Northern Ireland’s landscape and natural features, cultural traditions and
festivals continue to offer special attractions; it received some 1 million
visitors in 1989. For many North Americans the land from which their
forebears emigrated (a number of United States presidents have been
descended from Northern Ireland families) has a unique interest. The story
of this contribution to American life, the history of Northern Ireland, and
other aspects of its culture, including its dialects and strong literary tradition,
are recorded in the Ulster-American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum and the
Ulster Folk and Transport Museum.
The Government provides financial support for arts and cultural activities
related to the Irish language. Over 20,000 secondary school pupils currently
study Irish; full degree courses and research programmes are available at
Northern Ireland’s two universities.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland is a major contributor to cultural
life. The annual Belfast Festival at Queen’s University is the second largest
international festival in Britain. Among musicians who have achieved
international distinction are the flautist James Galway, the soprano Heather
Harper and the pianist Barry Douglas.
The National Health Service provides hospital and practitioner services.
Health and personal social services correspond fairly closely to those in the
rest of Britain, although the administrative framework is different.
Although publicly maintained schools are open to children of all religions,
in practice Protestants and Roman Catholics are for the most part educated
in separate schools. In recent years a small number of integrated schools
have been established to provide education for Protestant and Catholic
children together. These schools began as independent schools and qualified
for public funding on the same basis as other non-state schools only when
their long-term viability had been adequately demonstrated. Under the
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
POPULATION
Birth Rates
Education Reform (NI) Order 1989, new integrated schools may receive
public funding from their inception. Additional provisions enable existing
schools to seek integrated status if a majority of the pupils’ parents vote to do
so in a secret ballot. Contrary to developments in the rest of Britain,
emphasis on the comprehensive principle in secondary schools has been very
small. Links between the two universities and industry are well developed.
Considerable progress has been made in improving housing and the
urban environment, notably in Belfast. In the last ten years the housing stock
in Northern Ireland has increased by about 12 per cent and owner-
occupation from 51 per cent to more than 60 per cent. Major town centre
developments are taking place in Belfast, Londonderry and other towns,
providing greatly improved shopping facilities.
Local television and radio programmes are broadcast and there is a local
press; national radio and television networks are also received, and the
national press is sold widely. Sport has an important role in the community,
and many world-class sportsmen and sportswomen have come from
Northern Ireland, including Barry McGuigan and Dave McAuley (boxing),
Dennis Taylor and Alex Higgins (snooker), Joey Dunlop (motor-cycling) and
Avril Malley (judo).
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the
second half of the twentieth century. As in many other countries, underlying
causes include a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce
rate, widening educational opportunities, technological progress and a
higher standard of living.
With 57 million people in 1989, Britain ranks sixteenth in the world in terms
of population. This compares with 38-2 million in 1901, about 9 million at
the end of the seventeenth century and some 2 million at the end of the
eleventh century. Early figures are based on contemporary estimates, but
from the beginning of the nineteenth century relatively plentiful and reliable
information is available, mainly from the compulsory registration since 1837
of births, marriages and deaths, and the censuses. These have been taken
regularly every ten years since 1801, except in 1941, when, because of war,
there was no census; the next census will be in 1991. After 1974 the
population fell slightly for about four years, for the first time (other than in
war) since records began, reflecting a temporary decline in the birth rate.
Since then a slow upward trend has been resumed. Projections suggest that
population growth will continue at a low rate. Britain’s total population is
expected, on mid-1988 based projections, to be 57-5 million in 1991, 59-2
million in 2001 and 60 million in 2011.
In 1989 there were 777,300 live births in Britain, 10,300 fewer than in 1988.
Births outnumbered deaths (657,700) by 119,600. The total period fertility
rate (an indication of the average family size) remains below 2T, the level
leading to the long-term replacement of the population, although it is
projected to increase from 1-8 in 1989 to 2 for women born in or after 1980.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate in
recent years (13-6 live births per 1,000 population in 1989). The trends
towards later marriage and towards postponing births have led to an increase
in the average age of women having children (27-3 years in 1989 compared
with 26-7 in 1979). Another feature is the current preference for smaller
Mortality
Marriage and
Divorce
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
families than in the past, which has led to a significant decline in the
proportion of families with four or more children. In 1988, 21 per cent of
households in Great Britain consisted of a married couple with one or two
children only, compared with 5 per cent of households which consisted of a
married couple with three or more children.
Contraception has become more widespread and effective, making it
easier to plan families, and voluntary sterilisation of men and women has
also become more common. Of all pregnancies in England and Wales in
1988, 41'4 per cent were conceived outside marriage and of these over one-
third were terminated by legal abortion.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 72 years and for a woman
78 years, compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901.
Life expectancy in the older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 40 years,
at about 12 per 1,000 population. However, there has been a considerable
decline in mortality at most ages, particularly among children and young
adults. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under one year old per
1,000 live births) was 8-4 in 1989; neonatal mortality (deaths of infants under
four weeks old per 1,000 live births) was 4-7 in 1989; and maternal mortality
is about 0 07 per 1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in
personal hygiene and the smaller size of families. Deaths resulting from
infectious diseases (notably tuberculosis) have virtually disappeared. As in
other countries the spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome) is causing concern; by the end of August 1990, 3,688 cases of
AIDS had been reported, of which 1,975 had resulted in the patient s death.
Deaths caused by circulatory diseases (including heart attacks and strokes)
now account for nearly half of all deaths; mortality from heart disease in
Britain remains high compared with that of other developed countries. The
next largest cause of death is cancer (responsible for nearly one-quarter of
deaths). Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of illness and
death in Britain, accounting for some 100,000 premature deaths a year, but
there has been a significant decline in the incidence of smoking, with 33 per
cent of adult males and 30 per cent of adult females smoking cigarettes in
1988, as against 52 and 41 per cent respectively in 1972. In recent years
there have been major initiatives to reduce drug abuse in Britain. For
example, locally based drug prevention teams were announced in October
1989, to be set up in the areas most at risk from drug misuse.
In 1988 there were 394,000 marriages in Britain, of which 36 per cent were
remarriages (of one or both parties), compared with about 20 per cent in
1971 and 14 per cent in 1961. Some 33 per cent of all marriages in 1988
were remarriages where one or both parties had been divorced. Of the
population aged 16 or over in England and Wales in 1988, 59 per cent were
married, 26 per cent single, 9 per cent widowed and 6 per cent divorced. The
trend of the 1960s towards earlier marriage was reversed at the beginning of
the 1970s, since when there has been a slow increase in the average age for
first marriages, which in England and Wales is now 26 for men and 24 for
women.
In 1988 about 13 decrees of divorce were made absolute lor every 1,000
married couples in England and Wales, compared with two per 1,000 in
1961. The rates are lower in Scotland and Northern Ireland. In 1988 about
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
Age and Sex
Structure
Distribution of
Population
153,000 divorces were granted in England and Wales; the proportion
granted to wives was about 71 per cent. The average age of people at the
time of divorce in England and Wales is now about 38 for men and 35 for
women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries,
has been a considerable increase in cohabitation. Over one-quarter of
women in Great Britain marrying during the period 1980 to 1984, where the
marriage was the first for both parties, had lived with their husbands before
marriage (compared with 7 per cent for those married in the early 1970s)
and about 21 per cent of non-married women aged 18 to 49 were cohabiting
during 1988. Cohabitation occurs more frequently for separated or divorced
women than for single women. There is some evidence of a growing number
of stable non-married relationships in that half of all births outside marriage
(which now account for 26 per cent of live births in Britain compared with
6 per cent in 1961) are registered by both parents giving a single address as
the usual place of residence.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last
decade, there has been a noticeable change in the age structure, particularly
a decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the
proportion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The
estimated age distribution of the British population in mid-1988 was roughly
as follows: under 16 years, about 20 per cent; 16-64, 64 per cent; and 65 and
over, 16 per cent. Some 18 per cent of the population were over the normal
retirement ages (65 for men and 60 for women), compared with 15 per cent
in 1961.
In mid-1989 there were an estimated 29-3 million females and 27-9 million
males in Britain, representing a ratio of over 105 females to every 100 males.
There are about 5 per cent more male than female births every year.
Because of the higher mortality of men at all ages, however, there is a
turning point, at about 50 years of age, beyond which the number of women
exceeds the number of men. This imbalance increases with age so that there
are many more women among the elderly.
The population density is about 236 inhabitants per sq km, which is well
above the European Community average of 143 per sq km. England is the most
densely populated, with 366 people per sq km (Greater London having a
density of 4,288 people per sq km), and Scotland the least densely populated,
with 66 people per sq km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 138 and 112
people per sq km respectively.
Table 1.2 gives figures for some of Britain’s largest, mainly urban,
administrative districts. About half of the population lives in a belt across
England, with south Lancashire and West Yorkshire at one end, the London
area at the other, and the industrialised Midlands at its centre. Other areas with
large populations are: the central lowlands of Scotland; north-east England
from north of the river Tyne down to the river Tees; south-east Wales; the
Bristol area; and the English Channel coast from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards.
Since the nineteenth century there has been a general trend, especially in
London, for people to move away from the congested urban centres into the
suburbs. There has also been a geographical redistribution of the population
from Scotland and the northern regions of England to the South East, East
Anglia, the South West and the East Midlands. Another feature has been an
increase in the rate of retirement migration, the main recipient areas (where in
some towns the elderly can form over one-third of the population) being the
south coast of England and East Anglia.
24
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Migration
Nationality
Table 1.2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Areas, Mid-1989
Greater London
Birmingham
Leeds
Glasgow
Sheffield
Bradford
Liverpool
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Coventry
Belfast
Cardiff
Area
  — Population
sq km sq miles (thousands)
1,580 609-7 6,756-4
264 102-0 992-5
562 217-0 711-7
198 76-3 695-6
368 141-9 526-6
370 142-9 467-7
113 43-6 465-9
116 44-9 443-6
261 100-6 433-2
110 42-3 372-6
97 37-3 304-1
140 54-0 295-6
120 46-3 284-9
From 1983 to 1987 the earlier trend of net population loss from Britain due
to migration had reversed, but in 1988 there was again a net loss of 21,000.
Between 1984 and 1988 some 998,000 people left Britain to live abroad and
about 1-1 million came from overseas to live in Britain, so that net
immigration increased the population by about 114,000. Of the 237,000
departing residents in 1988, 26 per cent left for Australia, Canada or New
Zealand. 15 per cent for other Commonwealth countries, 25 per cent for
other European Community countries, 13 per cent for the United States and
6 per cent for the Middle East. Of the 216,000 new residents, 17 per cent
came from Australia, Canada or New Zealand, 19 pei cent from other
Commonwealth countries, 24 per cent from other European Community
countries. 11 per cent from the United States and 8 per cent from the Middle
East The number of migrants from the European Community countries
more than doubled between 1974-78 and 1984-88, while those going to
these countries increased by only 50 per cent. There was also a 50 per cent
increase both in the number of residents from the United States moving to
Britain and in those moving from Britain to the United States over the same
period. In 1988 about 41 per cent of those coming into Britain, and about 60
per cent of those going abroad, were British citizens.
Nationality legislation is embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981, which
came into force on 1 January 1983. Under this Act, citizenship of the United
Kingdom and Colonies was replaced by three citizenships: British citizenship
for people closely connected with Britain, the Channel Islands, and the Isle ol
Man- British Dependent Territories citizenship for people connected with the
dependencies; and British Overseas citizenship for those citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who did not acquire either of the other citizenships.
Almost all citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had the right ot
abode in Britain when the Act came into force acquired British citizenship.
'International migration statistics used here exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Immigration
British citizenship is acquired automatically at birth by a child born in
Britain if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or is settled in
Britain. A child adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a British citizen. A
child born abroad to a British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or registered
in Britain is a British citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the citizenship of
a child born abroad to a British citizen in Crown service, certain related
ser\ ices, or in service under a European Community institution.
British citizenship may also be acquired by registration of certain children
born in Britain who do not automatically acquire such citizenship at birth or
who have been born abroad to a parent who is a citizen by descent; by British
Dependent Territories citizens, British Overseas citizens, British subjects
under the Act (three very limited categories) and British protected persons
after five years’ residence in Britain (except for people from Gibraltar, who
may be registered without residence); and by naturalisation for Com¬
monwealth citizens, citizens of the Irish Republic, and foreign nationals. The
British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983 conferred British citizenship
(with effect from 1 January 1983) on those Falkland Islanders who did not
acquire it under the 1981 Act. For naturalisation, which is at the Home
Secretary’s discretion, five years’ residence, good character and sufficient
knowledge of English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic are required, except for the
spouse of a British citizen, who needs only three years’ residence and no
language qualification.
Special arrangements covering the status of British Dependent Territories
citizens connected with Hong Kong when the territory returns to the
People’s Republic of China in 1997 are made by the Hong Kong (British
Nationality) Order 1986. Under this, such citizens are entitled, before 1997,
to acquire a status known as British National (Overseas) and to hold a
passport in that status.
In 1988, 65,000 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation or
registration in Britain.
Immigration into Britain is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971 (as
amended by the British Nationality Act 1981 and the Immigration Act 1988)
and the Immigration Rules made in accordance with the Act. British citizens
under the British Nationality Act 1981 and those Commonwealth citizens
who had the right of abode before 1 January 1983 (when the 1981 Act came
into force) have the right of abode and are not subject to immigration
control. Those who do not have this right require permission to enter and
remain in Britain, which is given in accordance with the Rules. These Rules,
which are subject to the scrutiny of Parliament, set out the requirements to
be met by those seeking entry, whether in a temporary capacity, for example,
as students or visitors, or with the intention of taking employment or setting
up in business or for settlement as the dependants of a person already settled
in Britain. All nationals from certain countries require prior entry clearance
before they can enter Britain. Other nationals subject to immigration control
require entry clearance when coming to settle in Britain and in certain other
circumstances. Visas and other entry clearances are normally obtained from
the nearest British diplomatic post in a person’s home country.
In accordance with Britain’s obligations under the Treaty of Rome,
European Community nationals do not require entry clearances, nor are
they subject to restrictions on their freedom to take or seek work. Britain
similarly respects its obligations under the United Nations Convention and
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. These include granting refugees
the right of access to courts and the right to work, to education, to public
relief and to freedom of religion.
26
THE ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
Housing,
Transport
and the
Environment
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1989, 49,100 people were accepted for settlement, about the same as in
1988. A quarter of these were from the South Asian sub-continent. Wives
and children accounted for nearly half the total acceptances.
This section deals (to some extent in broad and informal terms) with social
developments affecting many sections of the population.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in
families or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels,
servicemen and people in educational or other institutions. In 1987 just
under four-fifths of people living in private households lived in a unit
headed by a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the continuing
fall in the average size of households in Great Britain from over four people
in 1911 to 3-09 in 1961 and 2-48 in 1988. The fall reflects a greater
proportion of people living on their own (11 per cent) or in one-parent
families, the increasing number of elderly people (more of whom are living
alone) and the preferences of parents for smaller families. The trend
towards smaller households (26 per cent of households consist of one
person) is expected to continue and the number of one-person households is
forecast to increase substantially in the next few years.
A growing proportion of households, over 64 per cent, own or are buying
their own'homes. Owner-occupation is higher among married couples than
for single, divorced or widowed household heads. The number of owner-
occupied dwellings rose from over 4 million in 1951 to over 15 million in
1989. Four British households out of five live in houses rather than flats.
Recent housing developments have been concentrated in suburban areas.
Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces, or semi¬
detached or detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and providing
two main ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a
bathroom and one or two lavatories. In inner urban areas slum clearance and
redevelopment were major features of post-1945 public housing pro¬
grammes While high-rise flats were popular in the 1960s and 1970s, the
emphasis in new building is now on low-rise, high-density designs, often
incorporating gardens or patios. Many older buildings are being restored
and converted to provide modern homes, with the help of a variety ot
government schemes and measures.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 98 per cent ol
households in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower and a
similar proportion sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by
international standards), while 76 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been
the growth of car ownership; in 1988, 66 per cent of households had the use
of at least one car or van, including 18 per cent with the use of two or more.
Greater access to motorised transport and the construction of a network ot
modern trunk roads and motorways have resulted in a considerable increase
in personal mobility and changed leisure patterns. Most detached or semi¬
detached houses in new suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town
shopping centres, often including large supermarkets and do-it-yoursell
stores, are usually planned with the motorist in mind.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased
congestion, noise and air pollution arising from motor vehicle emissions
Cars, taxis and motor cycles accounted for more than four-filths ot all
passenger transport in Great Britain in 1988, compared with about halt in
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Living
Standards
1961. Many public transport services have been reduced or withdrawn,
especially in rural areas. However, greater competition in express coach
services has resulted in more long-distance and commuter coach services,
while local bus services have been deregulated, the main effect being the
introduction of minibuses in many areas. Since 1986 the amount of lead
measured in the air has fallen by half, following a reduction in the maximum
permitted lead content in petrol in Britain. Unleaded petrol is now widely
available and increasingly used by motorists, due partly to the lower level of
excise duty on unleaded petrol.
Over the past 30 years there has been a steady reduction of the main
atmospheric and freshwater pollutants that were of concern in the past,
producing dramatic improvements in, for example, the quality of the air in
cities and the condition of major rivers. Various forms of pollution from
traffic and industrial processes remain a problem in some areas, however. A
phased programme to reduce further sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide
emissions from large combustion plants is being introduced, and Britain is
taking action to protect and enhance the quality of the North Sea by
reducing inputs of dangerous substances into rivers, estuaries and coastal
waters, and ceasing the dumping of industrial waste. The Government is
playing a full part in efforts by the international community to protect the
global environment. In September 1990 it set out its environmental strategy
for the future in a White Paper entitled This Common Inheritance.
There is a high degree of concern for the environment, as shown by the
growth in the number of organisations (especially voluntary societies)
concerned with conservation. Voluntary membership of environmental
organisations has risen sharply. Between 1971 and 1990, for example,
membership of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds rose from
98,000 to 656,000, and that of the National Trust from 278,000 to over 1-8
million.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century. According to a United Nations report on human
development published in 1990, Britain ranked tenth out of 130 nations on
an index based on social indicators such as life span, literacy and basic
purchasing power of people rather than on national wealth alone. Britain
has also performed well economically. Although gross domestic product
Per head fell in the early 1980s, Britain then experienced an
economic recovery and had eight successive years of sustained growth at
an annual average rate of over 3 per cent. Growth since 1980 has been
among the highest in the European Community. The rate of growth slowed
in 1989, to about 2 per cent, but was still spread through most sectors of the
economy.
Long-term trends in the pattern of expenditure show a substantial rise in
expenditure on housing, televisions, video recorders, telephones, electrical
and some other durable goods, motor vehicles and a range of services. The
diagram on p 28 shows the growth in availability of some key durables. Some
39 per cent of households in Great Britain have a microwave oven.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 25 years there
have been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee and
processed vegetables and fruit, while home consumption per person of
mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter, sugar,
tea and some other foods has fallen. However, another feature has been an
increase m the number of meals eaten away from home, either at work or in
restaurants, and a growth in the consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and
fast-food shops. In addition, the proportion of convenience foods eaten has
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
Source: Family Expenditure Survey
grown as women increasingly work outside the home and have less time to
prepare meals, and as the variety of prepared foods and ‘cook-chill meals
has risen in line with the growth in ownership of refrigerators andfreezers.
There is some evidence of consumption of food being influenced by health
factors; for example, people are drinking more skimmed milk at the expense
of whole milk and eating more wholemeal instead of white bread. Between
1961 and 1987 the consumption of brown and wholemeal bread increased
over 2-5 times and the consumption of butter fell by two-thirds during the
same period. The Government is encouraging the widest availability ol
wholesome food, while giving high priority to consumer safety. .
The Food Safety Act 1990 replaces the existing food legislation in England
and Wales and in Scotland with a single statute covering all of Great Britain.
This will strengthen the enforcement of existing law, give powers lor
LAND AND PEOPLE
29
Women
immediate closure of food premises when the public health is at risk, extend
controls throughout the food chain, enable detailed legislation to be
introduced to keep pace with new technology and increase the penalties for
food safety offences.
There was little change in alcohol consumption between 1978 and 1987.
Beer, with lager (now estimated to account for over half of beer sales),
remains much the most popular alcoholic drink. A high proportion of beer is
drunk in public houses (‘pubs’), which are a traditional social centre for many
people, and in clubs. Following the relaxation of restrictions on opening
hours of public houses under the Licensing Act 1988, there are signs that
they are becoming more popular with families: more meals are being served
and the consumption of non-alcoholic drinks is increasing. Consumption of
light (table) wine has increased considerably in recent years, although there
has been little change in the consumption of higher strength wines such as
sherry and port. The pattern of spirits consumption has also been changing,
with a decline in the consumption of whisky and gin, and higher
consumption of some other spirits. Partly to discourage drinking and
driving, sales of non-alcoholic and low-alcohol drinks are being increasingly
promoted, helped by a favourable excise duty structure.
Employment has been increasing since 1983, representing the longest
period of continuous employment growth for nearly 30 years. However, the
pattern of employment has altered considerably, with a long-term increase in
the numbers employed in service industries. Another feature has been an
increase in the number of self-employed, now accounting for 11 per cent of
the workforce. The educational standards of adults have risen, with 12 per
cent of men and 9 per cent of women aged 25-29 in Great Britain holding a
degree or equivalent qualification in 1988, compared with 9 per cent and
3 per cent respectively of those aged 50-59. The average size of classes has
fallen in recent years, both in primary and secondary schools.
Earnings from employment are the main source of income for most
people; in 1988 wages and salaries accounted for 62 per cent of household
income. The distribution of pre-tax income has remained relatively stable
over a long period, the lower 50 per cent of income earners accounting for
some 22 to 24 per cent of pre-tax income since 1949. The combined effect of
the tax system and the receipt of benefits is to redistribute incomes on a more
equal basis.
Wealth is less evenly distributed, with the richest 1 per cent of the
population aged 18 or over owning 18 per cent of marketable wealth in
1987, and the richest 10 per cent having 50 per cent. The inclusion of ‘non-
marketable’ rights in occupational and state pension schemes reduces these
shares substantially, to 11 and 35 per cent respectively. Since the mid-1970s
there has been little change in the distribution of marketable wealth or in
that of marketable wealth plus occupational and state pension rights. The
proportion of net wealth held in shares declined up to 1984, but has since
increased somewhat. The Government’s privatisation programme has had a
major effect on the pattern of share ownership, with 24 per cent of the adult
population in Great Britain owning shares, as against 7 percent in 1979.
Considerable changes have occurred in the twentieth century in the
economic and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of
almost all sex discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of
women’s changed role has been the rise in the number of women,
particularly married women, at work. With later marriages and the
availability of effective methods of contraception there has been a decline in
family size. Women as a result are involved in child-bearing for a shorter
30
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Equal
Opportunities
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
time and this, together with a variety of other factors which have made
housework less burdensome, has made it possible even for women with
young children to combine raising a family with employment. The growth of
part-time work, job-sharing and flexible working hours, as well as train¬
ing and retraining schemes, allows women to take advantage of more
employment opportunities.
Women comprise about two-fifths of the workforce and the proportion of
married women who work outside the home has grown to over one-half of
those between the ages of 16 and 60. Married women are most likely to be in
full-time employment if they are aged 16 to 29 with no children. By the mid-
1990s the numbers of young people entering the workforce will have
declined substantially and it is expected that the shortfall will be met to a
considerable extent by recruiting more married women. There is still a
significant difference between women’s and men’s earnings but the equal
pay legislation which came into force at the end of 1975 has narrowed the
gap. Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time
employees), increased from just over a half of those of men in 1970, to about
three-quarters in 1989. Women’s wages remain relatively low partly because
women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the economy, and because they
work fewer hours than men. A major reform in the taxation of women came
into effect in April 1990; since that date, their earnings have been taxed
separately rather than being treated as part of their husbands’ income for tax
purposes.
The Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986 make discrimination between
men and women unlawful in employment, education, training and the
provision of housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory ad¬
vertisements which breach the Act are also unlawful. In most cases,
complaints of discrimination are dealt with by industrial tribunals since they
concern employment; others may be taken before county courts in England
and Wales or the sheriff court in Scotland. Under the Equal Pay Act 1970, as
amended in 1984, women in Great Britain are entitled to equal pay with men
when doing work that is the same or broadly similar, or work which is of
equal value. There is similar legislation on sex discrimination and equal pay
in Northern Ireland.
The Equal Opportunities Commission, set up in 1975 (1976 in Northern
Ireland under separate legislation), has powers to enforce the Sex
Discrimination Acts and the Equal Pay Act. Its statutory duties are to work
towards eliminating discrimination and to promote equality of opportunity.
The Commission advises people of their rights under the Acts and may give
financial or other assistance to help individuals to conduct a case before a
court or tribunal. It also has power to conduct investigations and to issue
notices requiring discriminatory practices to stop. In addition, it keeps
legislation under review and may submit proposals for amending it to the
ministers concerned.
For centuries people have been coming from many parts of the world to
settle in Britain. Some came to avoid political or religious persecution, others
to find a better way of life or an escape from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain. Many Jewish refugees started
a new life in Britain towards the end of the nineteenth century and in the
1930s, and after 1945 large numbers of other European refugees settled in
Britain. The large communities from the West Indies and the South Asian
sub-continent date principally from the 1950s and 1960s. There are also
sizeable groups from the United States and Canada, as well as Australians,
a
LAND AND PEOPLE
31
Chinese and various European communities such as Greek and Turkish
Cypriots, Italians and Spaniards. More recently people from Latin America,
Indo-China and Sri Lanka have sought refuge in Britain.
In 1986—88, according to the results of a sample survey, the non-white
population of Great Britain numbered about 2-6 million (some 4-7 per cent
of the total population), of whom about 45 per cent were born in Britain.
Just over one-half of the ethnic minority population is of Indian, Pakistani or
Bangladeshi origin; about one-fifth is of West Indian ethnic origin; and one
in nine is of mixed ethnic origin. The proportion of men of working age in
Great Britain who were economically active was higher among the white
population and the West Indian/Guyanese group than among those from
other ethnic groups. Among women the variation was greater: 73 per cent of
those from the West Indian/Guyanese ethnic group were economically
active, compared with 69 per cent in the white group, 57 per cent in the
Indian group and 20 per cent in the Pakistani/Bangladeshi group (due,
among other factors, to the larger proportion of children among this
group).
Although members of the non-white population are concentrated in the
inner cities, where there are problems of deprivation and racial dis¬
crimination, progress has undoubtedly been made over the last 20 years in
several areas of life. Many individuals have achieved distinction in their
careers and in public life, and the proportion of ethnic minority workers in
professional and managerial jobs has increased. There are at present three
black Members of Parliament and one Asian Member of Parliament and the
number of ethnic minority councillors in local government is growing.
Increasingly, black and Asian people are achieving distinction in law,
medicine and teaching, while black sportsmen and women play a prominent
role in athletics, boxing, football and cricket, and black performers have
made a considerable impact in pop music and jazz. The growth of com¬
mercial enterprise has been significant, particularly among Asians, and there
are numerous examples of self-help in ethnic minority communities.
The principal means of combating disadvantage is through the economic,
environmental, educational and health programmes of central government
and local authorities, as well as through special programmes which channel
extra resources into projects to benefit ethnic minorities specifically. The
latter provide, for example, specialist teachers for those groups of children
who need English language tuition, business support services and measures
to revive local economies and improve the environment in inner city areas.
Gultural and recreational schemes are funded, including community and
social centres for different ethnic minorities, and the health and personal
social services make special provision for certain groups. In 1989 the
Government announced plans to increase support for the local enterprise
agencies established in 1985 to encourage the growth of black businesses in
inner city areas. It also intends to enlarge and redirect its practical help to
increase equal opportunities for members of ethnic minority groups through
training; this would include, among other measures, greater provision for
unemployed people who need training in English as a second language.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities
and the local community are promoted by race equality councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the tensions that can arise between the
police and ethnic minorities, consultation between the police and the
community has been made a statutory requirement, liaison work is under¬
taken in schools and police training in race relations has received particular
attention. Gampaigns are run by the police to encourage the recruitment of
officers from the ethnic minority communities and racially discriminatory
32
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Race Relations
Act
Commission for
Racial Equality
Leisure Trends
behaviour by officers has been made an offence under the police discipline
code.
Policies for promoting equality of opportunity in a multiracial society in
which all citizens receive equal respect are pursued against a background of
legislation against discrimination. The Race Relations Act 1976 makes
discrimination unlawful on grounds of colour, race, nationality or ethnic oi
national origin in the provision of goods, facilities and services, in
employment, training and related matters, in education, in housing and in
advertising. It strengthened legislation passed in 1968 which, in turn,
widened the scope of the first race relations legislation, enacted in 1965. It
also strengthened the criminal law on incitement to racial hatred, which was
further reinforced by the Public Order Act 1986.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with
that against sex discrimination and gave complainants direct access to civil
courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations
Act 1976. It has power to investigate unlawful discriminatory practices and
to issue non-discrimination notices, requiring such practices to cease. It has
an important educational role and has issued codes of practice in
employment and education and, in 1989, a draft code of practice on rented
housing. It is also the principal source of advice for the general public about
the Race Relations Act and has discretion to assist individuals with their
complaints. In 1989 the Commission received over 1,300 requests for
assistance and completed over 100 litigation cases. It can also undertake or
fund research.
The Commission supports the work of over 80 race equality councils,
which are autonomous voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote equality of opportunity
and good relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of
the race equality officers employed by the councils, most of whom also
receive funds from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority
self-help groups and to other projects run by or for the benefit of the
minority communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend
it and higher real incomes than previous generations. Agreed hours of full¬
time work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people
actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, such as
visiting or entertaining relatives or friends. Television viewing is by lar the
most popular leisure pastime, and nearly all households have a television set,
with 91 per cent in 1988 having a colour set. Some 51 per cent of households
have two or more television sets and average viewing time for the population
aged four and over is 25 hours a week. The proportion of households with a
video recorder rose from 24 per cent in 1984 to 53 per cent in 1988.
Moreover, the availability of new channels is spreading through cable and
satellite television. Other popular pursuits include: listening to music,
reading, do-it-yourself home improvements, gardening and going out for a
meal or for a drink. About half the households in Britain have a pet, the most
common being dogs and cats, of which there are thought to be roughly
7 million each in Britain.
Many people give up free time to work for voluntary organisations, ot
which there are over 250,000 in England and Wales. It is estimated that
LAND AND PEOPLE
33
Holidays
about one-quarter of the population is involved in some way in voluntary
work in Britain, and there are now several major charitable fund-raising
drives.
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by
increasing membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor
activities, although for some sports, such as greyhound racing, the number
of spectators has been declining. Walking and swimming are the two most
popular sporting activities, being almost equally undertaken by men and
women. Snooker/billiards/pool and darts are the next most popular sports
among men. Keep-fit, yoga, squash and cycling are among the sports where
participation has been increasing in recent years.
Holiday entitlements have increased for most employees. By the end of
1989, the average holiday entitlement among all employees was four weeks,
although a significant proportion (22 per cent) have at least 24 days’ leave. In
1989, 59 per cent of the adult population took at least one long holiday of
four or more nights away from home. The number of long holidays taken by
British residents was 52-5 million in 1989 (compared with 43-8 million in
1977), of which 3T5 million were taken in Britain. The most popular
destinations for summer holidays are the West Country, Scotland and Wales.
In addition, some 10 million shorter holidays were taken in Britain in 1989.
British residents also took 21 million holidays overseas in 1989, of which 56
per cent involved ‘package’ arrangements. The most popular destinations
were Spain, France and Greece, and 79 per cent of all holidays abroad in
1989 were taken in Europe. An increasing number of people take more than
one holiday each year; the proportion of adults taking two or more holidays
a year increased from 15 per cent in 1971 to 22 per cent in 1989.
2 Government
The British constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not contained
in anv single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common law and
partly bv convention, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by general
agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution thus
adapts readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable, although their
functions often intermingle and overlap. The legislature, Parliament, is the
supreme authority. The executive consists of: (1) the Government—Cabinet
and other ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national
policy; (2) government departments, which are responsible for national
administration; (3) local authorities, which administer and manage many
local services; and (4) public corporations responsible for operating par¬
ticular nationalised industries or, for example, a social or cultural service,
subject to ministerial control in varying degrees. The judiciary determines
common law andlnterprets statutes, and is independent of both legislature
and executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also
as the symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient
secular institution in Britain. During the last thousand years its continuity
has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which lasted
from 1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of succession,
the hereditary principle upon which it was founded has always been
preserved. The royal title in Britain is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of
God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of
Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth,
Defender of the Faith’. The form of the royal title is varied for those other
member states of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State,1
to suit the particular circumstances of each. Other member states are
republics or have their own monarchies.
The seat of the monarchy is in Great Britain. In the Channel Islands and
the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the
other member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State, her representative is the Governor-General, appointed by her on the
'The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands
and Tuvalu.
From the reign of Queen Victoria to August 1990
QUEEN VICTORIA 1819-1901
i. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
GOVERNMENT
37
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
Acts of
(Government
advice of the ministers of the country concerned and completely in¬
dependent of the British Government.
In the British dependencies the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good
government of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common
law rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of a granddaughter of
James I of England and VI of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress of
Hanover) are alone eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound
to continue in its present line, it can be altered only by common consent of
the Commonwealth nations, of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in
succeeding to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen
Regnant, and the powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were
a king. While the consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the
constitution does not give any special rank or privileges to the husband of a
Queen Regnant, although in practice he fills an important role in the life of
the nation, as does the Duke of Edinburgh.
1 he Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies
and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession
Council, to which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal (see p 40), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other
leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient
interval. It is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a
thousand years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the
customs of the time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the
presence of representatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great
public interests of Britain, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of
the other Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an
integral part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in¬
chief of all armed forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the
established Church of England. As a result of a long process of evolution,
during which the monarchy’s absolute power has been progressively
reduced, the Queen acts on the advice of her ministers. Britain is governed
by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred
years towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important
acts of government which require the participation of the Queen. These
include summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session
without dissolution) and dissolving Parliament; and giving Royal Assent to
Bills passed by Parliament. The Queen is also involved in appointing many
important office holders, including government ministers, judges, officers in
the armed forces, governors, diplomats, bishops and some other senior
clergy of the Church of England; conferring peerages, knighthoods and
other honours;2 and remitting all or part of the penalty imposed on a person
convicted of a crime. An important function is appointing the Prime
Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader of the political party
2Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few are
conferred on her personal selection—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of
Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
which commands a majority in the House of Commons to form a
government. In international affairs the Queen, as head of State, has the
power to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states and
governments, to conclude treaties and to annex or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), those acts
involving the use of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed
by government ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be
questioned about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s
authority to exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to
restrict or abolish a prerogative right.
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen’s role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of
the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials in
Britain and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches
and signs numerous state papers. She must be informed and consulted on
every aspect of national life, and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made to appoint a regent to perform them should the Queen be totally
incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of
the Queen’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision to
appoint Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adults next in
line of succession, and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate
certain royal functions. However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance,
dissolve Parliament (except on the Queen’s express instructions), nor create
peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in
spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people,
many traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and
royal funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday
is officially celebrated in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards
Parade. State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State
visits Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace and the Palace of
Holyroodhouse in Scotland to bestow honours; and royal processions add
significance to such occasions as a state opening of Parliament. Each year the
Queen and other members of the royal family visit many parts of Britain.
Their presence at scientific, artistic, industrial and charitable events of
national and local importance attracts nationwide interest and publicity. The
Queen pays state visits to foreign governments, accompanied by the Duke of
Edinburgh. She also undertakes lengthy tours in the other countries of the
Commonwealth. Other members of the royal family pay official visits
overseas, occasionally representing the Queen, and often in connection with
an organisation or a cause with which they are associated.
The expenditure incurred by the Queen in carrying out her public duties is
financed from the Civil List and from public departments (which meet the
cost of, for example, the royal yacht and the Queen’s Flight). All such
expenditure is approved by Parliament. About three-quarters of the Queen’s
Civil List provision is required to meet the cost of the staff who deal, among
other things, with state papers and correspondence, the organisation of state
occasions, visits and other public engagements undertaken by the Queen in
Britain and overseas. The Queen’s private expenditure as Sovereign is met
from the Privy Purse, which is financed mainly from the revenue of the
<1;
GOVERNMENT
39
The Functions
of Parliament
Duchy of Lancaster;3 her personal expenditure as a private individual is met
from her own personal resources.
Under the Civil List Acts, other members of the royal family also receive
parliamentary annual allowances to enable them to carry out their public
duties. The Prince of Wales, however, receives no such allowance, since as
Duke of Cornwall he is entitled to the net revenue of the estate of the Duchy
of Cornwall. (He voluntarily surrenders a quarter of this revenue to the
Exchequer.) The Queen pays into the Exchequer a sum equivalent to that
provided by Parliament for certain members of the royal family. Civil List
payments in 1990 amounted to £6-3 million. From January 1991 these
payments will be fixed at £7-9 million a year for ten years.
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the
Queen, the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are
outwardly separate and are constituted on different principles. They meet
together only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the state opening
of Parliament, when the Commons are summoned by the Queen to the
House of Lords. When Parliament legislates, however, the agreement of
each of its component parts is normally required.
Parliament can legislate for Britain as a whole, for any of the constituent
parts of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It can also
legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown
dependencies and not part of Britain, having subordinate legislatures which
make laws on island affairs.4
As there are no legal restraints imposed by a written constitution,
Parliament is able to legislate as it pleases. It can make, abolish or change any
law; and can destroy established conventions or turn a convention into law. It
can also prolong its own life beyond the normal period without consulting
the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way.
Its members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in
accordance with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of
Parliament which has been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot
be disputed in the law courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an
Act which it knew would receive no public support. The House of Commons
is directly responsible to the electorate, and in this century the House of
Lords has recognised the priority of the elected chamber. The system of
party government helps to ensure that Parliament legislates with its
responsibility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, Britain recognises the various
types of Community legislation and wider policies, and sends 81 elected
members to the European Parliament.
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by
voting taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, (3) to
The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the reigning
Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately administered by the
Chancellor of the Duchy.
The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the Isle of
Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty
of the Home Secretary, as the Privy Council member primarily concerned with island affairs, to
scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
40
The Meeting of
Parliament
The House of
Lords
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
scrutinise government policy and administration, including proposals for
expenditure, and (4) to debate the major political issues of the day. In
discharging these functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and
issues before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also informed before
the ratification of all important international treaties and agreements. I he
making of treaties is, however, a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of
the Government and is not subject to parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved
and a general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life
has been prolonged by legislation in rare circumstances such as the two
world wars. Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the
Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
—beginning and ending most often in October or November. It is
interspersed with ^adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter
and the late (English) Spring Bank Holiday, and during a long summer
recess starting in late July or early August. The average number of sitting
days in a session is about 170 in the House of Commons and about 160 in the
House of Lords. At the start of each session the Queen’s speech to
Parliament outlines the Government’s broad policies and proposed
legislative programme. Each session is ended by prorogation. Parliament
then ‘stands prorogued’ for about a week until the new session opens.
Prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary business: in particular, Bills
which have not been enacted by the end of the session are lost.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal.
The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the
Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 next most senior
diocesan bishops of the Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of
(1) all hereditary peers and peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain
and the United Kingdom, (2) life peers created to assist the House in its
judicial duties (Lords of Appeal or ‘law lords’),5 and (3) all other life peers.
Hereditary peerages carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain
disqualifications), provided the holder establishes his or her claim and is
aged 21 years or over. However, anyone succeeding to a peerage may, within
12 months of succession, disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime.
Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House but gain the right to vote and
to offer themselves as candidates at parliamentary elections.
Peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. They are usually granted in recognition ol
service in politics or other walks of Hie or because one of the political parties
wishes to have the recipient in the House ol Lords. I he House provides a
place in Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful, but who do
not wish to be involved in party politics.
In mid-1990 there were 1,189 members ol the House of Lords, including
the two archbishops and 24 bishops. The Lords Temporal consisted of 764
hereditary peers who had succeeded to their titles, 20 hereditary peers who
have had their titles conferred on them (including the Prince of Wales), and
379 life peers, of whom 19 were ‘law lords’. Of the total, 88 peers were not in
rThe House of Lords is the Final court of appeal for civil cases in Britain and for criminal cases in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
GOVERNMENT
41
The House of
Commons
receipt of a writ of summons and some 142 peers were on leave of absence
from the House.6 Irish peerages do not entitle their holders to membership
of the House of Lords, but some peers of Ireland are entitled to sit in the
House of Lords as holders of an English, Scottish, Great Britain or United
Kingdom peerage.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings.
Peers who attend the House (the average daily attendance is some 320)
receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses
incurred in attending the House (for which there are maximum daily rates)
and certain travelling expenses.
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on
the woolsack' as ex-officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place
may be taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is
present, by a speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy
speakers is the Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the beginning
of each session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House
decides otherwise. The Chairman and the Principal Deputy Chairman of
Committees are Lords, but receive salaries as officers of the House.
The permanent officers of the House include the Clerk of the Parliaments,
who is responsible for the records of proceedings and for the promulgation
of Acts of Parliament. He is the accounting officer for money voted to the
House, and is in charge of the administrative staff of the House, known as
the Parliament Office. The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who is also
Serjeant-at-Arms in attendance upon the Lord Chancellor, is responsible for
security, accommodation and services in the House of Lords’ part of the
Palace of Westminster. The Yeoman Usher is Deputy Serjeant-at-Arms and
assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists of
650 Members of Parliament (MPs). At present there are 43 women, one
Asian and three black MPs. Of the 650 seats, 523 are for England, 38 for
Wales, 72 for Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new
one summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns8 or is given a
peerage, a by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of
£26,701 (from January 1990) and an office costs allowance of up to £24,903.
There are also a number of other allowances, including travel allowances, a
supplement for London members and, for provincial members, subsistence
allowances and allowances for second homes. (For ministers’ salaries, see
p 53.)
I he chief officer ol the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs
to preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and
Means and two deputy chairmen, who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the
House on the nomination of the Government but drawn from the
Opposition as well as the government party. They, like the Speaker, neither
'’Some hereditary peers do not establish their claim to succeed and so do not receive a writ of summons
entitling them to sit in the House. Lords may apply for leave of absence for the duration, or for the
remainder, of a Parliament.
The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed with wool from several Commonwealth
countries; it is a tradition dating from the medieval period, when wool was the chief source of the
country’s wealth.
8An MP who wishes to resign from the House can only do so by using the technical device of applying
for an office under the Crown (Crown Steward or Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or Steward of the
Manor of Northstead), ancient offices which disqualify the holder from membership of the House but
which carry no salary and have no responsibilities.
42
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
speak nor vote other than in their official capacity. Overall responsibility for
the staffing, budget and administration of the House rests with the House ot
Commons Commission, a statutory body chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House ot
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker on its privileges and
procedures. His department has responsibilities relating to the conduct ot
the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant-at-Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper
of the Commons’ part of the building, and is responsible tor its security.
Other officers serve the House in the Library, the Department of the Official
Report (Hansard), the Administration Department and the Refreshment
Department.
For electoral purposes Britain is divided into constituencies, each of which
returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable
representation four permanent Parliamentary Boundary Commissions, one
each for England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, make periodic
reviews of constituencies and recommend any adjustment of seats that may
seem necessary in the light of population movements or other changes.
Elections are by secret ballot. British citizens, together with citizens of
other Commonwealth countries and citizens of the Irish Republic resident in
Britain, may vote provided they are aged 18 or over, registered in the annual
register of electors for the constituency and not subject to any dis¬
qualification. People not entitled to vote include members of the House of
Lords, patients detained under mental health legislation, sentenced
prisoners and people convicted within the previous five years of corrupt or
illegal election practices. Service voters (members of the armed forces and
their spouses, Crown servants and staff of the British Council employed
overseas, together with their wives or husbands if accompanying them) may
be registered for an address in a constituency where they would live but for
their service. The Representation of the People Act 1989 extended the right
to vote for British citizens living abroad by increasing from 5 to 20 years the
period during which they may apply to be registered to vote.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station.
Anyone who is entitled to an absent vote may vote by post or by proxy, but
their postal ballot papers cannot be sent to addresses outside Britain. Service
voters, overseas electors, electors who are physically incapacitated or unable
to vote in person because of the nature of their work may vote by post (unless
they are abroad at the time of the election) or by proxy for an indefinite
period. Under the 1989 Act, any elector whose circumstances on polling day
are such that he or she cannot reasonably be expected to vote in person at his
or her allotted polling station—for example, an elector away on holiday-
may apply for an absent vote. r.oc ii-
Voting is not compulsory ; 74-6 per cent of a total electorate of 43-6 million
people voted in the general election in June 1987. The simple majority
system of voting is used. A candidate is elected if he or she has a majority of
votes over the next candidate (although not necessarily an absolute majority
over all other candidates). .
British citizens and citizens of other Commonwealth countries, together
with citizens of the Irish Republic, may stand and be elected as MPs provided
they are aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualification. Those
disqualified include undischarged bankrupts; people sentenced to more
than one year’s imprisonment; clergy of the Church of England, Church of
Scotland, Church of Ireland and Roman Catholic Church; peers; and
GOVERNMENT
43
The Political
Party System
holders of certain offices listed in the House of Commons Disqualification
Act 1975. The latter include holders of judicial office, civil servants, some
local government officers, members of the regular armed forces, or the
police service, some members of public corporations and government
commissions, and also British members of the legislature of any country or
territory outside the Commonwealth. A candidate’s nomination for election
must be signed by two electors as proposer and seconder, and by eight other
electors registered in the constituency. He or she does not require any party
backing. A candidate must also deposit £500, which is forfeited if his or her
votes do not exceed 5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on a general election cam¬
paign is £3,648 plus 31 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or
4-1 pence for each elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post an
election address to each elector in the constituency, free of charge. All
election expenses, apart from the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject
to the statutory limit. A review of candidates’ election expenses is in progress.
The party system, existing in one form or another since the eighteenth
century, is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties
are not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most
candidates in elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of
the main parties.
For the last 150 years a predominantly two-party system has operated, and
since 1945 either the Conservative Party, which can trace its origins to the
eighteenth century, or the Labour Party, which emerged in the last decade of
the nineteenth century, has held power. A new party—the Social and Liberal
Democrats (now known as the Liberal Democrats)—was formed in 1988
when members of the Liberal Party (which could trace its origins to the
eighteenth century) merged with members of the Social Democratic Party,
which was itself formed in 1981. Other parties include two nationalist
parties, Plaid Cymru (founded in Wales in 1925) and the Scottish National
Party (founded in 1934). In Northern Ireland there are a number of parties;
the largest of those represented in the House of Commons is the Ulster
Unionist Party, which was formed in the early part of this century, and the
Democratic Unionist Party, founded in 1971 by a group which broke away
from the Ulster Unionists.
Since 1945 seven general elections have been won by the Conservative
Party and six by the Labour Party, and the great majority of members of the
House of Commons have represented either one or other of these two
parties. The percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the last
general election of June 1987 and the resulting distribution of seats in the
House of Commons are given in Table 2.1.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes)
at a general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in
the House of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the
leader of the majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form a government,
and about 100 of its members in the House of Commons and the House of
Lords receive ministerial appointments (including appointment to the
Cabinet—see p 53) on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority
party becomes the official Opposition, with its own leader and ‘shadow
cabinet’.
Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
Commons with their supporters (the backbenchers) sitting behind them.
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 2.It Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the 1987
General Election
% of votes
Party cast
Conservative 42-3
Labour 30-8
Liberal—Social
Democratic Alliance*1 22-6
Others 4-3
Members
Party elected
Conservative 375
Labour 229
Liberal 1 ^
Social Democratic
Scottish National
Plaid Cymru
(Welsh Nationalist)
Ulster Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Social Democratic and
Labour (Northern Ireland) 3
Ulster Popular Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Sinn Fein (Northern Ireland)
Speaker0  L
Total 650
a The former Liberal and Social Democratic Parties (see p 43) entered into an electoral alliance in 1981 and contested
the general elections of 1983 and 1987 with a joint programme.
bThe member of Sinn Fein (the political wing of the Provisional IRA) has not taken his seat.
cThe Speaker’s candidacy was as ’Mr Speaker seeking re-election'. (He was, before h.s election as Speaker, a Conservative
S On 1 September 1990 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three f Pu^|. “/""Xh
Conservative 371 Labour 224, Liberal Democrats 19, Social Democratic 3, Scottish National 4, Haid Cymru (Welsh
Nationalist) 3, Ulster Unionist 9, Democratic Unionist 3, Social Democratic and Labour 3, Ulster Popular Unionist 1,
Labour—Independent 1; Sinn Fein 1; there were 4 vacancies.
Similar arrangements for the parties also apply to the House of Lords;
however Lords who do not wish to be associated with any political party may
sit on the ‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament
rests largely on the relationship between the Government and the opposition
parties. Depending on the relative voting strengths of the parties in the
House of Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow the
Government by securing its defeat on a ‘matter of confidence . In genera ,
however, its aims are' to contribute to the formulation of policy and
legislation by constructive criticism; to oppose government proposals it
considers objectionable; to secure concessions on government Bills; and to
present its own policies in such a way as to enhance its chances ot electora
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under e
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the
Government Chief Whips in consultation with the Opposition (Tie! Whips.
The Chief Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels often reterred to
when the question of finding time for debating some particular issue is
discussed. The Leaders of the two Houses are primarily responsible it>r the
direction of business and for providing facilities for the Houses to debate
matters about which they are concerned. . , , . ,
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their assistants
(chosen within the party), whose duties include keeping members informed
of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party s voting
GOVERNMENT
45
Parliamentary
Procedure
strength by ensuring members attend important debates, and conveying to
the party leadership the opinions of backbench members. The importance a
party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the MPs by the
underlining (once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them each week
by the Whips; failure to comply with a three-line whip’ (the most important)
is usually seen as rebellion against the party’s policy. Party discipline tends to
be less strong in the Lords than in the Commons, since Lords have less hope
of high office and no need of party support in elections.
The Government Chief Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary
to the Treasury. Of the other Government Whips, three are officers of the
Royal Household (one of these is Deputy Chief Whip), five hold titular posts
as Lords Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips.
Salaries are also paid to the Opposition Chief Whips in both Houses and to
two of the Opposition Assistant Whips in the Commons. The Government
Whips in the Lords hold offices in the Royal Household and act as
government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties carry out
their parliamentary work at Westminster. It is limited to parties which had at
least two members elected at the previous general election or one member
elected and a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The amount is £2,550 for
every seat won, plus £510 for every 200 votes.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent. The system of
debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject starts off as a
proposal or ‘motion’ by a member. When a motion has been moved, the
Speaker proposes the question for debate. At the end of each debate the
question may be agreed to without voting, or decided by a simple majority
vote. The main difference between the two Houses is that the Speaker of the
Lords has no authority to check debate or cut it short. Such matters are
decided by the general feeling of the House. In the Gommons the Speaker
has full authority to enforce the rules and orders of the House. The Speaker
of the Commons must guard against abuse of procedure or infringement of
minority rights. The Speaker has discretion to allow or disallow a motion to
end discussion so that a matter may be put to the vote. He has powers to put
a stop to irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save time in other ways.
In cases of grave disorder the Speaker can adjourn or suspend the sitting.
The Speaker may order members who have offended against the rules ol
behaviour of the House to leave or be suspended for a period of days.
The Speaker supervises voting in the Commons and announces the final
result. In a tied vote the Speaker gives a casting vote, without expressing an
opinion on the merits of the question. The voting procedure in the House of
Lords is similar to that in the Commons, except that the Speaker or chairman
has an ordinary vote.
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members
with a financial interest in a matter before the House must declare it when
taking part in a debate. To act as a disqualification from voting the interest
must be direct, immediate and personal. In other proceedings of the House
or in dealings with other members, ministers or civil servants, MPs must also
disclose any relevant financial interest or benefit. There is no register of
financial interests in the Lords, but Lords speaking in a debate in which they
have a direct interest are expected to declare it.
Proceedings of both Houses are normally public. The minutes and
speeches {Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497
and of the Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and
political papers of certain past members of both Houses, are available to the
46
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Legislative
Proceedings
Private Members’
Bills
Passage of
Public Bills
public through the House of Lords Record Office. The proceedings of both
Houses of Parliament may be broadcast on television and radio, either live or
more usually in recorded or edited form.
The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles
are interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances. Sub¬
stantial changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government
through the normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public
Bills involving measures relating to public policy. Private Bills deal with
matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Hybrid Bills are public Bills
which may affect private rights. The passage of private Bills and hybrid Bills
through Parliament is governed by a special procedure which allows those
affected to make representations. Public Bills can be introduced, in either
House, by a government minister or by an ordinary member. Most public
Bills that become law are sponsored by the Government.
Before a government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other
agencies interested in the subject matter. These include major interest and
pressure groups which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for
legislative changes are sometimes set out in government ‘White Papers’,
which may be debated in Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time to
time consultative documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for
public discussion government proposals which are still taking shape.
Bills must be passed by both Houses. As a rule government Bills likely to
raise political controversy go through the Commons before being discussed
in the Lords, while those of a technical but non-political nature often pass
through the Lords first. A Bill with a mainly financial purpose is nearly
always introduced in the Commons, and a Bill involving taxation must be
based on resolutions agreed by that House, often after debate, before it can
be introduced. If the main object of a Bill is to create a public charge, the
Commons can proceed with it only if it is introduced by a minister or, if
brought from the Lords, taken up by a minister. This arrangement gives the
Government considerable control over financial legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the
first 20 are successful. After the ballot a private member may also present a
Bill after question time (see p 49), or seek to introduce a Bill under the ten
minute rule’, which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the
measure, after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be
brought in. Private members’ Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few
become law each session. If one secures a second reading, the Government
usually introduces any necessary money resolution. Private members’ Bills
may be introduced in the House of Lords at any time, but the time that can
be given to them in the Commons is limited.
I he process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. 4 he Bill
receives a formal first reading on introduction, is printed, and after a while
(between one day and several weeks, depending on the nature of the Bill) it is
given a second reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In
the Commons a non-controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading
committee for its second reading debate. After a second reading in the
Commons, a Bill is usually referred for detailed examination to a standing
committee (see p 48). If the House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the
GOVERNMENT
47
Private Bills
Delegated
Legislation
whole House sitting in committee. The committee stage is followed by the
report stage, during which further amendments may be considered. At the
third reading a Bill is reviewed in its final form and may again be debated.
The House may vote to limit the time devoted to examining a Bill by passing
a government timetable motion, commonly referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After
the third reading a Commons Bill is sent to the Lords. After the second
reading in the Lords, a Bill is considered by a committee of the whole House
unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a Public Bill
Committee. It is then considered on report and read a third time; at all these
stages amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is
passed by that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there.
Amendments made by the second House generally must be agreed by the
first, or a compromise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through
the Commons without difficulty. However, if a Lords Bill were unacceptable
to the Commons it would generally not become law. The Lords, on the other
hand, do not in general prevent a Bill insisted upon by the Commons from
finally becoming law, though they will often amend and return it for further
consideration by the Commons. In practice, the Lords pass Bills authorising
taxation or national expenditure without amendment. Under the Parliament
Acts 1911 and 1949, a Bill that deals only with taxation or expenditure must
become law within one month of being sent to the Lords, whether or not
they agree to it, unless the Commons directs otherwise. If no agreement is
reached between the two Houses on a non-financial Commons Bill the Lords
can delay the Bill for a period amounting (in practice) to at least 13 months.
At the end of this time the Bill may be submitted to the Queen for Royal
Assent, provided it has been passed a second time by the Commons. The
Parliament Acts make one important exception: a Bill to lengthen the life
of a Parliament would require the full assent of both Houses in the normal
way.
The limits to the power of the Lords, contained in the Parliament Acts, are
based on the belief that the principal legislative function of the non-elected
House nowadays is to act as a chamber of revision, complementing but not
rivalling the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for Royal Assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and
known as an Act of Parliament. The Royal Assent has not been refused since
1707.
Private Bills are promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament
(often local authorities) to give them special powers not granted by the
general law. They go through substantially the same procedure as public
Bills, but most of the work is done in committee, where procedures follow a
semi-judicial pattern: the promoter must prove the need for the powers or
privileges sought and the objections of opposing interests are heard. Both
sides may be legally represented.
In order to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, much legislation gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details
by making ‘delegated legislation’. To minimise the risk that powers thus
conferred on the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary
government, they are normally delegated to authorities directly responsible
to Parliament. Moreover, the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers
are delegated often provide for some measure of parliamentary control over
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of the
Whole House
Standing
Committees
Select Committees
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
legislation made in exercise of these powers, by reserving to Parliament the
right to affirm or annul it. Certain Acts also require direct consultation with
organisations affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of
these ‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time on the floor of the House,
the Commons also uses standing committees to consider the merits of
instruments, with any decisions reserved to the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee of the whole House to
consider Bills in detail after their second reading. This permits unrestricted
discussion, since the rule that a Member or Lord may speak only once on
each issue does not apply in committee.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine
public Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second
reading stage; two Scottish standing committees; and the Scottish and Welsh
Grand Committees. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive
names, being referred to simply as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on,
and the membership is separately appointed to consider each specific Bill.
Each committee has between 16 and 50 members, with a party balance
reflecting as far as possible that in the House as a whole. The Scottish Grand
Committee, which comprises all 72 Scottish members (and may be convened
in Edinburgh), considers the principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at
second reading stage, and Scottish estimates and other matters concei nmg
Scotland only which may be referred to it. The Welsh Grand Committee,
with all 38 Welsh members and up to five others, considers Bills referred to it
at second reading stage, and matters concerning Wales only. There is also
provision for a Northern Ireland committee to debate matters relating
specifically to Northern Ireland. The Lords’ equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
Unlike standing committees, which proceed by way of formal debate, select
committees are appointed, normally for the duration of a Parliament, to
examine subjects by taking written and oral evidence. After piivate
deliberation they present a report of their conclusions and recom¬
mendations. Select committees may be appointed to help Parliament with
the control of the executive by examining aspects of public policy and
administration. They also undertake responsibilities in connection with the
internal operations and procedures of Parliament. In the former category
come the 13 committees established by the House of Commons to examine
the expenditure, administration and policy of the main government
departments and related bodies. T he Foreign Affairs Committee, for ex¬
ample, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. I he
committees are constituted on a party basis, in approximate proportion to
party strength in the House.
Other regular Commons committees include those on European Legis¬
lation, Public Accounts, Members’ Interests, the Parliamentary Commis¬
sioner for Administration, and House of Commons Services. The Commit¬
tee of Selection and the Standing Orders Committee have duties relating
to private Bills, and the Committee of Selection also chooses members
to serve on standing and select committees. A Liaison Committee considers
general matters relating to select committees. On rare occasions a parlia¬
mentary Bill is examined by a specially appointed select committee, a proce¬
dure additional to the usual legislative process: this occurs, for ex¬
ample, every few years for the Armed forces Bill.
GOVERNMENT
49
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question
ministers, senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals.
Through hearings and published reports, they bring before Parliament and
the public a body of fact and informed opinion on many important issues,
and build up considerable expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees, in
which the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are two major
select committees, with several sub-committees, on the European Com¬
munities and on Science and Technology. There are also select com¬
mittees on House of Lords’ Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Ab¬
sence and Lords’ Expenses, Personal Bills, Private Bill Standing Orders,
Privileges, Procedure, Selection and Broadcasting.
Joint Committees Joint committees, with a membership drawn from both Houses, are
appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills and delegated
legislation. The two Houses may also agree to set up joint select committees
on other subjects.
Party Committees In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
unofficial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist
Members’ Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the backbench
membership of the party in the House of Commons. When the Conservative
Party is in office, ministers attend its meetings by invitation and not by right.
When the party is in opposition, the whole membership of the party may
attend meetings and the leader appoints a consultative committee, which
acts as the party’s ‘shadow cabinet’.
The Parliamentary Labour Party is a corporate body comprising all
members of the party in both Houses. When the Labour Party is in office a
parliamentary committee, half of whose members are elected and half of
whom are government representatives, acts as a channel of communication
between the Government and its backbenchers in both Houses. When the
party is in opposition the Parliamentary Labour Party is organised under the
direction of an elected parliamentary committee, which acts as the ‘shadow
cabinet’.
Other Forms of The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
Parliamentary continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. In addition to the
Control system of close scrutiny by select committees, the House of Commons offers
a number of opportunities for a searching examination of government
policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own backbenchers.
These include:
1. Question time, when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. The Prime Minister’s
question time takes place on Tuesday and Thursday. Parliamentary
questions are one means of eliciting information about the
Government’s intentions. They are also a way of airing, and possibly
securing redress of, grievances brought to MPs’ notice by constituents.
MPs may also put questions to ministers for written answers, which are
published in Hansard, the official report.
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to
open discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern.
There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of
the day, while immediately before the adjournment for each recess
(Christmas, Easter, spring and summer) a full day is spent discussing
50
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
matters raised by private members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss
a ‘specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration’
may, at the end of question time, ask leave to move the adjournment of
the House. If the Speaker accepts the terms of the motion, the MP asks
the House for leave for the motion to be put forward. Leave can be given
unanimously, or it can be given if 40 or more MPs support the motion or
if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and the House (on a vote)
is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is debated for three
hours, usually on the next day.
3. The 20 Opposition days each session, when the Opposition can choose
subjects for debate. Of these days, 17 are at the disposal of the Leader of
the Opposition and 3 at the disposal of the second largest opposition
party.
4. Debates on the occasion of the passage, three times a year, of Con¬
solidated Fund or Appropriation Bills, when members can exercise their
traditional right of‘raising grievances’ on matters for which any minister
is responsible. This takes place after voting the necessary supplies
(money) for the Government.
5. Debates on three days in each session on details of proposed government
expenditure recommended for consideration by the Liaison Committee
(see p 49).
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during
the debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of each session, during
debates or motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its
own time, and during debates on the Government’s legislative proposals.
Opportunities for criticism and examination of government policy are
provided in the House of Lords at daily question time, during debates on
general motions, in ‘unstarred’ questions (which can be debated) at the end
of the day’s business and during debates on specific legislative proposals.
The main responsibilities of Parliament, and more particularly of the
House of Commons, in managing the revenue of the State and payments for
the public service, are to authorise the taxes and duties to be levied and the
various objects of expenditure and the sum to be spent on each. It also has to
satisfy itself that the sums granted are spent only for the purposes which
Parliament intended. No payment out of the central government’s public
funds can be made and no taxation, charges or loans authorised, except by
Act of Parliament. However, interim payments can be made, within limits,
from the Contingencies Fund. The Finance Act is the most important of the
annual statutes which authorise the raising of revenue. The legislation is
based on the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s Budget statement, which is
normally made annually in March or April and which includes a review of
the public finances of the previous year, and proposals for meeting the
estimated expenditure of the coming year. Scrutiny of public expenditure is
carried out by House of Commons select committees (see p 48).
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community de¬
velopments, and to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies
and proposals, there is a select committee in each House (see p 48). Ministers
also make regular statements about Community business.
Control is exercised finally by the ability of the House of Commons to
force the Government to resign by passing a resolution of‘no confidence’, or
by rejecting a proposal for legislation which the Government considers so
vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’ or, finally, by
refusing to vote the money required for the public service.
GOVERNMENT
51
Parliamentary
Commissioner for
Administration
Parliamentary
Privilege
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government
departments and certain executive and non-departmental bodies but not to
policy decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to matters
affecting relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens
arising from dealings with British diplomatic posts overseas are open to
investigation in some circumstances. The Commissioner has access to
departmental papers and reports the findings to the MP who presented the
complaint. The Commissioner is required to report annually to Parliament.
In addition, he or she publishes details of selected investigations at quarterly
intervals and may submit other reports where necessary. A Commons select
committee has responsibility for overseeing the Commissioner’s work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it
from obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively to
each House and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims from the Queen ‘their
ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each
Parliament. These include freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil
actions; exemption from serving on juries, or being compelled to attend
court as witnesses; and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective
privilege of the House. Further privileges include the rights of the House to
control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance, to exclude
‘strangers’9 if it wishes); to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for
membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to punish for
breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords are broadly similar to those of the
House of Commons.
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent.
Many powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the
Council, and much of its work was handed over to newly created
government departments, some of which were originally committees of the
Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as
Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those
made under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending
meetings at which Orders are made do not thereby become personally
responsible for the policy upon which the Orders are based. This
responsibility rests with the minister answerable for the subject matter of the
Order in question, whether or not he or she was present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal
proclamations, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative
acts (such as summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own
statutory responsibilities, which are independent of the powers of the
Sovereign in Council, include powers of supervision over the registering
bodies for the medical and allied professions. 
!l All those who are not members or officials of either House.
52
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Composition
Prime Minister
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for
life except for very occasional removals) is accorded by the Sovereign on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister to eminent people in Britain and
independent monarchical countries of the Commonwealth. There are about
400 Privy Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the death of the
Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees, whose meetings
differ from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot
constitutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as
those dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of
incorporation. They may also be provided for by statute, as are those for the
universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal
for the courts of British dependencies, courts of independent members of
the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the appeal, courts of the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some
professional and disciplinary committees and ecclesiastical sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the
Lord President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the
administration of national affairs. The Prime Minister is appointed by the
Queen, and all other ministers are appointed by the Queen on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister. The majority of ministers are
members of the Commons, although the Government is also fully rep¬
resented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord Chancellor is always a mem¬
ber of the House of Lords.
The composition of governments can vary both in the number of ministers
and in the titles of some offices. New ministerial offices may be created,
others may be abolished, and functions may be transferred from one
minister to another.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First Lord of the Treasury and
Minister for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known
as the Prime Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s
unique position of authority derives from majority support in the House of
Commons and from the power to choose ministers and to obtain their
resignation or dismissal individually. By modern convention, the Prime
Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen at regular meetings of the general
business of the Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible
for the allocation of functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the
Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown
‘livings’; high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice; Privy
Counsellors, Lord-Lieutenants and certain civil appointments, such as Lord
High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and some university posts; and
GOVERNMENT
53
Departmental
Ministers
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
Ministerial
Salaries
appointments to various public boards and institutions, such as the British
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), as well as various royal and statutory
commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the award of many civil
honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to people who have
achieved eminence in science and the arts and are in some financial need). The
Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national museums and
institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10 Downing Street (the official residence in
central London) has a staff of civil servants who attend to the day-to-day
discharge of the Prime Minister’s numerous responsibilities. The Prime
Minister may also appoint special advisers to the Office from time to time to
assist in the formation of policies.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the
Cabinet, are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a special
title, as in the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal, the
Paymaster General and, from time to time, Ministers without Portfolio, may
have few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any
special duties the Prime Minister may wish to give them.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with
departmental functions and also head of the judiciary. The four Law Officers
of the Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the
Solicitor General; and for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor
General for Scotland.
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given titles which reflect
these particular functions. More than one may work in a department. A
Minister of State may be given a seat in the Cabinet and be paid accordingly.
Junior ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or, where
the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secretaries)
share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given
responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects
of the department’s work. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and
other Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as
Government Whips (see p 45).
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £38,961 a year
for junior ministers to £55,221 for Cabinet ministers. In the House of Lords sal¬
aries range from £33,241 for junior ministers to £44,591 for Cabinet ministers.
The Prime Minister receives £66,851 and the Lord Chancellor £91,500.10
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, receive a
parliamentary salary of £20,101 a year (which is included in the above figures)
in recognition of their constituency responsibilities and are entitled to claim the
other allowances which are paid to all MPs (see p 41).11
10 These figures show the salaries to which the holders are entitled; however, the Prime Minister has
decided to draw no more than the salary payable to a Cabinet minister in the House of Commons.
11 The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary of £32,200 for the post, as well as the
parliamentary salary of £20,101; the Leader of the Opposition in the Lords also receives a salary.
54
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Cabinet
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers (the number can vary)
chosen by the Prime Minister and may include departmental and non-
departmental ministers.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the initiation and final determination of
policies, the supreme control of government and the co-ordination of
government departments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected
by the fact that the Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending
upon majority support in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its
members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings, although after Cabinet papers have been
in existence for 30 years they may be made available for inspection in the
Public Record Office at Kew, Surrey.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting.
To keep the workload of the Cabinet within manageable limits, a great deal
of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves the
referring of issues either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee
then considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it
to the Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has
four standing committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an
economic strategy committee, both chaired by the Prime Minister; and a
home and social affairs committee and a legislation committee, both chaired
by the Lord President of the Council. Sub-committees of the standing
committees may be established. Membership and terms of reference of all
Cabinet committees are confidential. Diaries published by several former
ministers have given the public insight into Cabinet procedures in recent
times.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters
affecting their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees.
Where appropriate, the Secretary of the Cabinet and other senior officials of
the Cabinet Office also attend meetings of the Cabinet and its committees.
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the
direction of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Office
of the Minister for the Civil Service and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of
Cabinet business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of
policy at the highest level.
The Office of the Minister for the Civil Service is responsible for Civil
Service central recruitment, senior and public appointments, policies
on training, promotion and staff development, equal opportunities,
occupational health and the non-financial aspects of personnel man¬
agement.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of
completing the official histories of the second world war, and is responsible
for preparing official histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’
individual responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts
unanimously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject. The
GOVERNMENT
55
policy of departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the
Government as a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has been
decided, each minister is expected to support it or, if unable to, to resign. On
rare occasions, ministers have been allowed free votes in Parliament on
government policies involving important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her
department means that, as political head of that department, he or she is
answerable for all its acts and omissions. He or she must bear the
consequences of any defect of administration, any injustice to an individual
or any aspect of policy which may be criticised in Parliament, whether
personally responsible or not. Since most ministers are members of the
House of Commons, they must answer questions and defend themselves
against criticism in person. Departmental ministers in the House of Lords
are represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their
behalf, usually ajunior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their respon¬
sibility, although on important political matters they usually consult their
colleagues collectively, either through the Cabinet or through a Cabinet
committee. A decision by a departmental minister binds the Government as
a whole.
The final responsibility of ministers is to Parliament. The knowledge that
any departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament
discourages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and
public companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict
between public duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation,
and for advising ministers. They may, and often do, work with and through
local authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations
operating under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy
may be accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence)
covers Britain as a whole. Other departments (such as the Department of
Employment) cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland.
Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned
with affairs in England. Some departments, such as the Department of
Trade and Industry, maintain a regional organisation, and some which have
direct contact with the public throughout the country (for example, the
Department of Employment) also have local offices.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in
which questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent
official, and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to
Parliament. For instance, ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the
Central Office of Information, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, HM
Customs and Excise, the Inland Revenue and a number of other
departments, including the Central Statistical Office, the Royal Mint, and the
National Investment and Loans Office. Departments generally receive their
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
Executive Bodies
Tribunals
Advisory Bodies
BRI TAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL MANDBOOK
funds directly out of money provided by Parliament and are staffed by
members of the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department (in April 1989 the figure
was 1,555). Known as non-departmental public bodies, but often popularly
described as ‘quangos’ (‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organ¬
isations’, although there is no precise definition of the term), they are of
three kinds: executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals.
Executive bodies normally employ staff and have their own budget. They
consist of public bodies which carry out, among other duties, executive,
administrative, regulatory or commercial functions. They operate typically
within broad policy guidelines set by departmental ministers but are in
varying degrees independent of government in carrying out their day-to-day
responsibilities. Examples include the Arts Council of Great Britain, the
British Council, the Commonwealth Development Corporation and the
Commission for Racial Equality.
Tribunals are a specialised group of judicial bodies which are akin to courts
of law. They are normally set up under statutory powers which also govern
their constitution, functions and procedure. Tribunals often consist of
laypeople, but they are generally chaired by someone who is legally
qualified. They tend to be less expensive, and less formal, than courts of law.
Independently of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and obligations
of private citizens towards one another or towards a government department
or other public authority. Important examples are industrial tribunals, rent
tribunals and social security appeal tribunals. Tribunals usually consist of an
uneven number of people so that a majority decision can be reached.
Members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the subject.
Tribunals and advisory bodies do not normally employ staff or spend money
themselves, but their expenses are paid by the government departments
concerned.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or
committees which undertake research and collect information, mainly to
give ministers access to informed opinion before they come to a decision
involving a legislative or executive act. In some cases a minister must consult
a standing committee, but usually advisory bodies are appointed at the
discretion of the minister.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according
to the nature of the work involved, and will usually include representatives of
varying interests and professions.
In addition to the standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by
the Government to examine and make recommendations on specific
matters. For certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose
members are chosen for their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may
be appointed. Royal Commissions examine written and oral evidence from
government departments, interested organisations and individuals, and
submit recommendations. The Government may accept the recom¬
mendations in whole or in part, or may decide to take no further action or to
delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by departmental committees.
GOVERNMENT
57
Government
Information
Services
Each of the main government departments has its own information division
or directorate, public relations branch or news department. These are
normally staffed by professional information officers responsible for
communicating their department’s policies and activities to the news media
and the public (sometimes using publicity services provided by the Central
Office of Information—see p 58) and for advising their departments on the
public’s reaction to them. As press adviser to the Prime Minister, the Prime
Minister’s Press Secretary and other staff in the Prime Minister’s Press Office
have direct and constant contact with the parliamentary press through
regular meetings with the Lobby correspondents. The Lobby corres¬
pondents are a group of political correspondents who have the special
privilege of access to the Lobby of the House of Commons where they can
talk privately to government ministers and other members of the House.
The Prime Minister’s Press Office forms the accepted channel through
which information about parliamentary business is conveyed to the media.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is
Functions given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Scottish and Northern Ireland departments, which are grouped at the end of
the section, and the Cabinet Office, described on p 54. Lurther information
on the work of some departments is given in later chapters under the
relevant subject headings.
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Office of Arts
and Libraries
Crown
Prosecution
Service
HM Customs
and Excise
Ministry of
Defence
Department of
Education and
Science
The work of many of the departments listed on pp 57-60 covers Britain as a
whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB)
for functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for those
covering England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering
England and Wales; and (E) for those concerned with England only.
Policies for agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and food; responsibilities for
related environmental and rural issues (E); food policies.
General promotion of arts (GB); library and information services (E with
advice to W and NI); national museums (E); public libraries and local
museums (E); British Library; national heritage.
An independent department specialising in the prosecution of criminal
offences; headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions, who is supervised
by the Attorney General (E & W).
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including
value added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and
exports and compiling trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
Policies for education (E); the Government’s relations with universities (GB);
fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
58
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT
The Office of
Electricity
Regulation
(OFFER)
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department of
the
Environment
ECGD (Export
Credits
Guarantee
Department)
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Office of Gas
Supply
Department of
Health
Home Office
Central Office
of Information
Main areas of responsibility
Promotion of competition in the generation and supply of electricity;
ensuring that all reasonable demands for electricity are satisfied; protection
of consumer interests (GB).
The Employment Service, employment policy and legislation; training policy
and legislation; health and safety at work; industrial relations, wages
councils equal opportunities; small firms and tourism; statistics on labour
and industrial matters (GB); the Careers Service (E); international
representation on employment matters.
Policies for all forms of energy, including its efficient use and the
development of new sources; the Government’s relations with the energy
industries.
Policies for planning and regional development, local government, new
towns, housing, construction, inner city matters, environmental protection,
water, the countryside, sport and recreation, conservation, historic buildings
and ancient monuments (E); and Property Services Agency (GB).
Provision of insurance for exporters against the risk of not being paid for
goods and services, and access to bank finance for exports; insurance cover
for new investment overseas.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
Monitoring of British Gas as the sole public gas supplier, ensuring
compliance with its statutory obligations, and granting authorisations to
other suppliers of gas through pipes; development of competition in the
industrial market.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local
authorities, and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E).
Administration of justice; criminal law; treatment of offenders, including
probation; the prison service; the police; crime prevention; fire and civil
defence services; licensing laws; scrutiny of local authority by-laws; control ot
firearms and dangerous drugs; electoral matters (E & W). Gaming and
lotteries (GB). Regulation of broadcasting; passports, immigration and
nationality; race relations and sex discrimination. Responsibilities relating to
the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
An executive agency providing publicity material and other information
services on behalf of government departments and a number ot publicly
funded organisations.
Board of Inland Administration of direct taxes; collection of National Insurance con
Revenue tributions. Valuation of land and buildings (GB).
GOVERNMENT
59
DEPARTMENT
The Law
Officers’
Departments
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel
Paymaster
General’s Office
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
HM Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
Serious Fraud
Office
Department of
Social Security
HMSO (Her
Majesty’s
Stationery
Office)
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of
the Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and
criminal, by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—the
Attorney General and the Solicitor General (E 8c W). The Attorney General,
who is also Attorney General for Northern Ireland, superintends the
Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Crown Prosecution Service (E & W), the
Serious Fraud Office (E, W & NI) and the Director of Public Prosecutions for
Northern Ireland (NI).
Administration of the Supreme Court (Court of Appeal, High Court, Crown
Court) and the county courts (E & W), together with certain other courts and
tribunals, and all work relating to judicial and quasi-judicial appointments.
Responsibility for civil and criminal legal aid. Promotion of general reforms
in the civil law. (The Home Office has important responsibilities for the
criminal law.)
Official surveying and mapping, including geodetic surveys and associated
scientific work, and topographic surveys covering Great Britain and some
overseas countries.
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, developing
countries.
Drafting of government Bills (except those relating exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of
public service pensions.
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births,
marriages and deaths; population estimates and projections; compilation of
health statistics; censuses (E & W). Surveys for other government depart¬
ments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government
departments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and
drafting subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing
services; and giving general advice on the interpretation and application of
the law (E 8c W).
Investigating and prosecuting serious or complex fraud under the super¬
vision of the Attorney General (E, W 8c NI).
The social security system (GB). Three new executive agencies are to cover
the main aspects of the Department’s work: an Information Technology
Services Agency; a Benefits Agency; and a Contributions Unit.
An executive agency providing stationery, printing and related services
to Parliament, government departments and other public bodies; and
publishing and selling government documents.
60
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Central
Statistical
Office
Office of
Telecom¬
munications
(OFTEL)
Preparing and interpreting key economic statistics needed for government
policies; collecting and publishing business statistics; publishing annual
statistical digests.
Monitoring of British Telecom, Mercury, and other telecommunications
operators; enforcing competition legislation and representing telecom¬
munications users’ interests.
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Industrial and commercial policy, promotion of enterprise and competition,
information about new methods and opportunities, investor and consumer
protection. Specific responsibilities include industrial innovation policy;
regional industrial policy and inward investment promotion; management
development and business/education links; international trade policy;
commercial relations and export promotion; competition policy; company
law; insolvency; radio regulation; patents and copyright protection (GB).
Department of Land, sea and air transport; sponsorship of the nationalised London
Transport Transport and British Rail; domestic and international civil aviation;
international transport agreements; shipping and the ports industry; marine
pollution; oversight of road transport (GB); motorways and trunk roads;
road safety; and oversight of local authority transport (E).
HM Treasury Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance
and expenditure, including control of staffing and pay in the Civil Service.
Office of Water Monitoring the activities of companies appointed as water and sewerage
Services undertakers (E & W).
Welsh Office Many aspects of Welsh affairs, including health and personal social services;
education, except for terms and conditions of service, student awards and
the University of Wales; the Welsh language and culture; agriculture and
fisheries; forestry; local government; housing; water and sewerage;
environmental protection; sport; land use, including town and country
planning; countryside and nature conservation; new towns, ancient
monuments and historic buildings; roads; tourism; a range of matters
affecting the careers service and the training activities of the Department of
Employment in Wales; selective financial assistance to industry; the Urban
Programme in Wales; the operation of the European Regional Development
Fund in Wales and other European Community matters; non-departmental
public bodies; civil emergencies; all financial aspects of these matters
including Welsh revenue support grant; and oversight responsibilities for
economic affairs and regional planning in Wales.
SCOTLAND Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in
Scotland (with some exceptions) for formulating and carrying out policy
relating to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, en¬
vironmental protection and conservation of the countryside, land-use
planning, local government, housing, roads and certain aspects of transport
services, social work and health.
GOVERNMENT
61
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and de¬
velopment of the Scottish economy, and important functions relating to
industrial development, with responsibility for financial assistance to
industry. He is also responsible for the Scottish Development Agency, the
Highlands and Islands Development Board and new town development
corporations, together with the training activities of the Department of
Employment in Scotland12 and for the Scottish Tourist Board and the
careers service. The Secretary of State plays a full part in determining energy
policy, particularly in relation to responsibility for the electricity supply
industry in Scotland. He is also responsible for government interest in a
range of other functions from fire services to sport and for overseeing many
non-departmental public bodies.
The Secretary of State has overall responsibility for legal services in
Scotland and is advised by the two Scottish Law Officers, the Lord Advocate
and the Solicitor General for Scotland (see below).
The distinctive features and the different conditions and needs of Scotland
and its people are reflected in separate Scottish legislation on many domestic
matters or else in special provisions applying to Scotland alone, inserted in
Acts which otherwise apply to Britain generally.
The Secretary of State discharges his responsibilities principally through
the Scottish Office’s five departments, supported by Central Services (see
p 62) and through four smaller departments: the Department of the
Registers of Scotland (now an executive agency), the Scottish Record Office,
the General Register Office for Scotland and the Scottish Courts Ad¬
ministration.
British government departments with significant Scottish responsibilities
have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely with
the Scottish Office. The British headquarters of several government
departments are located in Scotland.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given
below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agricultural and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Scottish Environment, including environmental protection and conservation of the
Development countryside; land use planning; water supplies and sewerage; ancient
Department monuments and historic buildings; general policy relating to local
government; housing; building control; roads and certain transport
functions.
Scottish Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
Education galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Department
12 From April 1991, the Scottish Development Agency will be reconstituted as Scottish Enterprise and
the Highlands and Islands Development Board reconstituted as Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
62
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Functions
Scottish Home
and Health
Department
Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire,
home defence and civil emergency services.
Industry Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy; tourism;
Department urban regeneration; new towns.
for Scotland
Central Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the
Services Solicitor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, Finance
Divisions and Local Government Finance.
Lord Advocate’s Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and
Department and the principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the
Crown Office Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor
General for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the Supreme and Sheriff courts
Administration and court offices; jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of
judgments; and programme of Scottish Law Commission.
Other General Register Office for Scotland; Scottish Record Office; Department of
Administrative the Registers of Scotland.
Departments
NORTHERN Between 1921 and 1972 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament and
IRELAND Government, subordinate to the Parliament at Westminster. However, in
1972, following the resignation of the Northern Ireland Government, the
British Government assumed direct responsibility for its functions. Attempts
have been made by successive governments to find a means of restoring
devolved government to Northern Ireland on a basis that would command
widespread acceptance throughout the community. The most recent
attempt failed in June 1986, when the Northern Ireland Assembly, elected in
1982, was dissolved after it ceased to discharge its responsibility for making
proposals for the resumption of devolved government and of monitoring the
work of the Northern Ireland departments. The Government expressed the
hope that a new Assembly would be established which would contribute to
the better government and administration of Northern Ireland. To this end
discussions have been continuing since late 1989 between the Government
and the local constitutional political parties as a means of exploring the
extent of the common ground which now appears to exist between them.
This approach is viewed by the Government as a necessary prelude to
discussions about arrangements for the transfer of powers and res¬
ponsibilities to locally elected representatives in Northern Ireland.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is the Cabinet minister
responsible for Northern Ireland. Through the Northern Ireland Office he
has direct responsibility for constitutional developments, law and order,
security, and electoral matters. The work of the Northern Ireland
departments, whose functions are listed below, is also subject to the direction
and control of the Secretary of State.
GOVERNMENT
63
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries; administration
Agriculture for of agricultural grant schemes; advisory service to farmers; agricultural
Northern research, education and training.
Ireland
Department of
Economic
Development
for Northern
Ireland
Development of industry and commerce, as well as administration of
government policy in relation to tourism, energy and minerals;
administration of an employment service and labour training schemes and
assistance to industrial development, through the Industrial Development
Board for Northern Ireland.
Department of Control of the five education and library boards and education as a whole,
Education for youth services, sport and recreation, cultural activities and community
Northern services and facilities, including the improvement of community relations.
Ireland
Department
of the
Environment
for Northern
Ireland
Housing; planning; construction and maintenance of roads; transport and
traffic management, and motor taxation; water and sewerage; en¬
vironmental protection; ordnance survey; collection of rates; harbours; his¬
toric monuments and buildings; maintenance of public records; and certain
controls over local government.
Department of Control of public expenditure; liaison with HM Treasury and the Northern
Finance and Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning and
Personnel research; Ulster Savings; charities; Valuation and Lands Service; policies for
equal opportunities and personnel management; and general management
and control of the Northern Ireland Civil Service.
Department of Health and personal social services; social security; social legislation; and the
Health and Office of the Registrar-General.
Social Services
for Northern
Ireland
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of
government activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy
formulation to carrying out the day-to-day duties of public administration.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. For all practical purposes the
Crown in this context means and is represented by the Government of the
day. There are special cases in which certain functions are conferred by law
upon particular members or groups of members of the public service; but in
general the executive powers of the Crown are exercised by and on the
advice of Her Majesty’s Ministers, who are in turn answerable to Parliament.
The Civil Service as such has no constitutional responsibility separate from
the duly constituted Government of the day. The duty of the individual civil
servant is first and foremost to the Minister of the Crown who is in charge of
the Department concerned. A change of minister, for whatever reason, does
not involve a change of staff. Ministers sometimes appoint special advisers
from outside the Civil Service. The advisers are normally paid from public
funds, but their appointments come to an end when the Government’s term
Executive
Agencies: Next
Steps Initiative
Central
Management
and Structure
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of office finishes, or when the Minister to whom the special adviser is ap¬
pointed leaves the Government or moves to another appointment.
The number of civil servants has fallen from 732,000 in April 1979 to
562,000 in April 1990, reflecting the Government’s policy of controlling the
cost and size of the Civil Service and of improving its efficiency. About half
of all civil servants were engaged in the provision of public services, such as
paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes and contributions,
running employment services, staffing prisons, and providing services to
industry and agriculture. Around a quarter were employed in the Ministry of
Defence. The rest were divided between: central administrative and policy
duties; support services, such as accommodation, printing and information;
and largely financially self-supporting services, for instance, those provided
by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint. The total
includes about 67,000 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly manual workers in
government industrial establishments. Four-fifths of civil servants work
outside London.
The Government is committed to achieving equality of opportunity for all
its staff. In support of this commitment, the Civil Service is actively pursuing
policies to increase employment and career opportunities for women, ethnic
minorities and people with disabilities. The number of black and Asian
people now employed in the Civil Service is proportionate to their rep¬
resentation in Britain’s population as a whole.
Within the Civil Service, reforms of all aspects of the management of
government departments are being implemented to ensure improved
management performance, in particular through the greater accountability
of individual managers based on clear objectives and responsibilities. These
reforms include performance-related pay schemes, and other means to
encourage and reward improved performance.
The Next Steps Initiative, launched in 1988, has been concerned with
improving management in the Civil Service and the efficiency and quality of
services provided to the public and to customers within government. This
has involved setting up, to the greatest extent practicable, separate units or
agencies to perform the executive functions of government. Agencies
remain part of the Civil Service but under the terms of a framework
document they enjoy greater delegation on financial, pay and personnel
matters. Agencies are headed by chief executives who are personally
responsible for the performance of the agency and for meeting the financial
and quality of service targets which it is set. By July 1990 a total of more than
30 agencies had been set up covering around 70,000 staff. It is expected that
this programme will have been applied to at least half the Civil Service by
\99\.
Savings in public expenditure are also being sought by subjecting services
in government departments to competitive tendering and by contracting out
such services whenever commensurate with sound management and good
value for money. By April 1989 savings of around £50 million net a year had
been achieved.
Responsibility for central co-ordination and management of the Civil Service
is divided between the Treasury and the Cabinet Office (Office of the
Minister for the Civil Service). In addition to its other functions, the
Treasury is responsible for the structure of the Civil Service and the
classification of posts. It is also responsible for recruitment policy and for
controlling staffing, pay, pensions and allowances. I he Office of the
Minister for the Civil Service, which is part of the Cabinet Office and under
GOVERNMENT
65
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
the control of the Prime Minister, as Minister for the Civil Service, is
responsible for the organisation, non-financial aspects of personnel
management and overall efficiency of the Service. The function of official
Head of the Home Civil Service is combined with that of Secretary to the
Cabinet.
At the senior levels of the service, where management forms a major
component of most jobs, there are service-wide common grading
arrangements. These unified grades 1 to 7 are known as the Open Structure
and cover grades from Permanent Secretary level to Principal level. Within
the unified grades each post is filled by the person best equipped in terms of
skills, ability and experience regardless of the occupational group to which
he or she previously belonged.
Below this the structure of the non-industrial Civil Service is based on a
system of occupational groups and classes, which are the basic groupings of
staff for the purposes of personnel management. These include the
Administration, Economist, Information Officer, Lawyer, Librarian,
Professional and Technical (which includes architects, surveyors, and
electrical and mechanical engineers), Secretarial, Science and Statistician
Groups. These groups account for 66 per cent of non-industrial staff. Work
requiring specialist skill is always done by qualified individuals.
Personnel management policies encourage the deployment of staff so that
talent can be used to the best advantage, and higher posts are open to people
of outstanding ability, whatever their specialist background or original
method of entry into the Service. I his ensures that people with the necessary
qualities can gain suitably wide experience to fit them for posts at the highest
levels. The exchange of staff between the Civil Service and industry is also
encouraged.
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 6,650 or so people,
provides the majority of the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
and at British diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions
include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and
conducting business in international organisations; promoting British
exports and trade generally, administering aid, presenting British ideas,
policies and objectives to the people of overseas countries; administering the
remaining dependent territories; and protecting British interests abroad and
British nationals overseas.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with
that of the Home Civil Service. Conditions of work are in many ways
comparable, while taking into account the special demands of the Service,
particularly of postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the
armed forces, and individuals from the private sector, may also serve in the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or
attachment.
Recruitment of staff to the middle and higher levels of the Home Civil
Service and the Diplomatic Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service
Commission. In conjunction with departments, it ensures staff are selected
solely on merit through fair and open competition. I he selection of junior
staff, such as those engaged in clerical and manual work, is made by the
departments.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home and
Diplomatic Civil Services, entry is at three levels relating broadly to the
academic achievements of: a first or second class honours degree; GCE
Advanced level; and GCSE grades A, B or C. The selection procedure for the
66
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
highest of these levels (the Administration Trainee entry) comprises
qualifying tests, followed by tests and interviews at the Civil Service Selection
Board and an interview by the Final Selection Board. For the next level (the
Executive Officer entry) selection involves a qualifying test followed by an
interview. For the lower clerical level (the Administrative Officer/Assistant
entry) selection is normally by interview of those holding the prescribed
educational qualifications.
Entry to the Professional and Technology Group usually requires
appropriate qualifications, and selection is by interview, taking account of
past record. Graduates are offered a structured training programme leading
to membership of the appropriate professional institution. Entry to the
Science Group is at three levels: to the Scientific Officer level for graduates
and those with Higher National Diplomas and Higher National Certificates;
and to the Assistant Scientific Officer level for those with GCSEs or GCE
Advanced level.
Many government departments and agencies employ training officers and
tutors to help identify staff training needs and organise training by the most
effective method (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil
Service College provides a wide range of training courses in both
management and specialist skills. Use is also made of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their general education by
attending courses, usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). All
staff may be entitled to financial assistance to continue their education,
though mainly in their own time. There are also opportunities for civil
servants to obtain fellowships for research and study in areas of interest to
themselves and to their departments and agencies.
Promotion and
Terms of
Service
Departments are responsible for promotion up to and including Grade 4.
Normally promotion is from grade to grade, but there can be accelerated
promotion for staff who show exceptional promise. Promotion or
appointment to Grades 1 and 2 and all transfers between departments at
these levels are approved by the Prime Minister, who is advised by the Head
of the Home Civil Service. Promotions and appointments to Grade 3 are
approved by the Cabinet Office.
Terms and conditions of employment for civil servants are generally
subject to consultation between management and staff and their
representatives.
Political and
Private
Activities
Civil servants are required to discharge loyally the duties assigned to them by
the Government of the day of whatever political persuasion. It is essential
that ministers and the public should have confidence that the personal views
of civil servants do not influence the discharge of their official duties, given
the role of the Civil Service in serving successive governments of different
political complexions. The aim of the rules which govern political activities
by civil servants is to allow them the greatest possible freedom to participate
in public affairs consistent with their rights and duties as citizens without
infringing these fundamental principles. The rules are therefore concerned
with political activities liable to give public expression to political views rather
than with privately held beliefs and opinions.
The Civil Service is divided into three groups for the purposes of deciding
the extent to which individuals may take part in political activities. Those in
the ‘politically free’ group, consisting of industrial staff and non-office
grades, are free to engage in any political activity, including adoption as a
candidate for the British or the European Parliament (although they would
have to resign from the Service if elected). Those in the ‘politically restricted
GOVERNMENT
67
Security
group, which comprises staff in Grade 7 and above as well as Administration
Trainees, are debarred from national political activities but may apply for
permission to take part in local political activities. The ‘intermediate’ group,
which comprises all other civil servants, may apply for permission to take
part in national or local political activity, apart from candidature for the
British or the European Parliament.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the
avoidance of any conflict with official duties. A code of discretion requires
moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to ministers.
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil
servants, provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and
that there is no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil
servant must comply with any departmental instruction on the need to seek
authority before taking part in any outside activity which involves the use of
official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any company
holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of
official concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed
on work vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not
open to those who are known to be members of communist or fascist
organisations or of subversive groups, or associated with them in such a way
as to raise legitimate doubts about their reliability, or to anyone whose
reliability may be in doubt for any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission may investigate
and report on breaches of security in the public service and advise on
changes in security procedure, if requested to do so by the Prime Minister
after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition.
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout Britain. The gradual expansion of local services,
particularly in the period between the late 1940s and mid-1970s, led to a
steady rise in local government expenditure and in its support from central
funds. In recent years central government has sought to check this growth as
part of a general policy of reducing public expenditure. A number of
measures have been introduced, aimed at increasing the accountability of
local government. These include the holding back of central government
grant from authorities spending above government targets, and the
establishment in England and Wales of the independent Audit Commission
to audit accounts and ensure economical use of resources. The Government
has legislated to promote greater competition in the provision of some local
authority services. In Scotland there is an independent Commission for
Local Authority Accounts and similar action has been taken to control local
authority expenditure. Moreover, since staff costs form such a significant
part of public expenditure, local authorities have been urged to reduce staff
levels. Local authorities in England, Wales and Scotland are required to
publish quarterly staffing levels for particular services.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them
by Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual
administration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the
68
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
responsibility of the local authority. In the case of certain services, however,
ministers have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity in the
standard of a service provided, to safeguard public health, or to protect the
rights of individual citizens. For some services the minister concerned has
wide powers of supervision; for others there are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment, although other depart¬
ments (for example, the Department of Education and Science, and the
Home Office) are concerned with various local government functions; in
Scotland, the Scottish Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern
Ireland, the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) are divided into 53 counties,
within which there are 369 districts. All the districts and 47 of the
counties—the ‘non-metropolitan’ counties—have independent, locally
elected councils with separate functions. County authorities provide the
large-scale local government services, while the district authorities are
responsible for the more local ones (see p 70).
In Greater London—an area of about 1,580 sq km (610 sq miles) and a
population of some 6-8 million—the local government authorities are the
councils of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of the City of London,
while in the six metropolitan counties there are 36 district councils.
Until 1986 Greater London and the metropolitan counties had their own
councils, but these were abolished by the Local Government Act 1985, which
was designed to create a more effective, economical and accountable system
by removing a tier of local government. As a result, many of the functions
previously carried out by the Greater London Council and the metropolitan
county councils were transferred to the London borough and metropolitan
district councils. However, a number of services require a statutory authority
over areas wider than the boroughs and districts. These are waste regulation
and disposal in certain areas; the police and fire services, including civil
defence, and public transport in all metropolitan counties; and the fire
service, including civil defence, in London. All are run by joint authorities
composed of elected councillors nominated by the borough or district
councils. In April 1990 responsibility for education in inner London was
transferred from the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) to
individual inner London borough councils. The Local Government Act 1985
established seven residuary bodies to carry out the remaining tasks of the
Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils that were not
assigned to successor authorities at that time. The Act also placed a duty on
the residuary bodies to wind themselves up by March 1991.
Within rural districts in England, parish councils or meetings are focuses
for local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local interest. In Wales
community councils have similar functions.
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council.
There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and
the Western Isles. Provision is also made for local community councils,
although these are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England,
Wales and Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local
environmental and certain other services. Statutory bodies, such as the
Northern Ireland Housing Executive and area boards, are responsible to
GOVERNMENT
69
Election of
Councils
central government departments for administering major services such as
housing, education and libraries, and health and personal social services.
Regional services such as roads, water and sewerage, and planning, are the
responsibility of central government, through the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors
presided over by a chairman. Councillors can claim a flat-rate attendance
allowance or a financial loss allowance for performing council business. They
are also entitled to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and
community councillors cannot claim expenses for duties.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a
chairman and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of
borough, or city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland, by
the Secretary of State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally
known as the Mayor. In the City of London and certain other large cities, he
or she is known as the Lord Mayor. In Scotland the chairman of the district
council of each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost. No specific title is
laid down for the chairmen of other councils, but some are known as
conveners, while others continue to use the old title of‘provost’.
Councillors are elected for four years. All county councils, London
borough councils, and about two-thirds of non-metropolitan district councils
are elected in their entirety every four years. In the remaining districts
(including all metropolitan districts) one-third of the councillors are elected
in each of the three years between county council elections.
In Scotland local elections are held every two years, alternately for districts
and for regions and islands authorities, so that all types of authority are
elected for four years at a time.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British citizen, other
Commonwealth citizen, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not subject to
any legal incapacity and is on the electoral register. To qualify for
registration a person must be resident in the council area on the qualifying
date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative
of one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an
independent. Candidates must be British citizens, other Commonwealth
citizens or citizens of the Irish Republic, and aged 21 or over. They must also
be registered as local electors in the area of the local authority to which they
seek election; or have lived in or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or other
premises in that area during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day
on which they are nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months, have had
their principal or only place of work there. No one may be elected to a
council of which he or she is an employee, and there are some other
disqualifications. Under the Elected Authorities (Northern Ireland) Act
1989, all candidates for district council elections are required to make a
declaration against terrorism.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local
council elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided
into electoral divisions, each returning one councillor. Districts in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland are divided into ‘wards’, returning one
councillor or more. In Scotland the electoral areas in the regions and islands
areas are called electoral divisions, each returning a single member; the
districts are divided into wards, similarly returning a single member. For
parish or community council elections in England and Wales, each parish or
70
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Functions and
Services
Internal
Organisation of
Local
Authorities
community, or ward of a parish or community, forms an electoral area which
returns one member or more.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to
that for parliamentary elections. In Northern Ireland local government
elections are held on the basis of proportional representation, and electoral
wards are grouped into district electoral areas.
Some functions of local authorities are primarily duties, others purely
permissive.
Functions in England and Wales are divided between county and district
councils. County councils are responsible for matters requiring planning and
administration over wide areas or requiring the support of substantial
resources. District councils administer more local functions.
English county councils are responsible for strategic planning, transport
planning, highways, traffic regulation, education, consumer protection,
refuse disposal, police, the fire service, libraries and the personal social
services. District councils are responsible, for instance, for environmental
health, housing, decisions on most planning applications, and refuse
collection. 1’hey may also provide off-street car parks subject to the consent
of the county council. Powers to carry out functions—such as the provision
of museums, art galleries and parks—are available at both levels;
arrangements depend on local agreement.
In the metropolitan counties the district councils are responsible for all
services apart from the police, the fire service and public transport and, in
some areas, waste regulation and disposal. In Greater London the boroughs
and the City Corporation are responsible for similar functions but London’s
metropolitan police force is directly responsible to the Home Secretary.
Responsibility for public transport lies with London Transport.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is
much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their
functions to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other
than functions relating to education, police, the personal social services and
national parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local govern¬
ment functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England
and Wales. Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their iso¬
lation from the mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authoiities.
In Northern Ireland local environmental and certain other services, such
as leisure and the arts, are administered by the district councils.
Responsibility for planning, roads, water supply and sewerage services is
exercised in each district through a divisional office of the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland. Area boards, responsible to central
departments, administer education, public libraries and the health and
personal services locally. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive,
responsible to the Department of the Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make arrangements for
carrying out their duties. They may co-operate oi share among themselves
the discharge of their functions. Most use a committee system, whereby
policy and principle are decided in full council, while the detailed
administration of the various services is the responsibility of committees
composed of selected members of the council and, where the authority
chooses, 'persons of experience’. A council may delegate to a committee or
Parliamentary Democracy
The television control
room of the House of
Commons Broadcasting
Unit, which makes
television pictures
available to approved
broadcasters for use in
news and current affairs
programmes. After an
eight-month trial
period, the House of
Commons voted in 1990
to allow its proceedings
to be televised
permanently.
Voting in Britain is not
compulsory. At the last
general election, in
1987, 74-6 per cent of
the electorate turned
out to vote.
Waterfronts
South Tenby harbour
and town, Wales.
The Watershed,
St Augustine’s Reach,
Bristol.
The Broomielaw,
Glasgow, Scotland.
Commonwealth Institute
Schoolchildren and
professional performers take
part in the annual Trinidad
Carnival at the Institute.
In the Commonwealth Institute’s
Bhownagree Gallery Studio,
Nigerian artist Ademola Akintola
shows his work to local
schoolchildren. The Institute is
the centre of Commonwealth
education and culture in Britain.
GOVERNMENT
71
Public Access
Officers and
Employees
Local Authority
Finance
officer any function except in connection with raising loans, levying non¬
domestic rates, the community charge (see p 72) or making financial
demands on other local authorities liable to contribute; these are legally
reserved to the council as a whole. Some councils have policy advisory or co¬
ordinating committees which originate policy for implementation by the full
council. The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in formal standing orders.
Parish and community councils in England and Wales are often able to do
their work in full session, although they appoint committees from time to
time as necessary.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 is designed to strengthen
the democratic functioning of local authorities. This includes requiring
council committees to reflect the political composition of the council,
generally removing voting powers from co-opted members of decision¬
making committees and prohibiting the most senior officers from being
members of other local authorities or undertaking public political activity.
Some provisions of this Act have not been introduced in Northern Ireland.
The public (including the press) are admitted to council, committee and sub¬
committee meetings, and have a right of access to agendas, reports and
minutes of meetings and certain background papers. Local authorities may
exclude the public from meetings and withhold these papers only in limited
circumstances specified by legislation.
Over 2 million people are employed by local authorities in Great Britain.
These include administrative, professional and technical staff, teachers,
firefighters, those engaged on law and order services, and manual workers.
Nearly half of all local government workers are employed in the education
service.
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities
responsible for the functions concerned, councils are individually
responsible within national policy requirements for determining the size,
composition and deployment of their workforces. In Northern Ireland each
council must by law appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and
manual workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the
recommendation of the committee or committees involved. Most junior
appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible
for engaging manual workers. Pay and conditions of service are generally a
matter for each council, although there are scales recommended by national
negotiating machinery set up by the local authorities themselves.
Authorities differ in the degree to which they employ their own
permanent staff to carry out certain functions or use private firms under
contract. The Government’s policy of promoting value for money is
encouraging the use of private firms where there are resultant economies.
The Local Government Act 1988 requires authorities either to contract out
or to expose to competition the following services: refuse collection, street
cleaning, school and general catering, vehicle maintenance, ground
maintenance and building cleaning, sport and leisure management. The
current cost of this is estimated to be between £3,000 million and £5,000
million a year.
In 1989-90 expenditure by local authorities in Britain amounted to £51,200
million, one-quarter of general government expenditure. Current expen-
72
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Current
Expenditure
Capital
Expenditure
diture amounted to nearly £42,000 million, and capital expenditure, net of
capital receipts, was £4,200 million and debt interest £5,100 million.
A new system of local authority finance was introduced in England and
Wales in April 1990 and in Scotland in April 1989. The main features of the
new arrangements are designed to strengthen local democratic ac¬
countability. First, domestic rates (local property taxes) have been replaced
by a community charge set by each authority and payable by each resident
adult. Secondly, there is a grant system compensating for differences in local
authorities’ needs and ability to raise revenue. Thirdly, in England and
Wales a uniform business rate (uniform in the sense that a single poundage
applies throughout England and throughout Wales) has been set, the
proceeds of which are distributed to authorities in proportion to the number
of people paying the community charge. In Scotland the business rate is not
at present uniform.
In 1989—90 education accounted for 44 per cent of current expenditure.
Most of the remainder was spent on roads and transport; housing and other
environmental services; law, order and protective services; personal social
services and social security.
Local authority current expenditure in Great Britain is financed from the
community charge, the proceeds of the business rate pool and revenue
support grant from central government. Revenue support grant is
distributed so as to compensate for differences in the assessed cost for each
authority of providing a standard level of services. The grant is distributed in
such a way that local authorities with differing needs and local resources
(that is, income from the community charge and the business rate) should be
able to levy the community charge at a standard rate and provide a standard
level of service. The community charge for standard spending is set at a
different level in England and Wales. Specific grant is also paid to meet some
of the costs of providing services such as the police and, in inner cities, the
Urban Programme.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive central government grants.
These comprise specific grants, which assist with the financing of certain
functions (for example, the acquisition of open space) and certain capital
projects (for example, leisure centres), and a general grant, which is paid by
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. The general
grant compensates councils for loss of rate income arising from statutory
derating of premises, and also contains a resources element which brings the
rating resources of poorer councils up to a standard level determined by the
Department.
Local government capital expenditure is financed primarily by borrowing
and from capital receipts from the disposal of land and buildings. These
sources are supplemented mainly by capital grants and contributions from
central government. Every year each local authority receives from central
government credit approvals covering the main blocks of service for which it
is responsible. Credit approvals are expressed as an amount of money and
authorise the local authority to incur credit, including borrowing, on capital
expenditure up to the amount specified. Also, part of the capital receipts
generated by the authority can be used to finance capital expenditure; the
remainder is set aside as provision to repay debt. In addition, local
authorities can use revenue contributions to finance capital expenditure.
Authorities have almost complete discretion to spend according to local
priorities.
GOVERNMENT
73
Northern Ireland
Loans
Control of
Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
In Northern Ireland, occupiers of land and property pay rates to meet part
of the cost of local services. Each occupier’s payment is calculated annually
by the rating authority by multiplying the rateable value of a property
(broadly equivalent to its annual rental value) by the rate poundage—an
amount per pound of rateable value fixed by the authority according to its
projected financial needs. Rateable values are reassessed periodically, the last
occasion having been in 1973. Industrial premises are fully derated, as are
commercial premises in enterprise zones. Certain other properties, such as
freight transport and recreational premises, are partially derated.
Local authorities are allowed to borrow money long term to finance new
capital expenditure and also to refinance loans raised for capital finance,
thus enabling flexible debt management. Authorities are not allowed to
borrow long term to finance revenue expenditure but they may borrow
money short term in anticipation of revenues. In Northern Ireland long¬
term borrowing by district councils is subject to central approval. In Scotland
central approval is given to capital expenditure, not to loans.
Most long-term borrowing by authorities is from the Public Works Loan
Board (or, in Northern Ireland, the Consolidated Fund). The Board draws
its funds from the Government’s National Loans Fund and thus allows
authorities to enjoy interest rates lower than any institution except the
Government. Authorities may also borrow from the capital market using
means specified in legislation. All loan charges are secured against the
revenues of the authority and represent a first charge on those revenues.
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial
policy under constant review. They must have their annual accounts audited
by independent auditors appointed by the Audit Commission in England
and Wales, or by the Commission for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland this role is exercised by a local government audit section
appointed by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising
local commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Com¬
mission has three local commissioners and the Welsh, one. In Scotland the
statute provides for a single commissioner. All commissioners are
responsible in their particular area for investigating citizens’ allegations of
injustice resulting from maladministration by local authorities.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with com¬
plaints alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by dis¬
trict councils and certain other public bodies.
Fire Services
Every part of Britain is covered by a local authority fire service, which is
subject to some general oversight by central government. In Great Britain,
the cost is shared between local authorities and central government, the
latter contributing through the revenue support grant. In Northern Ireland,
the fire service is financed wholly from central government funds.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire¬
fighting, and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal
requirements. (In some parts of Scotland combined authorities provide fire
cover.) Other authorities also maintain fire brigades, for instance, the Army
and Royal Air Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; the Civil
74
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fire Prevention
Research
Aviation Authority at airports; and some large industrial and commercial
concerns. These work in co-operation with the local authority fire services.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
government is concerned mainly with ensuring the operational efficiency of
brigades. Ministers have statutory powers to prescribe standards and general
requirements on administrative and operational matters of service-wide
significance. These include appointments and promotions, the provision of a
central training institution, pensions and disciplinary matters. Their
approval is also required for reductions in the fire-fighting establishments of
fire brigades. Each minister is advised by a Central Fire Brigades Advisory
Council, comprising the respective home departments, local authorities, fire
service representative organisations and certain specialist advisers. In the
home departments inspectorates of fire services advise on operational and
technical matters. Most fire brigades include part-time personnel who
provide fire cover in less densely populated areas in return for a retaining
fee and call-out and attendance fees. Fire authorities also employ people for
duties in controls, communications, and mobilising and staff duties. There
are about 37,000 full-time and 14,000 part-time operational members of fire
brigades in Britain.
The standardisation of some equipment is encouraged to assist com¬
patibility when a fire is attended by more than one brigade. The prin¬
cipal types of fire-fighting appliances bought by fire authorities are based
upon specifications approved by the Secretaries of State and issued in the
form of advice by the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. The speci¬
fications aim to describe the minimum standards required while allow¬
ing some freedom of design.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in
Scotland) who exercises day-to-day control from brigade headquarters.
Divisional officers in charge of the geographical areas into which most
brigade regions are divided are responsible for mobilising forces. Constant
communication is maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters.
If additional resources are required to deal with an incident, neighbouring
divisions, or a neighbouring fire brigade, are asked to provide assistance.
Fire authorities are concerned with fire precautions in most buildings used
by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing legislation
concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient ariangements
for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spiead of fires, and
means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service
College for fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and
advisory duties, brigades are also involved in education and publicity to
promote fire safety, particularly in the home. The Home Office and the
Scottish Home and Health Department also promote fire safety in the home.
Central government is advised on prevention by the Joint Fire Prevention
Committee of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils, representing the
fire service and central and local authorities.
Research into health hazards to fire-fighters, fire prevention, fire-brigade
organisation and fire-fighting equipment is conducted by the Home Office
with the help of the fire services through the Joint Committee on Fire
Research of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual
research projects are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research
and Development Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other
government agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, or by private
GOVERNMENT
75
Special Services
Fire Losses
Fire Casualties
consultants. The Fire Research Station, part of the Building Research Es¬
tablishment of the Department of the Environment, is the principal organ¬
isation studying and investigating the technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment in a
variety of non-fire emergencies. These are known as ‘special services’ and
include rail, road and aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of
premises, leakage of harmful gas or liquids and the rescue of people or
animals from dangerous situations. Fire authorities are entitled to levy a
charge for such services.
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in
Britain in 1989 amounted to an estimated £792-4 million. (Consequential
losses from the interruption of business are not included in this total.) Most
fires involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended, and
fires are more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments.
Industries which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical
firms; textiles; food, drink and tobacco warehousing; chemical and allied
industries; paper, printing and publishing firms; and retailing.
Over 900 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires
every year (most of them at home) and about a further 13,300 suffer injury.
Among the chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and
clothing by smokers’ materials and by heaters. Government regulations on
the use of new, safer foam material in the upholstery of domestic furniture
have been introduced.
- rj i
3 Overseas Relations
Administration
Since 1945 Britain has progressively, and largely peacefully, dismantled its
Empire. Yet it retains global interests, including continuing responsibilities
for 14 dependent territories, and for 6 million British citizens who live
overseas. Britain imports over one-third of its food and over one-half of its
raw material requirements. Exports account for over a quarter of gross
national product (GNP). London is a major world financial centre and
Britain’s overseas investments are the second largest in the world, fast
catching up with Japan’s.
Britain’s overseas relations have been shaped by its history as a major
trading and maritime power. The maintenance of peace and promotion of
global stability and prosperity remain primary objectives of Britain’s overseas
policy today.
Britain regards multilateral co-operation as a key element in safeguarding
its security and economic interests. As well as maintaining diplomatic
relations with 165 countries, it is a member of some 120 international
organisations, including the United Nations (see p 97), the North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation (see p 92), and the European Community (see p 78).
Britain has close links with many developing countries, notably within the
Commonwealth, which evolved out of the former British Empire and which
links 50 independent countries in a representative cross-section of the
international community. Commonwealth members have a language in
common and close professional, academic and commercial ties. In all, Britain
provides development assistance to over 120 independent countries as well
as to its dependencies.
Britain also has strong links with the United States, including a common
language and similar political and cultural traditions.
The general conduct of overseas relations is the responsibility of the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, supported by
four Ministers of State, acting through the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office (ECO) and over 200 British diplomatic posts overseas. The latter
comprise embassies and high commissions in about 130 countries,1 together
with subordinate consulates-general and consulates, and missions at ten
international organisations. These posts, like the ECO, are staffed by mem¬
bers of the Diplomatic Service and locally engaged people. Excluding
supporting administrative and communications services, 30 per cent of front¬
line diplomatic staff and senior locally engaged staff are involved in com¬
mercial work such as export promotion and the protection of British
commercial interests, 24 per cent in consular/entry clearance services, 18 per
cent in political and economic work, 9 per cent in information and 8 per cent
in other work.
A few embassies are accredited to more than one country.
78
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
Other departments concerned with overseas relations include the Ministry
of Defence, the Department of Trade and Industry, the Treasury and the
Overseas Development Administration (ODA, which forms part of the
FCO).
Where overseas policy involves matters within the responsibility of other
departments, the FCO formulates policy in consultation with the
departments concerned. The department with the predominant functional
interest, even though it may be primarily domestic, takes the lead,
particularly in policy concerning the European Community and inter¬
national monetary matters. In the case of policy towards the Community, the
FCO exercises its co-ordinating role through the machinery of the Cabinet
Office.
Other bodies include the British Overseas Trade Board and the ECGD
(Export Credits Guarantee Department), which provide export services for
industry. Crown Agents helps to arrange purchases from British aid funds
and appointments under technical co-operation programmes; it also
provides mainly purchasing and management services to overseas
governments and institutions.
The British Council, an independent non-political organisation, promotes
Britain abroad and is the principal agent for British cultural relations
overseas. Represented in 90 countries, it provides a wide-ranging network of
contacts between government departments, universities, colleges, and pro¬
fessional, business and arts organisations in Britain and around the world.
The Council has five main activities: it helps people to study, train or make
professional contacts in Britain and enables British specialists to teach, advise
or establish joint projects abroad; teaches English and promotes its use;
provides library and information services; promotes British education,
science and technology; and makes British arts and literature more widely
known.
It employs qualified staff to teach English in its language centres, to run its
libraries and to manage its own businesses. It also matches the needs and
demands of countries overseas with the skills and services available from
various organisations in Britain. Wherever possible, the Council uses its own
operations to stimulate activity and expenditure by others.
The Council’s expenditure in 1990—91 is estimated at £348 million. As well
as providing its own programmes funded by government grant through the
FCO (£99 million) and Council earnings (£80 million), it also manages
training and education programmes on behalf of the ODA (£148 million)
and the FCO (£21 million). Business sponsorship—almost £4 million in
1989—90—is making an increasing contribution to the Council’s work.
In 1989-90 the Council brought 35,000 overseas students, trainees and
professional visitors to Britain, and taught English to 66,000 students in its
teaching centres overseas. The Council’s 116 overseas libraries had a total
membership of 428,000; issued 8 million books, periodicals, films and tapes;
and handled 800,000 enquiries for information about Britain. In addition to
their film and video stocks, many libraries have software demonstration
equipment and on-line access to British databases. The Council also
supported over 1,000 events in the visual arts, film and television, drama,
dance and music, ranging from the classical to the contemporary.
Membership of the European Community
Britain is fully committed to active membership of the European
Community, which is at the core of its European and wider foreign policy.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
Community
Institutions
Council of
Ministers
The Community’s objectives, as set out in the Treaty of Rome and confirmed
in the Single European Act of 1986, are to lay the foundations for a closer
union between the peoples of Europe on the basis of a common internal
market, the gradual approximation of member states’ economic policies and
a framework of common law. The Community has abolished internal tariffs
and some other trade barriers, established a common external customs tariff
and made provision for freer movement of labour, capital and services.
Member states have agreed to establish a genuinely free internal market by
the end of 1992. The Community also negotiates on behalf of its member
states in international trade negotiations. Overseas countries having special
links with the Community are accorded preferential treatment in aid and the
development of trade. The Community accounts for about a fifth of world
trade, and half of Britain’s trade is with the other 11 member states.
The European Community
Major policy decisions are taken by the Council of Ministers, on which
member states are represented by foreign or other ministers as appropriate
to the subject under discussion. The Presidency of the Council changes at six-
monthly intervals; Britain will assume it for the fourth time from July to
December 1992. Most Council decisions are taken on the basis of a proposal
made by the European Commission; some may be decided by majority or
qualified majority, with votes weighted according to each country’s size, as
set out in the Community treaties. In other cases the Council proceeds on the
basis of unanimity. The Single European Act provides for improved decision¬
taking through more use of qualified majority voting, particularly on
internal market measures.
80
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
European
Commission
European
Parliament
Court of Justice
Heads of Government meet twice a year as the European Council, which
takes important decisions and discusses Community policies and world
affairs generally.
The European Commission puts forward policy proposals, executes de¬
cisions taken by the Council of Ministers and ensures that Community rules
are correctly observed. It is composed of 17 Commissioners (two from
Britain), nominated by member governments and appointed by common
agreement, and is pledged to act independently of national or sectional
interests.
The European Parliament, directly elected by the people in member states at
five-yearly intervals, has 518 members, 81 of whom come from Britain.
Members sit in groups according to party affiliation and not nationality. The
most recent election took place in June 1989.
The Parliament is consulted on a wide range of issues before the Council
takes final decisions. The Commission can be removed from office as a whole
by a two-thirds majority of all members of the Parliament in a vote of
censure. The Parliament adopts the Community’s annual budget in
agreement with the Council. Members may also put questions to the Council
of Ministers and the Commission.
The Parliament’s legislative powers were increased by the 1986 Single
European Act. On certain categories of proposed legislation (notably that
related to the single European market, free movement of workers and
working conditions) the Parliament may give an opinion not just on a
Commission proposal but also—in a second reading—on the position taken
by the Council of Ministers on the proposal. The aim is to enable the
Parliament to propose amendments at a second stage before the Council
adopts the proposal as Community law. The Commission reconsiders its
proposal in the light of the Parliament’s amendments and the Council then
reaches a final decision. If the Parliament rejects the Council’s position,
unanimity is required for the Council to act on a second reading. If the
Parliament proposes amendments, the Council votes by qualified majority
where the Commission has endorsed them and unanimously where the
Commission has not done so. The Single European Act imposes a strict
timetable on the consultation procedures in order to quicken decision¬
making.
New applications for membership of the Community must receive the
assent of an absolute majority of the Parliament, as must the conclusion of
agreements with third countries establishing an association involving
reciprocal agreements.
The Court of Justice, consisting of 13 judges, interprets and adjudicates on
the meaning of the treaties and on any measures taken by the Council of
Ministers and the Commission. It also hears complaints and appeals brought
by or against Community institutions, member states or individuals and gives
preliminary rulings on cases referred by courts in the member states. It
represents the final authority on all aspects of Community law. The Single
European Act provided for a Court of First Instance to relieve the Court of
Justice of a substantial part of its workload and to enable the handing down
of rulings to be speeded up. The new Court, which became operational in
September 1989, has 12 members. Its jurisdiction covers disputes between
officials of the Community and their employers, certain actions against
Community institutions in relation to Community competition rules and
some cases under the 1951 European Coal and Steel Community Treaty.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
81
Court of Auditors
Policy
Implementation
Political
Co-operation
Finance
Internal
Policies
The Single
Market
The Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and expenditure to
see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure sound financial
management.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally
binding and directly applicable in all member countries, and directives,
which are binding on the member states to which they are addressed but
allow national authorities to decide on means of implementation. Decisions
are binding on those to whom they are addressed (for example, member
states, firms or individuals), while recommendations and opinions have no
binding force. The Council of Ministers can also indicate a general policy
direction through resolutions.
Member states have also set up machinery under which they consult each
other and co-ordinate their positions on foreign policy matters of general
interest. Known as political co-operation, these consultations include regular
meetings of foreign ministers, monthly meetings of senior officials, and
contacts at working level among those concerned with particular issues.
The Community is financed by a system of levies on agricultural imports,
customs duties and contributions from member states based on value added
tax (VAT) levied on a harmonised base and on gross national product
(GNP). These are known as ‘own resources’. Because of an imbalance
between Community policies a problem arose in the late 1970s over the
excessive level of Britain’s net contribution to the budget in relation to
Britain’s share of Community GNP.
Because Britain received considerably less from the Community budget
than it contributed, it made a net contribution to the Community
substantially in excess of that justified by its share of GNP. In June 1984, it
was agreed that Britain should receive an annual abatement, deducted from
its contribution, equal to two-thirds of the gap between its share of VAT
contributions and its share of expenditure in the previous year.
In 1988 there was a further reform of the Community’s finances which
retained Britain’s abatement, increased the ceiling on Community revenue
from 1 -4 per cent of the harmonised VAT base to 1 -2 per cent of Community
GNP, introduced new controls on Community spending, and imposed
legally binding constraints on agricultural spending, including measures to
cut back surplus stocks and discourage over-production.
In Britain’s view, completion of a single, unified internal Community market
by removing the remaining major barriers to the free movement of goods,
services and capital is the most effective means of improving European
competitiveness in world markets, so generating wealth and prosperity for its
citizens. The Single European Act commits member states to establish
a genuine single market by the end of 1992, and two-thirds of the pro¬
gramme is now agreed. It covers, for example, the liberalisation of capital
movements, the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and the
opening up of public procurement markets. Britain’s current priorities
include the simplification and eventual lifting of customs and other frontier
restrictions on the free movement of goods, the removal of technical barriers
to trade and the freeing of markets in services, especially financial services,
insurance and transport.
Since 1988 the Government has sought to bring home to British
businesses the importance of 1992 and to encourage companies to plan
ahead to meet the challenges and opportunities it presents. The
82
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Transport
Monetary Policy
Research and
Development
Government believes that the Community, in completing the single market,
should not erect trade barriers against other countries and should abide by
its international trading obligations, particularly under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Britain believes that a system of deregulated transport is an essential part of
the single market. It therefore supported the 1988 regulation under which
all quota restrictions on the movement of road haulage between member
states will be removed by the beginning of 1993. It has also welcomed recent
moves to increase competition in civil aviation and will press for further
liberalising steps in all transport sectors. Britain’s links with other member
states will be improved with the completion of the Channel Tunnel,
scheduled for 1993.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote
monetary stability in Europe. It consists of an exchange rate mechanism
(ERM), the European Currency Unit (ECU) and enlarged short- and
medium-term credit facilities. The ECU is based on a ‘basket’ of the
Community currencies, the value of which is recalculated daily.
Britain participated in the system from the outset, although not in the
ERM, and deposited 20 per cent of its gold and dollar currency reserves with
the European Monetary Co-operation Fund in exchange for ECUs. At the
beginning of October 1990 Britain announced that it would become a
member of the ERM.
In 1989 the European Council approved the first stage of a plan for
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) drawn up by a committee of
governors of central banks. This stage, implementation of which began in
July 1990, includes the strengthening of economic and monetary policy co¬
ordination, the completion of the single market, the strengthening of
competition policy and all member states joining the ERM on equal terms.
Britain is fully committed to stage one but has some reservations about full
monetary union.
An Inter-Governmental Conference will take place in December 1990 in
order to consider Treaty changes regarding EMU. As part of the
preparation for this conference, Britain has suggested the creation of a
European Monetary Fund (EMF) to manage the ERM, to co-ordinate
exchange rate intervention with external currencies and to promote use of
the ECU. Britain believes that the Fund could encourage more use of the
ECU by issuing ECU bank notes for general circulation alongside member
states’ currencies, backed by EMF holdings of various Community
currencies.
The British Government supports Community collaboration in longer term,
precompetitive research and development to maximise economies of scale,
improve Europe’s technological base and assist companies in exploiting the
single market. The Community’s industrial research and development
programmes are designed to promote the competitiveness of European
industry in world markets. The new Framework Programme agreed for
1990-94 has a budget of £4,200 million and includes more work on
information and communications technologies, the management of natural
resources and strengthening the science and technology base of European
industry.
The £1,000 million ESPRIT II programme supports research and
development in microelectronics, information processing and application
of information technology in such areas as computer integrated
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
Structural Funds
Employment and
Social Affairs
manufacturing. The £360 million RACE programme aims to help establish a
strong Community manufacturing industry in broadband communications
and to accelerate the emergence of a competitive market for tele¬
communications equipment and services by working towards European
common standards. The £325 million BRITE/EURAM programme
supports industrial precompetitive research covering advanced materials,
design methodologies, manufacturing processes and aeronautics.
Other important Community programmes cover research into the en¬
vironment, biotechnology, agriculture, health and energy. Under the new
Framework Programme there is also a scheme providing funds for the
exchange of researchers.
EUREKA is an initiative established in 1985 by the member states of the
Community, the six members of the European Free Trade Association,
Turkey and the Commission, to encourage projects in high technology
products, processes and services. The initiative complements Community
programmes and is concerned with the commercial exploitation of research
and development and with removing barriers to commercial success.
The Community’s Structural Funds, administered by the Commission,
support investment in industry and agriculture in the Community’s less
developed regions. There are three Funds—the European Regional
Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Guidance Section of
the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. Infrastructure
projects and productive investments are financed by the Regional
Development Fund. The Social Fund supports training and employment
measures for the long-term unemployed and young people. The
Agricultural Guidance Fund supports agricultural restructuring and some
rural development measures.
There are five priority objectives—promotion of economic development
in poorer regions, converting regions seriously affected by industrial decline,
combating long-term unemployment, facilitating the occupational in¬
tegration of young people and, as part of the reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy, promoting development in rural areas. The Funds’
allocations are increasing from £5,000 million in 1987 to £9,000 million in
1993, at 1988 prices.
In 1988 Britain was allocated some £390 million from the Regional De¬
velopment Fund and £405 million from the Social Fund.
Other Community programmes aim to assist the development of new
economic activities in regions affected by the restructuring of the steel and
coal industries.
In 1989 Britain received 14-2 per cent of lending within the Community
by the European Investment Bank. The Bank was set up in 1958 to provide
finance on a non-profit-making basis for investment to develop the
Community’s less favoured regions, modernise industry and help projects of
common interest to two or more member states.
Britain believes that the Community has an important role to play in tackling
unemployment. In 1986 an action programme for employment growth was
agreed based on proposals put forward by Britain, the Irish Republic and
Italy. Britain believes that deregulation and competition within the internal
market will create jobs, especially in small businesses.
In 1987 a programme was adopted, to run from 1988 to 1992, aimed at
ensuring that all young people who wish to can receive one or more years’
vocational training after leaving school. In 1988 the Social Affairs Council
approved the second phase of the Community in Education and Training
84
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for Technology programme, allocating 200 million ECUs (about £130
million) over a five-year period beginning in 1990. Much of the aid which
Britain receives from the Community’s Social Fund (see p 83) goes towards
training and retraining programmes for the young or unemployed.
In 1990 the Commission began bringing forward a series of proposals
ranging widely over the fields of employment, and health and safety at work.
The Environment Environmental pollution does not respect national boundaries and inter¬
national co-operation is often necessary to deal with it. The Community has
been active in this area for some 15 years and its role has been given explicit
legal recognition in the Single European Act. Community environment
policy is concerned with such issues as water and air pollution, the disposal of
wastes, noise and the protection of wild birds. A regulation establishing the
European Environment Agency was adopted by the Community in May
1990; this will bring together environmental information from existing
bodies for the use of member states and the Commission.
In 1988 Britain and its Community partners agreed to reduce emissions of
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide from existing large combustion plants
(such as power stations, refineries and other industrial plants) and to set
stringent emission standards for new plants. Sulphur dioxide emissions are
to be reduced by 60 per cent from 1980 levels by 2003, and nitrogen oxide
emissions by 30 per cent of 1980 levels by 1998.
Britain is also concerned about pollution from vehicle exhausts, and,
following a British initiative, the Council of Ministers adopted a directive in
1985 providing for the introduction of unleaded petrol throughout the
Community not later than 1989. The market share of unleaded petrol in
Britain is now over 30 per cent. Between 1987 and 1989, Britain and its
Community partners agreed a set of directives on car exhaust emissions
which are being implemented between 1989 and 1992. Emissions of
nitrogen oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons will be reduced by
about 60 per cent from each new car. All new cars will need catalytic
converters to meet these standards.
In 1987 the Community signed the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna
Convention for Protection of the Ozone Layer. In June 1990 an inter¬
national conference in London, attended by nearly 60 developed and
developing countries, agreed to phase out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by
2000, with immediate cuts of 50 per cent (compared with 1986 levels) by
1995 and 85 per cent by 1997. It also agreed to phase out halons by 2000,
except for agreed essential uses, with an immediate cut of 50 per cent by
1995. Controls on other ozone-depleting chemicals—carbon tetrachloride
and methyl chloroform—were also agreed; the use of the former will be
phased out completely by 2000 and the latter by 2005. Britain believes that
CFCs should be banned by 1997 and is pressing the Community to ensure
that member states do this.
At the Third North Sea Conference in March 1990, Britain, six other
Community member states, Norway and Sweden agreed to phase out and
destroy all remaining identifiable uses of polychlorinate biphenyls (PCBs) by
1999, to end incineration at sea by 1991 and to protect wildlife such as
dolphins and porpoises.The Community has banned the import of harp and
hooded seal pup skins and products. In June 1989 Britain banned imports of
ivory from the African elephant, as did Community in August 1989.
Agriculture
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is designed to secure food supply
and to stabilise markets. Until recently, however, it had resulted in over-
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
Fisheries
Political
Co-operation
East—West
Relations
The Middle East
production and unwanted food surpluses, which placed an increasing bur¬
den on the Community budget. To combat this, measures were taken to re¬
form the CAP. In 1988 the British Government persuaded its partners to
agree a guideline limit on overall agricultural spending and measures under
which automatic cuts are made in the guaranteed price for a commodity if
agreed production levels are exceeded. To complement these arrangements
and to discourage overproduction, member states also agreed non-price
measures, such as set-aside schemes, to take some agricultural land out of
production. Food surpluses have been reduced as a result of these measures;
butter stocks have been cut by 92 per cent from their highest levels and beef
stocks by 85 per cent. Similarly, cereal surpluses are down by 38 per cent and
there are virtually no milk product surpluses.
Britain has a particular interest in the control of Community fishing, since
a sizeable proportion of the total catch taken in the area bounded by mem¬
ber states’ 200-mile limits is in British waters. It therefore took an active role
in negotiations on an agreement reached in 1983 on a new Community
fisheries policy. This covers access to coastal waters, conservation of fish
stocks, the allocation of catch quotas among member states within each year’s
total allowable catch, enforcement of these rules, and financial aid to
promote the adaptation and development of the Community’s fishing fleet.
I he aim of European political co-operation on foreign policy issues is to
maximise the influence of the Twelve in international affairs. As the result of
a British initiative, the Single European Act places the basic commitments on
a treaty basis.
Britain considers that the 12 member states should ensure that a coherent
Western European voice is heard in the management of East-West relations.
The Twelve have welcomed the establishment of democracy in the German
Democratic Republic, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and other countries in
Central and Eastern Europe and are committed to assisting them in the
change from centrally planned economies to market economies. Member
states consider that the process of the Conference on Security and Co¬
operation in Europe (CSCE) has made a significant contribution to
overcoming divisions between East and West, and are determined to play a
full part at the CSCE Summit meeting proposed for late 1990. The Twelve
are committed to a secure and stable balance of forces in Europe at lower
levels.
In 1980 the European Council’s Venice Declaration stated that a lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli dispute required the mutual acceptance of two
basic principles—the right of all countries in the area, including Israel, to
secure existence within guaranteed borders and the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The Twelve support the proposal for an
international peace conference on the Middle East. They welcomed the
Palestine National Council’s recognition of the state of Israel and re¬
nunciation of terrorism in 1988. Member states have repeatedly called on
Israel to withdraw from territory occupied in 1967 and meanwhile to
administer its occupation in accordance with international law and human
rights standards. The Community has a development programme for the
occupied territories and has adopted measures to allow direct exports of
agricultural and industrial products from them to the Community market.
The Twelve have also consistently emphasised the importance of the
86
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Central America
South Africa
Terrorism and
Crime
complete withdrawal of foreign forces from Lebanon, except for those
whose presence is requested by the Lebanese Government, and of the
obligation on all parties to co-operate with the UN Interim Force in
Lebanon.
In response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, the Twelve
condemned the Iraqi action and urged Iraq to comply with UN Security
Council resolution 660, calling for a withdrawal of its troops. The
Community also agreed to implement another Security Council resolution
(No 661) calling for trade sanctions against Iraq. Community regulations
provide for a total ban by member states on the import or export of all goods
originating in or coming from Iraq or Kuwait.
The Twelve have consistently supported the regional peace process in
Central America embodied in the August 1987 agreement signed by Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. It provided for the
implementation of a series of measures to establish peace and democracy in
Central America. The Twelve also welcomed the progress made at
subsequent meetings in 1989 and 1990. The holding of free and fair
elections in Nicaragua in February 1990 with an extensive international
observer presence, including the United Nations, was particularly welcome.
The Twelve have also supported UN involvement in a security verification
force established in late 1989 and in an international support and
verification group whose task is to co-ordinate and monitor the de¬
mobilisation of the Contra guerrillas in Nicaragua.
The Community has a co-operation agreement with the five Central
American countries and Panama, providing for closer economic and aid
links with the region. It holds annual meetings at ministerial level with these
six countries and with Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela as ‘co-operating
nations’ to discuss these and other regional issues.
The Twelve have repeatedly called for a peaceful end to the system of
apartheid. They apply a policy which combines a programme of assistance to
victims of apartheid and restrictive measures to encourage the South African
Government to create a genuine national dialogue on the country’s future.
The major changes announced by South Africa in February 1990 included
many of the specific demands that the Twelve have made, notably the release
of Mr Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and the lifting of the ban
on the African National Congress and other organisations. Several meetings
have taken place between representatives of the South African Government
and the African National Congress. The Twelve have greatly welcomed
these moves and have affirmed their willingness to consider a gradual
relaxation of pressure on the South African Government when there is
further clear evidence of the process of change continuing. The Community
sent a fact-finding mission to South Africa in April 1990 which had contact
with a range of South African opinion.
There is a voluntary code of conduct for EC companies with subsidiaries in
South Africa which aims to improve conditions for black employees and to
remove racial segregation at work.
The Twelve supported the implementation of the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia which began in April 1989 and welcomed the
achievement of this independence in March 1990. Member states made their
own contributions to the work of the United Nations Transition Assistance
Group, which supervised the independence process.
Because of the threat posed by international and other terrorism, member
states have sought to act jointly against it. They have agreed not to export
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
87
arms or other military equipment to countries clearly implicated in
supporting terrorist activity and to take steps to prevent such material being
diverted for terrorist purposes. In 1986, for instance, they agreed measures
against both Libya and Syria following evidence of their involvement in
terrorist activity. It is European Community policy that there should be no
concessions made under duress to terrorists or their sponsors; that there
should be solidarity between member states in their efforts to prevent
terrorism and to bring the guilty to justice; and that terrorist attacks against
any member state should be met with a concerted response. Counter¬
terrorist measures agreed include the establishment of a secure com¬
munications link between police forces and arrangements for regular
assessments and analyses of terrorist threats to member states.
Regular meetings of ministers responsible for criminal justice take place to
discuss common measures directed at terrorists and other criminals. The
Government believes that with the introduction of the single market in 1992
some frontier controls will need to be retained to ensure that such people do
not enjoy unlimited freedom to move from one member state to others.
Measures Against The Community attaches great importance to co-operation against drug
Drug Trafficking trafficking and discussions on law enforcement, international co-operation,
assistance to developing countries, education and health take place regularly.
A committee to combat drugs co-ordinates the Community’s anti-drugs work
and the international aspects are dealt with by a political co-operation
working group. The Community believes that the problem requires a
comprehensive strategy, tackling both demand and supply. Member states
fully support the work of the United Nations in combating drug abuse and
participate in regular meetings of the Council of Europe’s Pompidou Group
which is also concerned with anti-drugs measures. In June 1990 member
states decided to set up a Community drugs intelligence unit.
Trade Under the Treaty of Rome, the European Commission negotiates on behalf
of the Community in major international trade negotiations. The
Community seeks to preserve the world open trading system on which
member states depend for future growth and jobs and to defend the interests
of its members against protectionist measures. One of the Community’s
priorities is the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of trade
negotiations launched in 1986 under the auspices of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and due to be completed in December 1990.
The negotiations seek to strengthen GATT rules and disciplines; to liberalise
trade in services and investment; to improve protection of intellectual
property; to negotiate multilateral tariff reductions; and to establish a fair
and market-oriented system for agricultural trade. The Community has
agreed to increase its co-operation with the European Free Trade Asso¬
ciation and reduce trade barriers.
The Community has association and co-operation agreements with all
countries with a Mediterranean coastline (except Albania and Libya) and
with Jordan; these give preferential access to Community markets. Non-
preferential co-operation agreements have also been made with individual
countries in South Asia and Latin America as well as with the People’s
Republic of China, the Association of South East Asian Nations, the Andean
Pact and the Central American states. Trade relations with the developing
countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific are governed by the Lo¬
me Conventions (see p 88). Trade or trade and economic co-operation
agreements are in place with Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland and the
Soviet Union and the Community has established official relations with the
88
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aid
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon). It has signed a trade
and economic co-operation agreement with the Gulf Co-operation Council.
The Community’s Generalised System of Preferences grants tariff-free
access to the Community market for most industrial goods from developing
countries and varying degrees of preferential access for their agricultural
produce (mainly processed) and textiles. The scheme concentrates benefits
on the poorer producers and countries. Certain categories of exports from
the more competitive producers are excluded.
The fourth Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation
between the Community and 68 developing countries in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific (AGP), was signed in December 1989. It will come
into force following ratification, probably in late 1990 or early 1991. It runs
for ten years with provision for review after five years; there will be two
European Development Funds, each lasting five years. The Convention
provides for aid totalling over £7,700 million for the first five years and up to
£850 million in loans from the European Investment Bank over the same
period. It also covers industrial and agricultural co-operation, a scheme
designed to help stabilise the commodity export earnings of the AGP
countries and assistance for AGP mineral producers whose production and
income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond their control. In addition,
it offers duty-free access to the Community for ACP exports of all industrial
and most agricultural goods, including special arrangements for sugar,
bananas, rum and beef. All British dependent territories (with the exception
of Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas
territories of other Community members, are formally associated with the
Community under provisions parallel to those of the Lome Convention and
with similar aid and trade benefits.
In 1987 the Council of Ministers approved a Community programme
worth around £70 million to aid highly indebted low-income countries in sub-
Saharan Africa undertaking significant structural adjustment efforts.
Britain played a leading part in the Community’s adoption of an aid
programme for developing countries in Asia and Latin America not covered
by the Lome Convention or having any other special relationship with the
Community. This has grown steadily since 1976 and was worth some £226
million in 1988. Priority is given to rural development and agricultural
production in the poorest countries, most of which are in Asia.
Co-operation and association agreements with individual countries and
regional groupings also include provision for development aid. In 1987, for
instance, new five-year financial protocols were agreed with most of the
Community’s Mediterranean partners. These provide for £430 million of
Community aid and £706 million in loans from the European Investment
Bank.
The Community’s food aid programme is designed to be an effective
instrument of development policy rather than a short-term expedient for the
disposal of food surpluses. In 1989 it spent some £394 million on food aid, of
which Britain’s share was £77 million, much of which went to Africa.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 50 independent states with
a combined population of some 1,300 million, nearly a quarter of the world
total. Commonwealth members include some of the richest and poorest
nations of the world community and also some of the largest and smallest.
Their peoples are drawn from practically all the world s main races, from all
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
89
Consultation
continents and from many faiths. Britain participates fully in all Com¬
monwealth activities and values it as a means of increasing international
understanding, stability and peace, and contributing to more balanced global
economic development.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica,
The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati,
Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Namibia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia
and Zimbabwe. Nauru and Tuvalu are special members, entitled to take part
in all Commonwealth meetings and activities, with the exception of
Commonwealth heads of Government meetings. The Queen is recognised as
head of the Commonwealth; she is also head of State in 17 of these countries.
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa,2 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent
status in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of
Westminster of 1931. The modern Commonwealth, comprising republics
and national monarchies as well as monarchies under the Queen, became
possible when it was agreed in 1949 that India, on becoming a republic,
could continue to be a member. Since then, almost all of Britain’s former
dependent territories have attained their independence and have voluntarily
joined the Commonwealth.3
Consultation between Commonwealth member states takes place through
diplomatic representatives known as high commissioners, meetings of heads
of Government, specialised conferences of other ministers and officials,
expert groups, and discussions at international conferences and the United
Nations. Trade and cultural exhibitions and conferences of professional and
unofficial medical, cultural, educational and economic organisations are
other ways in which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years. Proceedings are held
in private, facilitating a frank and informal exchange of views. No votes are
taken, decisions being reached by consensus. These meetings allow prime
ministers and presidents to discuss international issues and decide on
collective initiatives. Common views on matters of major international
concern are formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the end
of the meetings. Occasionally, separate declarations are made on particular
issues. The 1989 meeting, for instance, issued a declaration expressing deep
concern at the threat posed by serious deterioration of the environment and
agreed a set of measures to arrest this. Another statement reaffirmed the
central importance of a negotiated settlement in South Africa.
A summit of seven Commonwealth leaders, meeting in London in 1986,
agreed on the need for measures against South Africa. Britain, while
believing that mandatory economic sanctions would not succeed in
promoting peaceful change, agreed to accept voluntary bans on new
investment in, and the promotion of tourism to, South Africa, as well as to
implement European Community decisions to ban the import of iron and
steel. Following the release of Mr Nelson Mandela and other action taken
“South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
’Fiji’s membership lapsed in 1987.
90
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The
Commonwealth
Secretariat
Technical
Co-operation
Commonwealth
Organisations
by the South African Government, Britain lifted these voluntary bans in
February 1990 and decided not to discourage artists, scientists and academics
from visiting South Africa. The Government believes that the changes taking
place in South Africa vindicate a policy of contact rather than isolation.
With many small states among its members the Commonwealth has
expressed concern about their security and development. At Nassau in 1985
Commonwealth leaders called for action to reduce the vulnerability of small
states without affecting their independent and sovereign status. British
policy is to co-operate with other member states in order to increase the
security of small nations by encouraging regional co-operation and by
providing economic aid and technical assistance.
The Commonwealth Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates in¬
formation on matters of common concern, and organises meetings and
conferences, including those of heads of Government and of ministers. It co¬
ordinates many Commonwealth activities related to international economic,
social and political affairs, including education, food production and rural
development, the role of women in development, human rights, youth
programmes, management development, science and technology, law and
health. The Secretariat also administers the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its
good offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request,
special assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality .The Secretary
General is appointed by Commonwealth heads of Government.
Britain contributes almost a third of the income of the Commonwealth Fund
for Technical Co-operation, established within the Secretariat to provide
technical assistance for economic and social development in Commonwealth
developing countries. The Fund’s experts undertake advisory assignments
or fill specific posts and use consultancy firms to make studies for
governments. Its fellowships and training programme helps raise levels of
technical, industrial, managerial and other skills, and makes wide use of
training facilities within developing member countries for the benefit of
other developing countries. It has a special programme to help countries
develop their exports, another on food production and rural development
and a technical assistance group to give advice in key areas. An industrial
development unit investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries in
developing countries and helps to prepare and initiate agreed projects.
Expenditure by Britain on bilateral technical co-operation with Com¬
monwealth developing countries in 1989 was £199 million, the greater part
being spent on financing staff for service with Commonwealth governments
and in funding training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth
countries. The British aid programme finances the study in Britain of
students from other Commonwealth countries. Other assistance includes
sending volunteers to serve overseas, consultancy services, the supply of
training and research equipment, and the provision of advice by British
scientific and technical institutions. (About two-thirds of Britain’s gross
bilateral aid goes to Commonwealth countries, including Britain s remaining
dependencies—seep 100.)
The Commonwealth Foundation, financed by member governments,
promotes closer co-operation among professional and other non¬
governmental organisations within the Commonwealth. It has assisted over
30 Commonwealth professional associations, and has helped in the creation
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
91
DEPENDENCIES
and growth of many national ones; it has also supported 16 multidisciplinary
professional centres. It promotes understanding of the work carried out by
non-governmental organisations and is encouraging the strengthening of
information links through the establishment of liaison units in each
Commonwealth country.
The Commonwealth Institute in London promotes the Commonwealth,
its countries and its peoples to the British public. Funded mainly by the
British Government, it has three main galleries of permanent exhibitions
and a changing programme of temporary exhibitions, conferences and
performances. Its education service runs an extensive programme of
teaching about the Commonwealth in schools around Britain. A wide range
of books and other media can be borrowed.
The Commonwealth Trust is a centre for study and discussion, its library
in London housing one of the largest collections on the Commonwealth.
The Trust has branches in many countries.
Many unofficial organisations, professional bodies and voluntary societies
also provide machinery for co-operation. These organisations include the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, which organises an annual
conference of parliamentarians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the
Association of Commonwealth Universities, the Commonwealth Games
Federation and the English Speaking Union of the Commonwealth.
There are 14 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla; Bermuda;
British Antarctic Territory; British Indian Ocean Territory; British Virgin
Islands; Cayman Islands; Falkland Islands; Gibraltar; Hong Kong;
Montserrat; Pitcairn, Ducie, Henderson and Oeno; St Helena and St Helena
Dependencies (Ascension and Tristan da Cunha); South Georgia and the
South Sandwich Islands; and the Turks and Caicos Islands. They have a
combined population of nearly 6 million, of whom 5-8 million live in Hong
Kong. Few are rich in natural resources, and some are scattered groups of
islands. There are no permanent inhabitants in the British Antarctic
Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, South Georgia or the South
Sandwich Islands. Most dependencies have considerable self-government,
with their own legislature and civil service. Britain is generally responsible,
through a Governor, for defence, internal security and foreign affairs.
Britain’s policy is to give independence to those dependencies that want it
and where it is practicable to do so. In the case of the Falkland Islands, which
are the subject of a territorial claim by Argentina, the inhabitants wish to
retain the link with Britain. The Government is committed to the defence of
the Islanders’ right to live under a government of their own choosing. The
Islanders’ right of self-determination is set out in the 1985 Falkland Islands
Constitution.
Argentina and Chile have made claims to territory which overlaps part of
the British Antarctic Territory. Claims to territorial sovereignty in the Antarc¬
tic, however, are suspended by the provisions of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty.
Gibraltar is the subject of a territorial claim by Spain. Border restrictions
imposed by Spain in the 1960s were lifted in 1985 when Britain and Spain
reached agreement on the method for handling their differences over
Gibraltar. Britain wishes to see the development of practical co-operation
between Gibraltar and Spain to the benefit of both peoples and remains
committed to honouring the wishes of the people of Gibraltar as to their
future, as set out in the 1969 Gibraltar Constitution.
Hong Kong In 1984 an agreement was signed between Britain and the People’s Republic
of China on the future of Hong Kong. Under the Sino-British Joint
92
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Declaration, which was ratified by the two governments in 1985, Britain will
continue to be responsible for the administration of Hong Kong until 30
June 1997. Hong Kong will then become a Special Administrative Region
(SAR) of the People’s Republic of China, but its capitalist system and lifestyle
will remain unchanged for at least 50 years. With the exception of foreign
affairs and defence, the Hong Kong SAR will enjoy a high degree of
autonomy, including executive, legislative and independent judicial power.
The Government and legislature of the Hong Kong SAR will be composed
of Hong Kong people.The Basic Law, which stipulates China’s basic policies
towards Hong Kong, as set out in the Joint Declaration, was enacted by the
National People’s Congress on 4 April 1990.
In February 1990 the British Government announced that the Hong
Kong Government would introduce 18 directly elected seats into the
Legislative Council in 1991. The Basic Law sets out a path for progressively
increasing this number to 30 seats or 50 per cent by 2003 and the possibility
of full direct elections in 2007.
In April 1990 legislation to give British citizenship to 50,000 key people
in Hong Kong and their dependants—without their having to leave
the territory in order to qualify—was passed. The purpose of the British
Nationality (Hong Kong) Act is to persuade these people to remain in Hong
Kong so that the territory can remain stable and prosperous up to and
beyond 1997.
The problem of Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong is still a matter of
concern to the Government, over 34,000 having arrived in 1989. Although
the number of new arrivals dropped during 1990, there are still nearly
55,000 in the territory. The main problem is how to deal with those found
not to be refugees under internationally agreed screening procedures.
Although the number volunteering to return to Vietnam has increased,
voluntary returns alone will not be sufficient to provide a comprehensive
solution to the problem.
International Peace and Security
Britain protects its territorial integrity and political independence, as well as
the interests of its dependencies and of its allies, through a national security
policy. This combines the maintenance of effective defence with measures to
reduce international tension and encourage dialogue with the Soviet Union
and with countries in Eastern and Central Europe.
British defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO),5 the guarantee for member countries of their security and
freedom. NATO has always pursued a strategy of deterrence at the lowest
possible level of forces, involving North American forces stationed in Europe
and an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional weapons. Although
these are still needed as a counterbalance to continued Soviet military power,
NATO is increasing its political role in response to the changing security
architecture of Europe and the Soviet Union. Progress is being made in
negotiations on reductions in conventional forces in Europe (CEE),
implementing and verifying an agreement will be a major task. NATO is
examining the arrangements for a unified Germany in NATO, and is
looking at the future pattern for nuclear and conventional arms control.
5NATO’s 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, I urkey
and the United States. France, Iceland (which has no military forces) and Spain do not participate in
NATO’s integrated military structure.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
93
East-West
Relations
German
Unification
Economic
Assistance
Britain’s defence resources are concentrated on key NATO tasks.
However, the Government’s defence policy is also designed to promote
British and more general Western interests outside the NATO area. In
addition, Britain demonstrates its worldwide interests by periodic military
deployments and exercises overseas; by supporting United Nations and
other peacekeeping efforts; and by providing military assistance and training
to a number of friendly countries.
Britain seeks improvements in East—West relations based on a broader
understanding and on the recognition that East and West have a common
interest in peace and enhanced security at significantly lower levels. It has
welcomed the recent replacement of Communist dictatorships by
democratically elected governments in Eastern and Central Europe and
recognises the importance of recent political and economic reforms in the
Soviet Union.
The Government believes that all parties should avoid policies which risk
provoking confrontation and should aim instead for mutual accommodation
and co-operation while exercising restraint in the conduct of international
relations both in Europe and in the rest of the world. This is recognised in
the 1975 Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation
in Europe, which states that European security has to be considered in the
broader context of world security.
Britain is committed to increasing its official and unofficial contacts with
the Soviet Union and the new governments in Eastern and Central Europe.
The meetings between the Prime Minister and the Soviet President in 1987,
1989 and 1990, and the series of other ministerial visits between Britain and
the Soviet Union and Eastern European countries have reinforced the
continuing improvements in East—West relations. These include the 1987
Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, greater co-operation on regional
issues, including Southern Africa and the withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan, and the improved human rights provisions of the CSCE
agreement in 1989.
Britain has always favoured German unification on the basis of self-
determination. On 12 September 1990, along with France, the United States,
the Soviet Union and the two German states, it signed a treaty on the
external aspects of the unification of Germany and Berlin, which took place
on 3 October. The treaty ended four-power responsibilities relating to
Germany as a whole and Berlin. Germany’s definitive borders will be the
external borders of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German
Democratic Republic. Soviet forces in eastern Germany and Berlin will be
withdrawn by the end of 1994. While these remain, British, French and
United States forces will, upon German request, remain stationed in Berlin.
A unified Germany will be free to choose its alliances.
Britain recognises the magnitude of the task now being undertaken by the
Soviet Union and the new governments in Central and Eastern Europe in
transforming their centrally planned economies into market-based ones.
The Government is helping those countries committed to economic and
political change through bilateral assistance and through international
institutions such as the European Community and the Paris Club of major
developed nations. In 1989 Britain established a ‘Know How’ fund for
Hungary and Poland covering training in such areas as management and
financial services, banking and accountancy, and commercial law. The fund
also finances the provision of advice on the running of democratic
94
Conference on
Security and
Co-operation
in Europe
Arms Control
and
Disarmament
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
institutions such as an independent judiciary, a free media and different
political parties. In March 1990 the fund was extended to Czechoslovakia.
Britain is also supporting debt-rescheduling schemes being negotiated by the
International Monetary Fund with several Eastern European countries. In
addition, it is participating in other multilateral assistance plans, including
World Bank loans and European Community agreements liberalising trade,
aimed at encouraging the development of market economies.
Britain welcomes the recent and significant improvements in the im¬
plementation of the provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act. The CSCE
process has assisted in increasing stability in Europe and improved co¬
operation between the 35 European and North American signatory states.
While not legally binding, the Final Act established a large number of
important political commitments and a code of behaviour for a more normal
and open relationship between both governments and peoples in East and
West. In order to achieve these goals, the signatories of the Final Act made
undertakings about security, respect for human rights, and co-operation in
economic, humanitarian and other matters. Meetings to review the
application of the Final Act took place in Belgrade (1977-78), Madrid
(1980-83) and Vienna (1987-89). The Madrid Conference also set up in
Stockholm in 1984 a Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building
Measures and Disarmament in Europe, as well as other meetings on such
issues as human rights, culture and human contacts.
As a result of initiatives by Britain and other Western countries aimed at
improving the implementation of the Final Act, participating states agreed
in Vienna in 1989 to undertake new commitments, in particular in human
rights (for example, on freedom of religion) and human contacts (for exam¬
ple, on freedom of movement). Various meetings have taken place on infor¬
mation, the environment, economic co-operation and human rights. More
are planned before 1992, including meetings on culture and human rights.
At the Stockholm conference in 1986, the participating states signed an
agreement (the Stockholm Document) on confidence-building measures
designed to bring about a greater degree of openness and predictability in
military activities. The agreement provided for advance notification and
observation of planned military manoeuvres above specified thresholds and
detailed information on their purpose, size, composition and dates, as well as
intrusive provisions for verification in the form of on-site challenge
inspections. In Britain’s view, implementation of the Stockholm Document
has continued to work well. In 1989, 15 inspections took place and six
NATO and two Warsaw Pact exercises were observed, as well as two by
neutral or non-aligned countries.
Following a British initiative in 1986, informal talks between NA TO and
the Warsaw Pact led to an agreement in January 1989 to establish within the
framework of the Vienna CSCE Conference new sets of negotiations, which
opened in Vienna in March 1989. In the first, which involves all CSCE
countries, Britain and its NATO allies are seeking to expand the compliance
and verification provisions of the Stockholm Document.
The second set of talks involves the 23 members of NATO and the
Warsaw Pact. The talks aim to establish a stable and secure balance of
conventional ground forces at lower levels in the whole of Europe.
Together with its NATO allies, Britain is committed to the search for
significant, balanced and verifiable measures of arms control and
disarmament, leading to increased security at lower levels of forces, and has
played a prominent part in multilateral disarmament negotiations. Britain
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
95
participates in the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva and in the
negotiations in Vienna on conventional armed forces in Europe and on
confidence- and security-building measures. It also takes an active part in
other disarmament deliberations under the auspices of the United Nations.
Following the INF Treaty, Britain wants further progress in arms control.
The priorities, as set out by NATO, are substantial reductions in United
States and Soviet strategic nuclear arsenals, a global ban on chemical
weapons, and the elimination of conventional imbalances in Europe.
Nuclear Weapons Britain strongly supports the nuclear and space talks between the United
States and the Soviet Union which began in Geneva in 1985. It fully shares
the agreed objective of working out effective agreements aimed at
preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth, at limiting and
reducing nuclear arms and at strengthening strategic stability.
The Government has welcomed the 1987 treaty between the United States
and the Soviet Union under which both countries are eliminating all their
ground-launched intermediate-range nuclear missiles throughout the world
over a three-year period. Under the treaty, which came into effect in June
1988 and is the first arms control agreement designed to eliminate a whole
class of nuclear weapons, missiles capable of carrying some 1,700 Soviet and
400 US warheads are being destroyed. Britain also supports the efforts of the
superpowers to work towards a treaty aimed at reducing strategic offensive
arms.The Government looks forward to the prospect of negotiations on
shorter-range nuclear forces shortly after a treaty limiting conventional
forces in Europe has been signed.
Nuclear Deterrent Britain’s strategic nuclear deterrent is the minimum necessary for credible
deterrence and is very small in comparison with Soviet nuclear forces. It will
continue to be a minimum force even after the replacement of the
submarine-launched Polaris force with a modernised missile system known
as Trident.
In Britain’s view, the priority is for reductions in the arsenals of the two
superpowers. Britain has, however, made it clear that, if the US and Soviet
strategic arsenals were to be very substantially reduced, it would review the
position and consider how best it could contribute to arms control in the light
of the reduced threat. But reductions would have to go much further than
those under discussion in Geneva before the Government could consider
bringing the British independent nuclear deterrent into arms control
negotiations.
Non-Proliferation Britain has played a leading part in strengthening the regime of non¬
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It is a party to the most widely supported
arms control agreement, the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is
designed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons by providing an assurance
through international safeguards that nuclear facilities of non-nuclear-
weapon states will not be used for making such weapons. It also protects the
right of all countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Britain was the first nuclear-weapon state to conclude a voluntary
agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency for the application
of safeguards to some nuclear installations. It has also undertaken not to use
nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states which are parties to the
Treaty or to other internationally binding commitments not to manufacture
or acquire nuclear explosive devices. This undertaking would not apply in
the case of an attack on Britain, its dependent territories, its armed forces or
its allies by such a state in association or alliance with a nuclear-weapon state.
96
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Tests
Nuclear- Weapon-
Free Zones
Chemical and
Biological
Weapons
Conventional
Weapons
Britain will continue to make every effort to strengthen and expand the
Treaty.
Since for the foreseeable future Britain’s security will depend on deterrence
based in part on the possession of nuclear weapons, there will be a
continuing requirement to conduct underground nuclear tests to ensure that
Britain’s nuclear weapons remain effective and up to date. Britain hopes that
the 1974 Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the 1976 Peaceful Nuclear
Explosions Treaty, which were negotiated by the United States and the
Soviet Union and set ceilings for individual and group nuclear tests, will be
ratified by the two countries soon. Verification protocols regarding the two
treaties were signed by both countries in 1990. A comprehensive test ban,
however, remains a long term goal, and progress towards this is dependent
on a step-by-step approach which takes account of technical advances on
verification as well as progress elsewhere in arms control and the attitude of
other states.
The Government thinks that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones in certain parts of the world could contribute to regional security, to
non-proliferation and to disarmament in general, provided that nuclear
weapons do not already feature in the security of the region involved and
that the balance of security is maintained.
Britain is working towards a comprehensive and effectively verifiable
worldwide ban on chemical weapons, having destroyed its own chemical
weapons in the late 1950s. The negotiations for such a treaty take place at
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, where Britain plays a leading
role. It has presented a number of substantive papers, particularly on the
issues of verification and confidence building.
Pending achievement of a global ban, Britain and some other Western
nations have imposed export controls on certain chemicals which may be
used to produce chemical weapons in order to curb further proliferation of
such weapons.
The Government has welcomed the recent bilateral progress between the
United States and the Soviet Union, particularly their 1990 agreement on
the destruction of their stocks of chemical weapons down to 20 per cent of
the current US stockpile.
Biological weapons are already prohibited under a 1972 convention. A
review conference in 1986 reaffirmed the value of the convention and
adopted a number of voluntary confidence-building measures involving
exchanges of information aimed at strengthening the authority of the
convention. A further review conference is to be held in 1991.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national
armouries. Since March 1989 Britain has been participating with its NATO
allies in new negotiations with the Warsaw Pact on conventional arms
reductions, which are being held within the CSCE framework and involve all
23 NATO and Warsaw Pact states in an area from the Atlantic to the Urals
mountains.
NATO’s proposals aim to set limits on the number of battle tanks, ar¬
moured combat vehicles, artillery, attack helicopters and combat aircraft at
some 10 to 15 per cent below current NATO holdings. In some cases this
would involve cuts of over 50 per cent in Warsaw Pact holdings. There would
also be rules limiting the proportions of the total holdings which any one
country could possess and a limit on forces stationed by states in other
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
97
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
countries. There would also be strict verification and monitoring.
At the United Nations Britain submitted memoranda setting out its arms
control priorities at Special Sessions of the General Assembly on dis¬
armament in 1978, 1982 and 1988. Britain also contributes to the UN
Disarmament Commission, a deliberative body considering issues such as
naval armaments and the reduction of military budgets which are not on the
agenda of the Conference on Disarmament.
Britain and the United Nations
Britain is fully committed to the principles of the United Nations and its
Charter and believes that all member states should ensure that the
organisation functions as effectively as possible to maintain peace, assist
developing countries and protect human rights and freedoms.
Britain believes that the United Nations, as the only forum in which almost
the whole international community is represented, should seek to resolve
disputes which threaten international peace and stability. As a permanent
member of the Security Council, Britain plays an active part in the Council’s
work and has sought to develop and improve its role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Britain has also encouraged financial and ad¬
ministrative reform aimed at rationalising the work of the Organisation.
Britain strongly supports the United Nations’ peacekeeping role, is the
major contributor to the UN Force in Cyprus and has provided logistic
support to the UN Interim Force in Lebanon. In 1989-90 Britain con¬
tributed an Army signals unit to Namibia to provide communications for the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group monitoring the implemen¬
tation of the UN plan for independence.
Britain has consistently supported United Nations efforts to promote human
rights throughout the world through the establishment of internationally
accepted standards. The UN Charter says that the United Nations should
achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion. Britain believes that this and the subsequent
practice of the United Nations has established human rights as a legitimate
matter for international concern and that the UN Charter imposes on
member governments an obligation to co-operate with appropriate UN
bodies in the pursuit of policies which promote human rights.
Fundamental human rights provisions are set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly in 1948,
and in the two International Covenants (one on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the other on Civil and Political Rights) which impose
legal obligations on those who ratify them and which came into force in
1976. Britain played a large part in their drafting and ratified the two
Covenants in 1976. Britain is also a party to other international instruments,
including conventions on the elimination of racial discrimination and of
discrimination against women, prevention of genocide, the abolition of
slavery, the status of refugees and stateless persons, the political rights of
women, the rights of the child and consent to marriage. In 1988 Britain
ratified the UN Convention against Torture, which was adopted with British
support by the General Assembly in 1984.
Britain constantly urges states to adhere to those standards which have
been agreed internationally as the basis of the protection of human rights. It
has also supported the idea of appointing representatives of the UN
98
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic and
Social Affairs
Commission on Human Rights to investigate human rights abuses.
Britain plays a leading part in the discussion of human rights in the
various United Nations bodies. In 1987 it was re-elected to the UN
Commission on Human Rights for a further three-year term. There are
British experts on the UN Sub-Commission and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
The UN Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United
Nations; an estimated 90 per cent of the organisation’s resources and staff is
devoted to this end. With growing concern over the problems of economic
development in poor countries, the UN system has become the largest
single source of technical assistance for developing countries. It also pro¬
vides considerable emergency and relief aid, assistance for refugees and
help in combating the problems associated with drug production, traffick¬
ing and abuse.
Britain is the sixth largest contributor to the UN’s regular budget, and
provided in 1990 some £23 million, nearly 5 per cent of the total. In
addition, in 1989, it contributed some £7-9 million to the World Health
Organisation, £5-6 million to the International Labour Organisation and
£8-6 million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation.
Britain provides considerable contributions to the UN’s voluntary funds,
donating £26 million in 1989 for the UN Development Programme, £19-4
million for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, £5-6 million for the
UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees, £9-6 million for the
UN Children’s Fund, £5-5 million for the UN Population Fund, and about
£0-5 million for the World Food Programme. It is also a major donor to the
UN Fund for Drug Abuse Control.
Britain encourages the deployment of UN resources towards the poorest
countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also seeks
to promote the most efficient use of UN development funds and im¬
provements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
In 1985 Britain withdrew from the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). Although Britain supports the ideals
and objectives contained in UNESCO’s constitution, it had major doubts
about the effectiveness with which the Organisation was pursuing them.
After a detailed review of UNESCO activities, Britain announced in 1990
that the reforms carried out were not yet sufficient to merit rejoining the
Organisation. Aid amounting to £6-4 million, representing funds saved from
the withdrawal, was allocated to a number of educational, scientific and
cultural programmes in developing countries in 1989-90.
Other International Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including
those concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder
member of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1945 (along
with the World Bank) to regulate the international financial system and to
provide a source of credit for member countries facing balance-of-payments
problems. It has welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide
special assistance to developing countries experiencing financial or trading
difficulties. The Government strongly supports the objectives of the current
Uruguay Round of negotiations conducted under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (see p 87).
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
99
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), an instrument for intergovernmental co¬
operation among 24 industrialised countries. The basic objectives of the
OECD are to promote the economic growth of its members, to help less
developed countries within and outside its own membership and to
encourage worldwide trade expansion.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support include
the regional development banks in Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America and
Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and medical institutions.
Britain is a founder member of the Council of Europe, which works for
greater European unity and aims to improve the conditions of life.
Membership is open to any European parliamentary democracy which
accepts the rule of law and the protection of fundamental human rights and
freedoms.The 23 member states co-operate on culture, education, sport,
social questions, legal affairs, health, crime and drug prevention, youth
affairs and the improvement of the environment. The Council was
responsible for the adoption in 1950 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, which Britain was the first to ratify in 1951. In 1986 Britain
renewed its acceptance for a further five years of the optional articles of the
Convention which recognise both the right of individual petition and the
compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
Development Co-operation
The objective of Britain’s aid programme is the promotion of sustainable
economic and social progress and the alleviation of poverty in developing
countries. In meeting this objective weight is given to political, commercial
and humanitarian considerations. Account is also taken of the effectiveness
with which British aid can be used.
Gross public expenditure on the aid programme was £1,787 million in
1989. About 80 per cent of Britain’s bilateral aid is directed to the poorer
countries of the world. The Overseas Development Administration (ODA),
which is responsible for formulating and implementing Britain’s aid policy,
maintains rigorous procedures to ensure that aid is correctly targeted and
efficiently administered.
To ensure the best use of aid resources, individual country aid
programmes take account of the needs of the recipient country, its
development priorities, the activities of other donors and what Britain can
offer by way of expertise, goods and services. Individual projects are
carefully appraised before approval, monitored during progress against
quantifiable targets and assessed in a project completion report. The British
aid programme seeks to provide essential economic infrastructure in areas
such as communications and power supplies; to improve education, health
services or housing; to raise incomes and improve agricultural and industrial
productivity; and to provide support for countries pursuing economic
reform programmes agreed with the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank.
Britain has taken a number of measures to assist the poorest and most
heavily indebted countries pursuing policies of economic reform. In 1987 it
proposed international action to cut interest rates to well below market
levels, to convert aid loans into grants and to allow for more generous
rescheduling of debt. These proposals, and subsequent variations by other
countries, were welcomed at the 1988 Economic Summit at Toronto.
Concessionary debt rescheduling has since been arranged for 16 of the
poorest countries in Africa. Britain has cancelled the official aid debt of 22 of
100
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
Bilateral Aid
the poorest countries. In addition, Britain is the largest contributor to the
interest subsidy account of the IMF Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility, which was established in 1988 to lend up to £4,500 million to the
poorest countries on highly concessional terms—that is, at interest rates of
0.5 per cent.
Britain’s aid represents part of a wider Western effort to help developing
countries. In 1989 total net official development assistance disbursed by the
18 countries belonging to the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee
amounted to $46,500 million. It is estimated that in 1989 Arab countries
provided $1,200 million and centrally planned economies $4,300 million.
In addition to official aid, the British private sector provides investment,
technology and management expertise, and assists the development of
indigenous resources and skills in developing countries. In 1989 estimated
investment by British companies in developing countries amounted to
£2,600 million. Trade, too, is important, developing countries providing 12
per cent of British imports in 1989.
In 1989 total official flows5 of aid amounted to some £1,856 million net, of
which £1,576 million represented official development assistance and £280
million other official flows.
Aid volume performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross
national product (GNP), particularly with reference to the three UN targets
for resource transfers to developing countries. These targets state that net
official development assistance to developing countries should equal 0-7 per
cent of GNP, to the least developed countries 0T5 per cent of GNP and that
combined private and official flows should equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain
accepts the first and second targets in principle but is not committed to a
timetable for reaching them. Successive governments have made it clear that
progress must depend on Britain’s economic situation and upon other calls
on its resources. In 1989 net official development assistance was 0-31 per
cent of GNP, close to the overall 0-33 per cent for donor countries belonging
to the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee. Total net financial flows
from Britain to developing countries amounted to £2,252 million, 0-45 per
cent of GNP.
The main emphasis of the British aid programme is on the Commonwealth,
which includes among its members some of the world’s poorest countries.
In 1989, about £1,113 million of gross public expenditure on overseas aid
was disbursed bilaterally. Some 75 per cent of that directly allocated to
countries went to the Commonwealth and to Britain’s remaining
dependencies. Aid was disbursed regionally as follows: Africa £510 million,
Asia £301 million, Latin America and the Caribbean £90 million. Pacific £31
million, the Middle East £14 million and Europe £5 million. (A further £162
million was not allocable by continent.)
Major recipients included Bangladesh, India, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia,
Tanzania, Mozambique, Pakistan, Sudan and Ghana. In line with the policy
of concentrating aid on the poorest countries, 69 per cent of total gross
bilateral aid was provided to those with an average annual income per head
in 1987 of less than $700.
0 ‘Total official flows’ is an international reporting concept. Its main component—official development
assistance—is defined as official flows for development purposes with a grant (concessional) element of
25 per cent or more. The main British reporting concept is ‘public expenditure on overseas aid , which
differs from total official flows by excluding certain British flows which benefit developing countries but
are not considered developmental, and by recording some contributions to multilateral agencies at a
different time. All concepts can be measured before (gross) or after (net) deducting capital repayments.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
101
Financial Aid
Aid Projects
Gross bilateral financial aid in 1989 totalled £645 million. Aid for individual
projects totalled £382 million, the principal sectors supported being agri¬
culture, fisheries and forestry (£80 million), manufacturing (£36 million),
energy (£76 million), mining (£28 million), transport and communications
(£83 million) and social and community services (£39 million).
Other financial aid totalled £257 million, of which £190 million was for
programme aid, £26-1 million for debt relief, £19-4 million for disaster relief,
£16-8 million for food aid and £5-1 million for budgetary aid.
About 75 per cent of the ODA’s bilateral financial aid in 1988 was pro¬
vided in grants. Since 1975 development aid to the poorest countries has
been on grant terms. In 1984 these terms were extended to the majority of
recipients of British financial aid,.and simplified loan terms were introduced
for those countries still not qualifying for grants. Britain has more than
fulfilled the 1978 resolution of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development on easing the terms of financial aid.
Most financial aid—58 per cent in 1989—is tied to the purchase of goods,
equipment and services from Britain, although there may be a substantial
element for local costs and foreign content in contracts financed from tied
aid in appropriate cases. Commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees,
to the extent that goods can be purchased either from the poorest
developing countries or from Britain.
More resources are being committed to the sustainable development of
forestry; the ODA is involved in 165 projects in 22 countries costing over
£150 million. Since August 1989 ODA forestry experts have visited Brazil,
Cameroon, India, Malaysia, Nepal, Nigeria, T anzania and Zimbabwe, and in
November another £100 million was committed by Britain over the next
three years for forestry activities. Britain is co-operating with Brazil to solve
environmental problems, including schemes to manage and conserve the
Amazon rainforest.
Other British aid projects include a major water and sanitation scheme in
Karachi and the building of a power station in south-west Pakistan. Similarly,
the power station in Maputo, Mozambique, is being repaired with British
aid. In September 1989 Britain and India signed a £35 million aid agree¬
ment to improve primary education in the state of Andhra Pradesh in south¬
ern India; over 4,000 new classrooms will be built and over 1,100 teachers’
centres upgraded, mostly in remote rural areas.
Britain is also helping Sierra Leone, Cameroon and Zaire in schemes to
repair and maintain road bridges, by providing engineers, light vehicles and
small-scale plant equipment. British projects in countries in southern Africa
include £29 million for the rehabilitation of the Limpopo railway linking
Zimbabwe to Maputo in Mozambique. Direct British support is being given
to over 200 community projects and to a private sector scheme designed
to build new, low cost owner-occupied homes in South Africa, the bene¬
fits going to members of the black population.In March 1990 Britain
announced that it would provide aid worth £10 million to newly indepen¬
dent Namibia.
The Aid and Trade Provision is designed to match the mixed credit
practices of other donors by providing aid in combination with export credits
to support sound investment projects offering commercial opportunities to
British exporters. Expenditure under this provision amounted to £51 million
in 1989. In 1985 the Government introduced a new soft-loan facility under
the Provision in order to respond to the preferences of certain developing
countries and to counter the practices of competitors. Increased funds are
being made available; to enable British companies to win business annually
102
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Disaster Relief
and Food Aid
Technical
Co-operation
with the provision. As a matter of general policy, however, the Government
would like to see a reduction in the use of tied-aid financing by all exporting
nations in the interests of more open competition and freer trade.
The Commonwealth Development Corporation is empowered to invest in
Commonwealth countries which have achieved independence since 1948, in
the remaining British dependencies and, with ministerial approval, in other
developing countries. Its aim is to assist in the development of these
countries’ economies. By the end of 1989, the Corporation had total
commitments of £1,166 million. Of this total, £462-8 million was in Africa,
£346-1 million in Asia, £224-5 million in the Caribbean and Latin America,
and £126-2 million in the Pacific Islands. Some £380-8 million was invested
in basic development, £555-8 million in primary production and processing,
and £229-4 million in industry and commerce.
Britain responds to disasters throughout the world by providing food,
medical equipment, blankets, shelters and clothing, power generators, boats,
bridges and other vital supplies. In 1988 British emergency aid was sent to
the Soviet Union to help deal with the consequences of the Armenian
earthquake, to the Caribbean and Central America following hurricanes
Gilbert and Joan, and to Bangladesh in the aftermath of a cyclone. In
September 1989 Britain provided almost £5 million for emergency relief to
the Caribbean islands devastated by Hurricane Hugo. In sub-Saharan and
southern Africa, Britain continued its contribution to disaster relief and food
aid to help combat drought and famine. In addition to its multilateral aid
contributions to UN agencies and the European Community (see p 103),
Britain gave £111 million in bilateral disaster relief between 1984 and 1989.
Emergency aid to Ethiopia in 1989 was £18-5 million. Furthermore, bilateral
and multilateral food aid by Britain amounted to £110 million over the same
period.
Many African countries suffering from famine are also victims of locusts;
in response Britain has pledged more than £7-5 million for locust and pest
control in Africa since the beginning of 1987. Britain and three other
countries are financing research on the biological control of locusts.
Britain also helps refugees and people displaced by famine, political
upheaval, civil war and invasion. Since 1980, for instance, over £70 million
has been contributed to assist Afghan refugees. Worldwide, some £35
million is provided annually through non-governmental bodies and UN
agencies.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid since expertise is often
essential to the success of a programme of financial aid or investment.
Expenditure on it has increased in recent years and was £419 million, nearly
38 per cent of gross bilateral aid, in 1989. This included £78 million for the
provision of expert personnel, including volunteers, £110-5 million for
students and trainees in Britain and overseas, £49-8 million for education
and training programmes, £62-5 million for consultancy services, £27-4
million for research and development, and £20-8 million for equipment and
supplies.
At the end of 1989 there were 2,939 people financed by Britain (other
than volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom 1,470 were
engaged in education, 492 in agriculture and related areas, and 213 in health
services. In addition, there were nearly 1,400 volunteers, mainly qualified
people with some relevant work experience, working in developing
countries, about half in education. Recruitment, training and placing
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
103
Multilateral Aid
Voluntary
Agencies
overseas are undertaken by voluntary bodies. The four main agencies are the
Catholic Institute for International Relations, International Voluntary
Service, United Nations Association International Service and Voluntary
Service Overseas. More than 80 per cent of their costs are met by the
Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Some 13,300 were financed in 1089 under a variety of award
schemes.
The ODA’s scientific organisation, the Natural Resources Institute, col¬
laborates with developing countries on increasing the productivity of their
renewable natural resources. The Government provides support for many
other institutions, including overseas units/divisions of the Transport and
Road Research Laboratory, the Building Research Establishment, the British
Geological Survey, the Overseas Surveys Directorate of the Ordnance
Survey, and of Hydraulics Research Ltd. These organisations provide special¬
ist information, advice and experts for service overseas, and undertake field
and laboratory research investigations.
Britain is a major subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation and
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
The resources of the IDA, which provides interest-free loans to de¬
veloping countries unable to service loans on conventional terms, are
replenished at roughly three-year intervals. The British commitment to its
Ninth Replenishment, covering the three years starting in 1991, is £619
million towards a total of US$15,000 million.
Britain contributes to the resources of the Asian Development Bank, the
Inter-American Development Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and
the African Development Bank. Its contribution to the United Nations
Development Programme for 1989 was £27 million, and it is the largest
source of expertise and the second largest of fellowships and equipment
provided under the Programme. There is also a major British contribution
to other UN agencies and programmes, including the World Health
Organisation’s special programme for the prevention and control of AIDS.
Almost half of British multilateral aid is channelled through the European
Community’s aid programme. Under the fourth Lome Convention, Britain’s
commitment to Community aid over the next five years is £1,300 million out
of a total of £8,500 million.
Voluntary agencies play an important and distinctive role in developing
countries in such areas as agriculture, health and nutrition, education
projects, and emergency relief operations.
There are more than 200 agencies, including church and missionary
societies. Among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, the Save the
Children Fund, and the Catholic Fund for Overseas Development. The
funds are raised largely through regular donations and collections, legacies
and trading activities, and, particularly in response to specific emergencies,
through appeals in the media. The Government co-operates with the
agencies in various ways, especially in immediate post-disaster relief and
rehabilitation operations and through its Joint Funding Scheme. Under this
scheme it meets half the cost of selected development projects undertaken by
the agencies and aimed at helping the poorest people. Such projects include
community health, non-formal education, agricultural training, water
supply and projects concerned with the preservation of the environment and
104
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sustainable use of natural resources such as tropical forests. The scheme’s
budget has increased from £3-7 million in 1984—85 to £20 million in
1990-91.
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives
official support.
4 Defence
Changes in
Europe
NATO Policy
The primary objectives of Britain’s defence policy are to ensure the country’s
security, to preserve peace with freedom, and to enable it to pursue its
legitimate interests both within Britain and overseas. Britain’s policy is based
on membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), a
defensive alliance whose collective strength provides each of its members1
with far greater security than any could achieve alone. Britain welcomes the
election of democratic governments in Eastern Europe and moves towards
democracy in the Soviet Union. It believes that British security can be
protected by the continuing maintenance of collective defence with its
NATO allies. At the same time, Britain and its NATO allies have recognised
the need to readjust their military structure and strategy to the new security
position and have outlined ways in which this would be done.
By far the greatest part of the defence budget goes, directly or indirectly,
towards carrying out Britain’s main defence roles in NATO, to which the
majority of its armed forces are committed. In recent years the structure and
balance of these forces have been improved to increase their combat
effectiveness. As a result of these improvements Britain also has the flex¬
ibility to respond quickly and effectively to challenges to its interests outside
the NATO area.
Despite important political and military changes in the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union remains a military superpower. NATO,
therefore, is still needed to provide continuing stability and security during a
period of political uncertainty in Europe. Britain also believes that NATO
provides the most effective forum for transatlantic political co-operation and
consultation on security and arms control, for co-ordinating the im¬
plementation of arms control agreements and for establishing the basis for
further negotiations.
NATO is a political and military alliance of countries sharing a common
commitment to peace, democracy and the rule of law. Its aims are to prevent
war and maintain the security of its members at the lowest possible levels of
forces.
NATO continues to maintain collective security, taking account of the
military forces stationed in Europe, and to pursue a strategy that deters wars
of all kinds. Its flexible response strategy requires the Alliance to have the
ability to respond to any form of potential military aggression with effective
and up-to-date forces—conventional, sub-strategic nuclear or strategic
nuclear—at an appropriate level to prevent an attacker from predicting with
certainty the precise character of NATO’s response. In this way the strategy
aims to convince an attacker that the risks run would far outweigh any
possible gains.
'NATO’S 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey
and the United States.
106
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In a declaration in July 1990, the allies reaffirmed their commitment to
defend the territory of all NATO members. However, they also recognised
that, as Europe was changing militarily and politically, the Alliance had to
alter its structure and strategy. This will include the deployment of smaller,
highly mobile forces; a change in the size and tasks of the Alliance’s nuclear
deterrent forces, with a reduced role for short-range nuclear systems; and a
modified military strategy, reflecting a reduced reliance on nuclear weapons.
Britain plays a full part in the Alliance’s efforts to negotiate balanced and
verifiable arms control agreements. NATO believes that the first priority is a
treaty to reduce and limit conventional forces in Europe (CEE), along with
the completion of a package of confidence- and security-building measures.
This would be followed by new conventional arms control negotiations
aimed at further measures to limit the offensive capability of conventional
arms forces in Europe. Once the CEE agreement is signed, new negotiations
between the Soviet Union and the United States should take place on the
reduction of short-range nuclear forces.
Britain supports the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) ne¬
gotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. Britain also plays
a key role in negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
The most important issue under discussion is a global ban on chemical
weapons.
The NATO allies have acknowledged that Western interests outside the
NATO area may be threatened and recognise the need, in the last resort, for
those members with the means to do so to take action in consultation with
their allies.
Britain’s NATO Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best
Contribution help to maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear
deterrent and the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern
Atlantic and English Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate
approaches.
Britain’s strategic forces, equipped with improved Polaris missiles (to be
replaced by a Trident force in the mid-1990s), provide an independent and
European centre of decision-making within the Alliance, thereby guarding
against any misconception that Europe’s defence is ultimately dependent on
the US nuclear guarantee. Britain has also committed its other nuclear
systems to NATO.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy is committed to the Alliance. Permanent
contributions are made to NATO’s two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic
and the Channel, and to its Mediterranean force when activated. The British
Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are
stationed in the Federal Republic of Germany. Under the 1954 Brussels
Treaty,2 BAOR has three armoured divisions (with supporting artillery): two
divisions consist of three armoured brigades each and the other of two
armoured brigades and an infantry brigade. A reinforcing division com¬
prising one regular and two Territorial Army brigades is located in Britain.
Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support aircraft are assigned to NATO.
RAF Germany’s 15 squadrons (two of helicopters) are equipped for strike/
attack, reconnaissance, close support, air defence and air transport roles,
while RAF Strike Command, based in Britain, provides forces for these and
for the maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare roles.
2In 1988 the seven original members—Belgium, Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands—were joined by Portugal and Spain.
DEFENCE
107
Options for
Change
Europe and the
Alliance
Outside the
NATO Area
Britain also contributes ships and commando units to a British-Dutch
amphibious force, ground and air units for the Allied Command Europe
Mobile Force, and several squadrons for NATO’s Strategic Air Reserve.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at
the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
Because of the changed military situation in Europe, the Government is
proposing changes in defence provision. The strategic deterrent and a sub-
strategic nuclear force, provided by dual-capable aircraft, would be retained.
The air defence of Britain would be undertaken by Tornado F3 squadrons,
supplemented by Hawk aircraft. Home defence forces and the fleet of mine
counter-measures vessels would remain at their current level.
Although Britain will continue to play a full part in the defence of Europe,
the Government envisages that the British forces stationed in Germany could
be half their existing strength. When reinforced from Britain, BAOR could
comprise two divisions rather than four as at present. RAF Germany could be
reduced from 15 to nine squadrons, and two of the four RAF bases in Germany
closed. An amphibious force will be retained which should reinforce NATO’s
northern region; also retained is the ability to provide air support to defend
that area. A strategic reserve division is to be established, bringing together
amphibious, parachute, air-mobile and armoured formations, with roles also in
Europe or in national defence.
The Government proposes that Britain’s maritime contribution to NATO
should continue to include three aircraft carriers, smaller forces of destroyers
and frigates (reduced to about 40), submarines and Nimrod aircraft.
Implementing these changes would result in the strength of the armed forces
being reduced by 18 per cent to around 60,000 in the Royal Navy and the Royal
Marines; 120,000 in the Army; and 75,000 in the Royal Air Force. The number
of civilians employed by the Ministry of Defence would be similarly reduced.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is part of the wider effort which the European
allies make for the defence of the West, including the protection of their
common interests outside the NATO area. The European allies provide the
majority of NATO forces, as well as military facilities for United States
contributions, communications and transport.
Britain and its European allies play a full part in the Independent European
Programme Group, which promotes arms co-operation among European
allies, and in the Conference of National Armaments Directors, the forum for
defence equipment collaboration across the Atlantic. They also work together
in the Eurogroup to improve their contributions to the Alliance and to achieve
better use of available resources. In addition, the Western European Union
(WEU) provides further impetus towards European defence and security co¬
operation. The WEU helped to co-ordinate contributions by member countries
in mine clearance operations in the Gulf during the Iran-Iraq war in the late
1980s; in 1987 it also published a statement setting out how members intended
to contribute to NATO’s future security and to provide a basis for the
development of the WEU as a forum for Western Europe’s defence effort in
support of the Alliance. WEU members have agreed to co-ordinate their
participation in the multinational force in the Gulf (see p 108).
Britain maintains and improves its ability to operate outside the NATO area to
protect its interests without diminishing its commitment to the Alliance. It has
an airborne brigade which can be deployed to trouble spots should the need
arise. British garrisons are maintained in Belize, Brunei, Cyprus, the Falkland
Islands and, until 1997, Hong Kong.
Northern
Ireland
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
It also provides the largest national troop contingent to the United
Nations Force in Cyprus as well as giving support for the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, and contributes a detachment to the Multi¬
national Force and Observers in Sinai. Britain is contributing contingents to
the multilateral force deployed in the Middle East to help in the defence of
Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states against the threat of Iraqi aggression.
Considerable effort is devoted to the provision of military assistance and
training to about 30 countries outside the NATO area, and Britain deploys
its forces on visits and exercises in important areas.
Within Britain, the armed forces support the Royal Ulster Constabulary
(RUC) in the fight against terrorism in Northern Ireland. The Army
provides ten major regular units and nine battalions of the Ulster Defence
Regiment. The Royal Navy, which carries out patrols to prevent arms
smuggling, and the RAF also make substantial contributions; the Royal
Marines support Army and Navy operations.
At the beginning of 1990 the strength of the armed forces, all volunteers,
was 306,000: 63,500 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 152,900 in
the Army and 89,600 in the Royal Air Force. The Ministry of Defence
employed about 142,000 civilians (based in Britain) at the same date.
The 16,700 female personnel in the nursing and women’s services (3,500
in the Royal Navy, 6,700 in the Army and 6,500 in the Royal Air Force) serve
alongside servicemen in Britain and overseas.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with
a wide choice of length and terms of service. Subject to a minimum period of
service, entrants may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice (12 months for
certain engagements). Discharge may also be granted on compassionate
grounds, by purchase, or on grounds of conscience. Commissions, either by
promotion from the ranks or by direct entry based on educational and other
qualifications, are granted for short, medium and long terms. All three
Services have schemes for school, university and college sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by
specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational qual¬
ifications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly
valued by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for many
Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth; the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst; or the Royal
Air Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often
including degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher
training for officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich; the
Army Staff College at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at
Bracknell. Selected senior officers and civilian officials from Britain attend
the Joint Services Defence College, Greenwich, and the Royal College of
Defence Studies, London, which is also attended by officers and officials
from other countries. These provide the wider background necessary for
those destined to fill higher appointments.
Operational training includes joint-Service and inter-allied exercises.
Training is provided for the armed forces of allied, Commonwealth and
other countries.
Reserve Forces
Trained reserve and auxiliary forces supplement the regular forces on
mobilisation and are able immediately to take their places either as formed
DEFENCE
109
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
Royal Navy
Combat Forces
units or as individual reinforcements. They are also a link between the
Services and the civil community. Some members of these forces become
reservists following a period of regular service (regular reserve); others are
volunteers who train in their spare time. Volunteer reserve forces include
the Territorial Army, whose role is to reinforce the ground forces committed
to NATO and to help maintain a secure home base in Britain. Set up in
1985, a Home Service Force, linked to the Territorial Army and with a
planned strength of about 5,000, would on mobilisation assist in guarding
important civilian and military installations. Other volunteer forces include
the Royal Naval and Royal Marines Reserves, the Royal Naval Auxiliary
Service, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the Royal Air Force Volunteer
Reserve. All, except the Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, have been expanded
substantially in recent years or are planned to increase in strength in the near
future. The Ulster Defence Regiment (see p 108) is also a reserve force.
At the end of 1989 regular reserves totalled 240,500, and volunteer
reserves and auxiliary forces 91,400. The strength of the cadet forces, which
make a significant contribution to recruitment to the regular forces, was
137,000.
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of
which can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is capable
of carrying 16 nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. The missile system,
incorporating improvements designed to penetrate anti-ballistic missile
defences, will maintain the force’s effectiveness until it is replaced in the mid-
1990s by four Trident nuclear submarines. They will extend Britain’s
nuclear deterrent into the twenty-first century.
The Trident programme, which will cost an estimated £9,380 million (at
1989-90 prices), is expected to account on average for less than 3 per cent of
the defence budget (and less than 6 per cent of the equipment budget)
during its procurement period. It is also estimated that almost 70 per cent of
the money for the project will be spent in Britain. Three of the submarines
designed to carry Trident missiles are under construction.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Channel, where
they constitute the majority of naval forces immediately available to NATO.
Their primary role is anti-submarine warfare, which is crucial to deterrence
in peacetime and maritime operations in war. The navy includes three
Invincible-class anti-submarine warfare carriers, deploying Sea King anti¬
submarine and airborne early warning helicopters, Sea Harrier aircraft, and
Sea Dart air defence missiles; 17 nuclear-powered attack submarines (with
another one on order) equipped with torpedoes and anti-ship missiles; and
nine diesel-electric-powered submarines, including the more powerful
Upholder class, the first of which entered service during 1990.
The navy also has about 50 destroyers and frigates (including the first of
the new Type 23 frigate) for air defence, anti-submarine and general
purpose duties. Most of these have weapon-carrying helicopters, and
armaments include surface-to-surface, air defence, and anti-ship missiles.
There are two amphibious assault ships, supporting vessels and the Royal
Marines. Other ships include 40 mine counter-measures vessels, and
offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing interests and oil and gas
installations.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will
be based on an improved anti-submarine warfare force. This will be made up
of nuclear-powered attack submarines and advanced diesel-electric
110
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
conventional submarines, of which four have been ordered; the Type 23
frigate (a further nine have been ordered); and Nimrod maritime patrol
aircraft, equipped with Searchwater radar and armed with Harpoon anti¬
ship missiles and Stingray anti-submarine torpedoes. In addition, the surface
fleet has been strengthened by 14 multi-role Type 22 frigates—13 are
already in service and the building of the last ship is being completed—and
by the new Sandown class of minehunter, of which five have been ordered
(the first joined the fleet in 1989).
New or improved weapons will include the Harpoon missile for the last
four Type 22 and for the new Type 23 frigates, the Sea Eagle anti-ship
missile, Goalkeeper rapid firing guns, and, for submarines, the Spearfish
torpedo. The Sea Wolf and Sea Dart air defence missiles are also being
developed or improved, while a lightweight version of the Sea Wolf is being
developed. The Type 23 frigate, which will also be armed with the ship- or
air-launched Stingray torpedo, will be able to carry a number of different
helicopters, including the EH 101 helicopter when that enters service in the
mid-1990s. The navy’s Sea Harriers are being updated.
Army Combat The three armoured divisions in BAOR are equipped with Chieftain or
Forces Challenger tanks. Seven of the 12 Chieftain regiments in BAOR will be
replaced with Challenger; replacements for the remainder have yet to be
determined. The mobility of the infantry is being improved with the
continuing introduction of Warrior armoured personnel carriers, fitted with
a 30-mm cannon. The SA80 rifle and the light anti-tank weapon, LAW80,
have further augmented the infantry’s firepower.
Major improvements to the Army’s air defences are planned for the 1990s.
These include the formation of a third air defence regiment equipped with
the Starstreak missile, a new air defence command and control system, and
continuing improvements to the Rapier system. In 1989 the increased
emphasis being placed on mobile operations led to the conversion of a
brigade to the air-mobile role, with more Lynx helicopters. Major im¬
provements are being made to the Lynx helicopter and its anti-tank missiles.
The multiple-launch rocket system, which fires a variety of munitions at long-
range targets, is planned to enter service during the 1990s. Tactical nuclear
support is provided by the Lance missile and dual-capable artillery. The
need for sophisticated command, control and communications systems is
being met by the PTARMIGAN secure communications, the WAVELL
computerised battlefield information and the BATES artillery targeting
systems, among others.
Royal Air Force Tornado F3 and Phantom aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles and Oerlikon guns directed by Skyguard radar,
provide Britain’s air defence. They are assisted by Shackleton airborne early
warning aircraft and the ground radars and command, control and
communication systems of the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground
Environment. In addition, a number of Hawk trainer aircraft have been
equipped with air-to-air missiles and cannon for local air defence. The
strike/attack fleet has been re-equipped with the Tornado GR1; a variant of
this aircraft is replacing some Jaguars to provide reconnaissance. Close air
support for ground troops is given by the Harrier GR3, which is being
replaced by the Harrier GR5. Fourteen Harrier T 10 training aircraft have
been ordered for delivery later in 1990.
Nimrod maritime aircraft form part of Britain’s anti-submarine warfare
force, and also undertake long-range surveillance operations against surface
ships, as well as providing offshore surveillance and fishery protection.
DEFENCE
111
Organisation
and
Management
Improved Buccaneers, armed with Sea Eagle and Martel missiles, are employed
in an anti-ship role.
Victor, TriStar and VC 10 aircraft are used as tankers for in-flight refuelling.
Tactical transport is provided by VC 10 and Hercules aircraft, while Chinook,
Puma and Wessex helicopters provide tactical support to ground forces. Sea
King and Wessex helicopters perform search and rescue duties around the
British Isles. Weapons in service include Skyflash, Sparrow, Sidewinder, Martel
and Sea Eagle missiles, and guided and cluster bombs.
Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the introduction of the
Tornado F3, which is replacing the Phantom FG1, and the modernisation of
the radar and command, control and communications systems.
From the early 1990s the Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft will be
replaced by Boeing E-3D aircraft. The ability of the Tornado GR1 to attack at
night will be enhanced; the new Harrier GR5 is also being upgraded to a night-
attack version, GR7. All strike/attack and offensive support aircraft will be fitted
with advanced electronic warfare equipment to increase their ability to survive.
The Tornado GR1, already equipped with the British JP233 airfield attack
weapon, will have the ALARM anti-radiation missile. The European Fighter
Aircraft, which is being developed by Britain, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy and Spain, will replace the Phantom. Air-to-air refuelling
capacity is being increased by converting more VC 10 aircraft into tankers. The
Chinook fleet is to be updated, to extend its life into the next century.
Finance and Management
The defence budget for 1990-91 is over £21,000 million. Britain remains one
of the highest contributors to NATO, with over £350 per capita spent on
defence in 1989; 4 per cent of gross domestic product was devoted to defence
expenditure, a proportion only exceeded in NATO by the United States and
Greece.
Increased competition in the letting of contracts has improved both quality
and value for money. About 40 per cent of Britain’s defence expenditure is
devoted to the purchase of equipment.
Within the Ministry of Defence a military-civilian Defence Staff is responsible
for defence policy and strategy, operational requirements and commitments.
An Office of Management and Budget handles budgets and resources. Each
Service Chief of Staff reports through the Chief of Defence Staff to the
Secretary of State on matters related to the fighting effectiveness, management,
efficiency and morale of his Service. The management of the three forces is
exercised through executive committees of the Service Boards, which are
chaired by their respective Chiefs of Staff and act in accordance with centrally
determined policy objectives and budgets. The Procurement Executive deals
with the purchase of equipment, including equipment collaboration with allies
and friendly nations.
Under a new system of budgeting taking effect in April 1991, military and
civilian managers will be allowed to make the most efficient use of their
allocated resources. This new approach is designed to promote better value for
money, and to provide clear direction for local managers.
Defence Procurement
Nearly £8,300 million will be spent on equipment in 1990-91, making the
Ministry of Defence British industry’s largest customer. Contracts are awarded
Research and
Development
Alliance
Co-operation
Defence Sales
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by open international competition where possible, and strict guidelines ensure
that companies are placed under the maximum incentive to perform ef¬
ficiently.
Research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research establishments and under
contract in industry and the universities. Around £431 million is expected to be
spent on defence research and £2,034 million on development in 1990-91.
Nearly all design and development of defence equipment is carried out by
industry. The Ministry is seeking to involve industry in the research pro¬
gramme and to promote civil applications. As part of the Government’s policy
of improving the strength of Britain’s science base, the Ministry, together with
the research councils, makes joint grants to academic institutions in areas of
research relevant to defence. In order to obtain better value for money, four of
the Ministry’s non-nuclear research and development establishments are being
combined into the Defence Research Agency, due to start operation in 1991.
International co-operation has been a feature of armaments procurement for
over 20 years, and Britain was one of its pioneers in programmes such as the
British—French Jaguar aircraft and the Lynx, Puma and Gazelle helicopters; the
FH70 towed howitzer developed jointly with the Federal Republic of Germany
and Italy; and the successful Tornado aircraft developed and produced with
the same two partners. Britain also worked with the United States on the
Harrier GR5.
In order to make better use of limited resources, Britain is playing an active
role in forums such as NATO, the Conference of National Armaments
Directors, and the Independent European Programme Group. In the latter,
the majority of member countries have followed Britain and France in
publishing bulletins of contract opportunities which open up the European
defence equipment market.
Major new programmes under way include the EH 101 helicopter (with
Italy), the new European Fighter Aircraft (with the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy and Spain), the multiple-launch rocket system (with France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and the United States) and anti-tank
guided weapons (with France and the Federal Republic of Germany).
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments
to take advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development pro¬
grammes to improve their own defence. The Defence Export Services Organ¬
isation of the Ministry of Defence provides a wide range of assistance to
industry in promoting equipment and negotiating contracts with overseas
customers. This includes collecting market information, demonstrating
equipment, providing expert military advice, training and support, staging
exhibitions and negotiating with overseas governments.
Britain is one of the West’s top three defence exporters, and new contracts
signed in 1989 amounted to some £2,000 million. Export orders for defence
equipment maintain some 150,000jobs.
All exports of defence goods are controlled under a 1989 order and subject to
strict licensing in accordance with procedures operated by the Department of
Trade and Industry.
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, emergency
DEFENCE
113
services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of
voluntary organisations and individual volunteers. Since 1983 civil defence
regulations require local authorities to make and keep up to date plans for a
range of essential functions in the event of war; to arrange training and
exercises for civil defence staff and volunteers; and to provide suitable
emergency centres for the direction of civil defence in wartime. Following
legislation in 1986, local authorities may use their civil defence resources in
responding to peacetime emergencies.
Expenditure on civil defence has been growing steadily and was about
£120 million in 1989-90. This is being used to improve the quality and
readiness of central and local government planning; increase training
opportunities arranged by the Home Office on staff college lines at the
Emergency Planning College, Easingwold; help local authorities to plan for
better community involvement in civil defence; and improve the emergency
system for decentralised government control and communications.
Improvements are also being made in the communications, equipment and
administrative facilities of the United Kingdom Warning and Monitoring
Organisation. This includes the civilian Royal Observer Corps, which is
organised to provide public warning of an attack, of the location and
strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level of
radioactive fall-out.
5 Justice and the Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland all have their own legal systems, with
considerable differences in law, organisation and practice. However, a large
volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United Kingdom.
There is a common distinction between criminal law, concerned with
wrongful acts harmful to the community, and civil law, concerned with
individuals’ rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are government legislation, common law and
European Community law. Common law, the ancient law of the land
deduced from custom and interpreted in court cases by judges, has never
been precisely defined or codified but forms the basis of the law except when
superseded by legislation. European Community law is confined mainly to
economic and social matters; in certain circumstances it takes precedence
over domestic law. It is normally applied by the domestic courts, but the most
authoritative rulings are given by the Community’s Court of Justice.
Certain changes to United Kingdom law have been enacted as a result
of rulings of the European Court of Human Rights. These arose where
domestic law was in breach of the Council of Europe’s Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which the
United Kingdom is a party.
Criminal Justice
The Government’s strategy for dealing with crime is to prevent it, where
possible; to detect suspects; to convict the guilty and acquit the innocent; to
deal with those found guilty; and to provide more effective support for the
victims of crime. It is also concerned to maintain public confidence in the
criminal justice system and a proper balance between the rights of the citizen
and the needs of the community as a whole.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over rising
crime rates, public expenditure on the criminal justice sy stem has increased
from about £2,000 million in 1979-80 to an estimated £7,000 million in
1989-90, an increase in real terms of about 50 per cent. Extra spending has
taken place on the police, the probation service and prison building. More
than two-thirds of expenditure is initially incurred by local government
authorities, with the help of central government grants, mainly on the police.
Crime Statistics Differences in the legal systems, police recording practices and statistical
classifications in the countries of the United Kingdom make it impracticable
to analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. Nevertheless,
it is clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been a substantial
increase in crime since the early 1950s. However, official statistics cover only
crime recorded by the police and can be affected by changes in the
proportion of crimes which are undiscovered or unreported.
116
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crime
Prevention
Table 5.1: Notifiable Crimes Recorded by the Police in England and Wales
1989
Offence group
Crimes Recorded
Crimes Cleared up
Violence against the person 176,959
Sexual offences 29,733
Burglary 827,354
Robbery 33,163
Theft and handling stolen goods 2,012,760
Fraud and forgery 134,490
Criminal damage 630,084
Other 26,202
136,066
22,215
226,604
8,772
630,522
89,429
111,581
25,222
Total
3,870,745
1,250,411
Source: Home Office.
Table 5.1 shows the number of offences recorded by the police in England
and Wales in 1989 and their clear up rates. There were 3-9 million crimes in
1989,1 of which 32-3 per cent were cleared up. Violence against the person
acccounted for only 4-6 per cent of recorded crimes. The Scottish police
recorded 493,000 crimes, of which 33 per cent were cleared up.
Crime tends to be concentrated in inner cities and deprived areas; the risk
of burglary can be as high as one in ten houses a year in inner city areas,
compared with one in 100 in rural areas. Rising affluence has provided more
opportunities for casual property crime. In 1957, for example, car crime was
only 10 per cent of total crime but 30 years later this had risen to over 25 per
cent.
Most crime is committed by young males; it is opportunist and is not
planned by hardened professional criminals although these do exist. Only a
small proportion of young male offenders go on to become serious repeat
offenders.
The national crime prevention programme is overseen by the Ministerial
Group on Crime Prevention. National publicity campaigns, such as the
Crack Crime campaign launched in 1988, are a regular feature of the
Government’s programmes. The Home Office’s Crime Prevention Unit
helps local agencies to design and implement preventive measures and to
assess the results. In Scotland national publicity is administered through the
Crime Prevention Committee.
Other government departments are brought together with the Home
Office in the Ministerial Group to deal with crime prevention strategies. The
Department of the Environment’s Priority Estates Project and Estate Action
Programme are designed to encourage improvements in the design, layout
and management of housing estates. The gas and electricity suppliers have
speeded up their programme of replacing domestic prepayment meters by
cashless or ‘token’ meters, so removing a prime target for burglaries.
Local crime prevention panels—each one assisted by the police crime
prevention department—identify crime problems and try to tackle them
through publicity, marking goods and equipment and fund raising to buy
security devices. The panels have been closely involved in setting up some
Excluding ‘other criminal damage’ valued at £20 and under.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
117
Strengthening
the Law
Helping the
Victim
74,000 neighbourhood watch schemes in England and Wales. There are
some 1,100 watch schemes in Scotland.
In 1988 an independent national crime prevention organisation, Crime
Concern, was launched to encourage local initiatives such as crime
prevention panels and neighbourhood watch schemes, and to stimulate
business participation in crime prevention. Crime Concern in Scotland was
established in 1989.
In 1986 five local projects were set up with government support to see how
crime and the fear of crime could be reduced through action by local
government, private businesses, the police and voluntary agencies. As part of
the Government’s Safer Cities projects, this model is being adapted for use in
20 inner city areas in England and Wales. Each project is led by a local
committee, drawn from local agencies and supported by a co-ordinator
funded by the Home Office. Four projects are also being established in
Scotland. The aim is to encourage local communities to devise their own
crime prevention activities. Similar projects are being funded by the
Government in Northern Ireland.
A number of measures to strengthen the criminal justice system have been
taken. The Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 and the Criminal Justice
(Scotland) Act 1987 provide powers to trace, freeze and confiscate the
proceeds of trafficking. Under the Acts a court can issue an order requiring
the offender to pay an amount equal to the full value of the proceeds arising
from the trafficking. The laundering of illegal money associated with
trafficking is unlawful. Because of the international nature of the problem,
the legislation also provides for restraint and confiscation orders made by
courts to be enforced against assets held overseas, and vice versa. These
arrangements apply to countries with which mutual enforcement agree¬
ments have been concluded.
Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 a court may also make a confiscation
order against the proceeds arising from offences such as robbery, fraud,
blackmail and insider dealing in shares. A Serious Fraud Office with wide
powers to investigate and prosecute serious or complex fraud in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland was established in 1988 under the Criminal
Justice Act 1987.
Legislation has been passed to increase controls on firearms and the
carrying of knives. In 1988 the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 prohibited
the private ownership of certain highly dangerous types of weapon such as
high-powered self-loading rifles and burst-fire weapons. It also tightened
police regulation of the possession, safekeeping and movement of shotguns.
Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland. Under the Criminal Justice
Act 1988 it is unlawful to manufacture, sell or import certain weapons such
as knuckledusters or, in England and Wales, to carry a knife in a public place
without good reason.
The Public Order Act 1986 and similar legislation in Northern Ireland
strengthened the law against incitement to racial hatred and created a new
offence of possessing inflammatory material. It also introduced in England
and Wales a new order for convicted football hooligans to prevent them
attending certain matches and created a new offence of disorderly conduct
to enable police to deal with hooligan behaviour. The Act gave the police
powers to impose conditions on assemblies in public places.
The Government is taking steps to ensure that proper consideration is given
to the needs of victims of crime. There are more than 350 victim support
118
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
schemes in England and Wales, covering 94 per cent of the population, with
over 6,000 trained volunteer visitors. They are co-ordinated by a national
organisation, Victim Support, which receives a government grant. The
Government also finances local schemes to meet either the costs of paid co¬
ordinators or running costs. In February 1990 the Government published its
Victims Charter, setting out for the first time the rights and expectations
of victims of crime. Victim support schemes are expanding in Northern
Ireland.
The courts can also help victims by granting a compensation order against
a convicted criminal which takes precedence over a fine. The Criminal
Justice Act 1988 requires courts in England and Wales to consider
compensation in every appropriate case and to give reasons if it is not
awarded.
Victims of violent crime may apply for compensation under the Criminal
Injuries Compensation Scheme administered by a Board. Compensation is
based on common law damages and is a lump-sum payment. In 1989—90
some 38,600 cases were resolved by the Criminal Injuries Compensation
Board and nearly £75 million was paid in compensation. The Criminal
Justice Act 1988 provided for the Scheme to be established on a statutory
basis. Because of the need to tackle the backlog of unresolved cases and to
improve the Board’s service to claimants, this provision has been postponed
and steps are being taken to streamline procedures under the present
scheme. The Scheme allows foreign nationals to claim compensation for
violent criminal acts against them in Britain.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain
circumstances for compensation to be made from public funds for criminal
injuries, and for malicious damage to property, including the resulting loss
of profits.
In February 1990 Britain ratified the European Convention on the Com¬
pensation of Victims of Violent Crimes, under which mutual arrange¬
ments for compensation apply to citizens of those countries in which the
Convention is in force; at present these are Denmark, France, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands and Sweden.
Legislation provides the authorities with certain exceptional powers for
dealing with and preventing terrorist activities, while taking account of the
need to achieve a proper balance between the safety of the public and the
rights of the individual. While acknowledging that the special powers make
inroads into civil liberties, the Government believes that they should
continue in force as long as a substantial terrorist threat remains. Nobody
can be imprisoned for political beliefs; all prisoners, except those awaiting
trial, have been found guilty in court of criminal offences. The legislation is
reviewed annually by an independent person whose reports are presented to
Parliament.
The Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Acts 1978 and 1987 give
the security forces in Northern Ireland special powers to search, question
and arrest suspected terrorists. They allow the Secretary of State to proscribe
terrorist organisations. Certain serious terrorist offences are tried by a judge
sitting alone without a jury because of the possibility of jurors being
intimidated by terrorist organisations. The maximum period for which the
police can hold a suspected terrorist on their own authority has been reduced
from 72 to 48 hours. Statements obtained by the use or threat of violence are
inadmissible in court. Renewable each year, the Emergency Provisions Acts
expire in 1992.
THE POLICE
SERVICE
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989 applies
throughout the United Kingdom and is renewable annually by Parliament. It
provides for the exclusion from Great Britain, Northern Ireland or the
United Kingdom of people connected with terrorism related to Northern
Ireland affairs and for the proscription of terrorist organisations in Great
Britain. It also gives the police powers to arrest people suspected of being
involved in terrorism without warrant and hold them for 48 hours and, with
the approval of the Secretary of State, for up to a further five days. This
provision also applies to suspected international terrorists.
It is a criminal offence to handle, give or receive funds for use in the
furtherance of, or in connection with, terrorism. Police are able to apply for a
court order to freeze a suspect’s assets once he or she has been charged and
funds can be confiscated if a person is convicted. The Act also provides for
reciprocal enforcement agreements with other countries.
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in Northern
Ireland a person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish
Republic. It also enables evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for the
trial of offences in the Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the
Irish Republic.
Britain attaches great importance to international action to combat
terrorism and plays an active part in the work of various bodies. These
include a group of European Community ministers, which facilitates the
exchange of information and intelligence about terrorism affecting member
countries. Britain believes that there should be no concessions to terrorist
demands and that international co-operation is essential in tracking down
and arresting terrorists, and impeding the movement of international
terrorists from one country to another.
There are 43 police forces in England and Wales, eight in Scotland and one
in Northern Ireland (the Royal Ulster Constabulary). Outside London the
service is organised on a county basis (regional in Scotland) though some
counties and regions have combined forces. The Metropolitan Police Force
and the City of London force are responsible for policing London. At the
end of 1989 police strength in Great Britain was nearly 140,000. The Royal
Ulster Constabulary numbered 8,260.
Because of the need to strike a balance between providing the police with
effective powers and protecting individual freedom against any abuse of
those powers, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 was introduced to
clarify police powers in England and Wales to stop, search, arrest and detain
suspects and to search premises for evidence. Separate legislation applies in
Scotland, while a number of major reforms are being implemented in
Northern Ireland to bring it in line with the 1984 Act.
Officers in Great Britain do not normally carry firearms, although in an
emergency firearms can be issued quickly on the authority of a senior officer.
In Northern Ireland police officers are issued with firearms for personal
protection and other firearms are available for duty purposes.
The Interception of Communications Act 1985 sets out the grounds on
which the Government is empowered to authorise interception of postal and
telephone services. For the police, these are the prevention and detection of
serious crime, and, in some instances, the protection of national security.
The other ground for interception is the safeguarding of the economic well¬
being of Britain. Interception outside the procedures established by the Act
is a criminal offence.
120
Police
Authorities
and Chief
Constables
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
Police Discipline
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Police forces are maintained by police authorities. In England and Wales these
are committees of local county councillors and magistrates, and in Scotland the
regional and islands councils. The police authority for London’s Metropolitan
Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the police authority is
appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s functions, some subject to ministerial approval,
include appointing the chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant
chief constables; fixing the maximum permitted strength of the force; and
providing buildings and equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the
commissioner of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed on the
recommendation of the Home Secretary. The police authorities are financed by
central and local government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces,
including the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below
assistant chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities
on matters of efficiency, and must submit an annual report.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland approve the appointment of chief, deputy and assistant chief con¬
stables; where necessary they can require a police authority to retire a chief
constable in the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on
matters relating to local policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make
regulations covering such matters as qualifications for appointment, promotion
and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances; and
uniform. Some of these regulations are first negotiable within the Police
Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom. The Board consists of an in¬
dependent chairman and representatives of the police authorities, police staff
associations and the home departments. Matters of a non-negotiable kind and
general questions are discussed by the Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police) are subject to statutory
inspection by inspectors of constabulary reporting to the appropriate Secretary
of State. Inspectors maintain close touch with the forces they inspect and have
advisory functions. At the request of the Commissioner, the inspectorate also
undertakes inspections of selected parts of the Metropolitan Police.
A British police officer may be sued or prosecuted for any wrongful act
committed in carrying out duties. Police discipline codes are designed to
prevent any abuse of the considerable powers enjoyed by a police officer and to
maintain public confidence in the impartiality of the service. Statutory
procedures, including an independent element, govern the way in which
complaints from the public against the police are handled. The independent
Police Complaints Authority has powers to supervise the investigation of any
serious complaint against a police officer in England and Wales. In Scotland
complaints against police officers involving allegations of any form of criminal
conduct are investigated by an independent procurator fiscal service.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are accountable to the law. If they
break it, their members are liable to prosecution and, in some cases, this has led
to conviction. The Northern Ireland Independent Commission for Police
Complaints is required to supervise the investigation of a complaint regarding
death or serious injury and has the power to supervise that of any other
complaint if it so wishes. In certain circumstances, the Secretary of State may
direct the Commission to supervise the investigation of matters that are not the
subject of a formal complaint.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
121
Police Work
Community
Relations
Co-ordination
of Police
Operations
Police work ranges from the protection of people and of property, street
patrolling and traffic control to crime prevention, criminal investigation and
arresting suspected offenders. In urban areas, particularly, police officers
have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social agencies and
expert help.
Because the police cannot do their job without public support, virtually all
forces have community liaison departments designed to develop closer
contact between the force and the community. The Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 requires arrangements to be made for obtaining the views
of people about the policing of their area. Almost all areas have
police/community consultative groups. Particular efforts are made to
develop relations with young people, through greater contact with schools;
the Education Act 1986 places a duty on governing bodies and head teachers
to describe in their annual reports the steps they take to strengthen their
schools’ links with the community, including the police.
Emphasis is placed on improving relations with ethnic minorities. The
Government believes that all police officers should receive a thorough
training in community and race relations. The Home Office sponsors two
national courses in these subjects for community liaison officers and police
managers. There is also a national specialist support unit responsible for
improving community and race relations training for the police.
Discriminatory behaviour by police officers is an offence under the Police
Discipline Code. The Home Office organises recruitment advertising
campaigns in the press in order to encourage black and Asian recruits to the
police. In April 1990 there were 1,339 ethnic minority police officers in
England and Wales.
To release as many uniformed police officers as possible for operational
duties, police authorities employ over 42,100 full-time civilians in England
and Wales and over 2,670 in Scotland. Traffic wardens—of whom there are
over 4,610 in England and Wales and over 500 in Scotland—carry out duties
concerned with traffic and parking. Wardens are under the control of the
chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay, acting mainly as auxiliaries to
the regular force. In Northern Ireland there is a 4,600-strong part-time and
full-time paid reserve.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may
they withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks,
however, have their own staff associations to represent their interests.
Several common services are provided by central government and by
arrangements between forces. In England and Wales the most important of
these cover forensic science, telecommunications and the central and
provincial criminal records available to all forces. In Scotland the main
common services cover centralised police training, the Scottish Crime Squad
and the Scottish Criminal Record Office.
Certain special services such as liaison with the International Criminal
Police Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other British forces by the
Metropolitan Police. The National Drugs Intelligence Unit assists police
forces and the Customs service throughout Britain. The services of the
Fraud Squad, which is run jointly by the Metropolitan Police and City of
London Police to investigate company frauds, are available in England and
Wales.
122
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Police Powers
Arrest
Detention,
Treatment and
Questioning
Regional crime squads, co-ordinated at national level, deal with serious
crime such as drug trafficking and are used whenever operations cannot be
dealt with by individual police forces alone. In 1988 the specialist drug wings
of the regional crime squads arrested and charged over 700 people,
including 45 major traffickers.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A
national police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the
dissemination of information.
Under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 a police officer in England
and Wales has a general power of stop and search if he or she has reasonable
grounds for suspicion that a person is carrying stolen goods, offensive
weapons or burglary implements. The officer must, however, state and
record the grounds for taking this action. The Act also defines police powers
to arrest and detain people for questioning but provides a number of
safeguards. In addition, there is a statutory right for suspects to have legal
advice on arrest. The Act contains provisions for the tape recording of police
interviews.
In England and Wales arrests may be made with or without a warrant issued
by a magistrate. The 1984 Act provides a general conditional power to arrest
a person reasonably suspected of an offence, but this power can only be used
where it is not possible or appropriate to proceed by way of summons to
appear in court.
The Act categorises certain offences as ‘arrestable’ or ‘serious arrestable’
and provides a full power of arrest without warrant in respect of them for the
protection of the public.
A code of practice on detention, treatment and questioning is one of five
codes which the Home Secretary has issued under the 1984 Act. Failure to
comply with their provisions can render a police officer liable to disciplinary
proceedings.
An arrested person has a statutory right to consult a solicitor and to ask the
police to notify a named person likely to take an interest in his or her welfare
about the arrest. Where a person has been arrested in connection with a
serious arrestable offence, but has not yet been charged, the police may delay
for up to 36 hours the exercise of these rights in the interests of the
investigation if certain criteria are met.
The police must caution a suspect before any questions are put for the
purpose of obtaining evidence. Questions relating to an offence may
normally not be put to a person after he or she has been charged with that
offence or informed that he or she may be prosecuted for it.
Under the Act a person can be detained for up to a maximum of 96 hours
without charge. A person can only be detained beyond 36 hours if a warrant
is obtained from a magistrates’ court.
Reviews must be made of a person’s detention at regular intervals—six
hours after initial detention and thereafter every nine hours as a
maximum—to check whether the criteria for detention are still satisfied. If
they are not, the person must be released immediately.
The Act provides for the tape recording of interviews with suspected
offenders at police stations. This has already been adopted in some police
authority areas, and will become standard throughout England and Wales by
1991. A code of practice governing these tape recordings has been approved
by Parliament.
The Government is encouraging the establishment of schemes in England
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
123
Charging
Grant of Bail by
the Court
and Wales whereby lay visitors make random checks on the treatment of
persons detained in police stations and the conditions in which they are held.
Lay visitor schemes have been established in the majority of Greater London
boroughs and more are being set up in other parts of the country. The
schemes have helped improve relations between the police and the local
community, particularly in inner city areas.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful2 may
apply to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him or her, requiring that person to appear before the court to
justify the detention. Similar procedures apply in Northern Ireland.
Once there is sufficient evidence, the police have to decide whether or not to
charge the person with the offence. As an alternative to charging im¬
mediately, they can, for example, decide to defer charging, to caution, or to
take no further action and release the person with or without bail. Where an
immediate charge is appropriate the person may continue to be held in
custody, if there are grounds for believing that detention is necessary for his
or her own protection or to prevent harm to people or property. This also
applies if there is a risk that the person could fail to appear in court or could
interfere with the administration of justice. When no such considerations
apply, the person must be released on or without bail. Where someone is
detained after charge, he or she must be brought before a magistrates’ court
quickly. This will usually be no later than the following day.
Under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 there are time limits on the
period from arrest to the beginning of trial in England and Wales. These are
in force in most English counties and throughout Wales and are to be phased
in elsewhere in England by the end of 1990. The limits are 56 days from first
appearance before magistrates to summary trial or 70 days to committal for
trial in the Crown Court. The limit is 112 days from committal to taking of
the plea in the case of the Crown Court. When a time limit expires the
defendant is entitled to bail unless the court extends the limit; it can only do
this if satisfied that there is a good and sufficient reason and that the
prosecution has acted expeditiously.
It is a basic principle in Britain that accused people should not be remanded
in custody except where strictly necessary. Under the Bail Act 1976, which
applies to England and Wales, the court decides whether a defendant should
be released on bail pending trial. Unconditional bail may only be withheld in
certain specified circumstances, for instance, if the court has substantial
grounds for believing that the accused person would abscond, commit an
offence, interfere with witnesses, or otherwise obstruct the course of justice if
released on bail. A court may also impose conditions before granting bail. If
bail is refused, the defendant may apply to a High Court judge or to the
Crown Court for bail, and application can be made to the Crown Court for
conditions imposed by a magistrates’ court to be varied. The majority of
people remanded by magistrates are given bail.
In some cases a court may grant bail to a defendant on condition that he or
she lives in an approved bail or probation/bail hostel. There are 22 bail
hostels with nearly 380 places; the 82 probation/bail hostels have almost
1,700 places. An expansion programme is underway to provide 1,000
additional bail places in the period from 1988 to 1993. The probation service
has developed bail information schemes which provide the Crown
detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case of the
mentally disordered.
124
Scotland
CRIMINAL
COURTS
Prosecution
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prosecution Service with verified information about a defendant. This assists
the Service when it takes decisions on whether to oppose bail and enables the
courts to take an informed decision on whether to grant bail. Planned
provision should allow 100 courts to be served by April 1992.
In Scotland the police may detain and question a suspected person for a
period of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must either be released or
charged. An arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a
person has been charged, only voluntary statements will normally be allowed
in evidence at the trial. The court will reject statements unless satisfied that
they have been fairly obtained. The tape recording of interviews with
suspects is being implemented over a period of two years which began in
1988.
Anyone arrested must be brought before a court with the least possible
delay (generally not later than the first day after being taken into custody),
or—in less serious cases—liberated by the police, often on a written
undertaking to attend court on a specified date.
Where an accusation of a more serious offence is to be made, the accused
is brought before the sheriff in private to be committed, either for further
examination or until liberated in due course of law. A judicial examination
may take place. A maximum of eight days may elapse between committal for
further examination and committal for trial. No evidence needs to be
presented to the sheriff for such committal.
Anyone accused of a crime, except murder or treason, is entitled to apply
for release on bail. Even in cases of murder or treason, bail may be granted at
the discretion of the Lord Advocate or a quorum of the High Court. Money
bail has been virtually abolished and the courts, or the Lord Advocate, may
release an accused person if he or she accepts certain conditions.
There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person against
the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by
either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas corpus does
not apply in Scotland, but if a person charged with a more serious offence
has been kept in custody pending trial, the trial must begin within 110 days
of the date of full committal. The trial of a person charged with a summary
offence and held in custody must begin within 40 days of the date of first
appearance in court.
In England and Wales the initial decision to begin criminal proceedings
normally lies with the police. Once the police have brought a criminal
charge, the papers are passed to the Crown Prosecution Service, which
decides whether to prosecute. In Scotland procurators fiscal decide whether
to bring proceedings. In Northern Ireland there is a Director of Public
Prosecutions. In England and Wales (and exceptionally in Scotland) a private
person may institute criminal proceedings.
Instead of prosecuting, the police can issue a caution. In Scotland the pro¬
curator fiscal may make use of various alternatives to prosecution (see p 125).
The Crown Prosecution Service, headed by the Director of Public
Prosecutions, prosecutes criminal offences in magistrates’ courts and the
Crown Court. The Service is divided into 31 areas, each of which is run by a
locally-based Chief Crown Prosecutor appointed by the Director. The
Service provides lawyers to prosecute cases in the magistrates’ courts and
briefs barristers to appear in the Crown Court. Although the decision to
prosecute is generally delegated to the lawyers in the area offices, some cases
are dealt with by the headquarters of the Service. These include cases of
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
125
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Serious Fraud
Office
Courts in
England and
Wales
national importance, exceptional difficulty or great public concern and those
which require that suggestions of local influence be avoided. Such cases
might include terrorist offences, breaches of the Official Secrets Acts, large-
scale conspiracies to import drugs and the prosecution of police officers.
Discharging his duties through the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Ser¬
vice, the Lord Advocate is responsible for prosecutions in the High Court of
Justiciary, sheriff courts and district courts. There is no general right of
private prosecution; with a few minor exceptions crimes and offences may be
prosecuted only by the Lord Advocate or his deputes or by the locally-based
procurators fiscal holding a commission from the Lord Advocate. The
permanent adviser to the Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is the
Crown Agent, who is head of the procurator fiscal service and is assisted in
the Crown Office by a staff of legally qualified civil servants, all of whom
have had experience as depute procurators fiscal.
Prosecutions in the High Court are prepared by procurators fiscal and
Crown Office officials and prosecuted by the Lord Advocate, the Solicitor
General for Scotland (the Lord Advocate’s ministerial deputy) and advocate
deputes, who are collectively known as Crown Counsel. Crimes tried before
the sheriff and district courts are prepared and prosecuted by procurators
fiscal. The police and other law enforcement agencies investigate crimes and
offences and report to the procurator fiscal, who decides whether to
prosecute, subject to the directions of Crown Counsel.
When dealing with minor crime, the procurator fiscal increasingly makes
use of alternatives to prosecution such as formal warnings and fixed
penalties. The offender is not obliged to accept such an offer but if he or she
does so the prosecution loses the right to prosecute.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible
to the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and
may do so in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are
prosecuted by the police.
The Serious Fraud Office investigates and prosecutes the most serious and
complex cases of fraud in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Investigations are conducted by teams of lawyers, accountants, police
officers and other specialists, each headed by a case controller who decides
whether to prosecute, although this decision may, if necessary, be taken by a
more senior lawyer. If proceedings are instituted, the case controller and the
case secretary prepare the case for trial and instruct counsel for the
prosecution. The Office has computer-aided equipment for the presentation
of evidence in a graphic form to make it more comprehensible to jurors.
In Scotland the Crown Office Fraud Unit investigates and prepares—in co¬
operation with the police and other agencies—cases of serious and complex
fraud. It also deals with drug profit confiscation procedures and in¬
ternational criminal investigations.
Criminal offences may be grouped into three categories. Very serious
offences such as murder, manslaughter, rape and robbery are tried only by
the Crown Court presided over by a judge sitting with a jury. Summary
offences—the least serious offences and the vast majority of criminal
cases—are tried by unpaid lay magistrates sitting without a jury. A third
category of offences (such as theft, burglary or malicious wounding) are
known as ‘either way’ offences; they can be tried either by magistrates or by
126
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Crown Court, depending on the circumstances of each case and the
wishes of the defendant.
All those charged with offences triable only in the Crown Court must first
appear before a magistrates’ court, which decides whether or not to commit
them to the Court for trial. Committal proceedings also apply to ‘either way’
offences which it has been determined will be tried in the Crown Court. The
magistrates court may also commit a defendant tried summarily in an ‘either
way’ case, and found guilty, to the Crown Court for sentence.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, to which the public and the
media are admitted. A court normally consists of three lay magis¬
trates—known as justices of the peace—advised on points of law and pro¬
cedure by a legally qualified clerk or a qualified assistant. Magistrates are
appointed by the Lord Chancellor, except in Lancashire, Greater Man¬
chester and Merseyside, where appointments are made by the Chancellor
of the Duchy of Lancaster. There are nearly 28,000 lay magistrates.
There are 63 full-time, legally qualified stipendiary magistrates who may
sit alone and usually preside in courts in urban areas where the workload is
heavy.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts. These are
specially constituted magistrates’ courts which either sit apart from other
courts or are held at a different time. Only limited categories of people may
be present and media reports must not identify any juvenile appearing
either as a defendant (unless a judge directs otherwise) or a witness. Where a
young person under 17 is charged jointly with someone of 17 or over, the
case is heard in an ordinary magistrates’ court or the Crown Court. If the
young person is found guilty, the court may transfer the case to a juvenile
court for sentence unless satisfied that it is undesirable to do so.
The Crown Court sits at about 90 centres and is presided over by High
Court judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-time recorders. All contested
trials take place before a jury. Magistrates sit with a circuit judge or recorder
to deal with appeals and committals for sentence.
In cases of serious or complex fraud, full committal proceedings in
magistrates’ courts may be bypassed at the discretion of the prosecution.
However, there is a special procedure under which the accused is able to
apply to the Crown Court to be discharged on the ground that there is no
case to answer.
Appeals A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown Court
against the sentence imposed if he or she has pleaded guilty; or against the
conviction or sentence imposed if he or she has pleaded not guilty. Where
the appeal is on a point of procedure or of law, either the prosecutor or the
defendant may appeal from the magistrates’ court to the High Court (see
above). Appeals from the Crown Court, either against conviction or against
sentence, are made to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). The House
of Lords is the final appeal court for all cases, from either the High Court or
the Court of Appeal. Before a case can go to the Lords, the court hearing the
previous appeal must certify that it involves a point of law of general public
importance and either that court or the Lords must grant leave for the
appeal to be heard. The ten Lords of Appeal in Ordinary are the judges who
deal with Lords appeals.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a
point of law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is
acquitted; the Court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if
necessary. The acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity
of the acquitted person revealed without his or her consent.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
127
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988, the Attorney General may refer a
case to the Court of Appeal if he considers that a sentence passed by the
Crown Court is over-lenient. This only applies to a case triable exclusively in
the Crown Court. If the Court of Appeal agrees, it may increase the sentence
within the statutory maximum laid down by Parliament for the offence.
The High Court of Justiciary, which sits in Edinburgh and other major
towns and cities, tries the most serious crimes and has exclusive jurisdiction
in cases involving murder, treason and rape. The sheriff court is concerned
with less serious offences and the district court with minor offences. Criminal
cases are heard either under solemn procedure, when the judge sits with a
jury of 15 members, or under summary procedure, when the judge sits
without a jury. All cases in the High Court and the more serious ones in
sheriff courts are tried by a judge and jury. Summary procedure is used in
the less serious cases in the sheriff courts, and in all cases in the district
courts. District courts are the administrative responsibility of the district and
the islands local government authorities; the judges are lay justices of the
peace and the local authorities may appoint up to one-quarter of their
elected members to be ex-officio justices. In Glasgow there are four
stipendiary magistrates who are full-time salaried lawyers and have
equivalent criminal jurisdiction to a sheriff sitting under summary pro¬
cedure.
Children under 16 who have committed an offence are normally dealt
with by children’s hearings (see p 137).
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court. In both solemn and
summary procedure, an appeal may be brought by the accused against
conviction, or sentence, or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets
aside a conviction. There is no further appeal to the House of Lords. In
summary proceedings the prosecutor may appeal on a point of law against
acquittal or sentence. The Lord Advocate may seek the opinion of the High
Court on a point of law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on
indictment is acquitted. The acquittal in the original case is not affected.
Cases involving minor summary offences are heard by magistrates’ courts
presided over by a full-time, legally qualified resident magistrate. Young
offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who need care, protection
and control are dealt with by a juvenile court. They consist of the resident
magistrate and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a woman)
specially qualified to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’ courts
are heard by the county court; an appeal on a point of law alone can be
heard by the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by
High Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single
judge, and all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified
under emergency legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the
Crown Court against conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern
Ireland Court of Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of
Lords are similar to those in England and Wales.
Those accused of terrorist type offences are tried in non-jury courts to
avoid the intimidation of jurors. The onus remains on the prosecution to
prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt and the defendant has the right to be
represented by a lawyer of his or her choice. The judge must set out in a
written statement the reasons for convicting and there is an automatic right
of appeal against sentence on points of fact as well as of law. In 1989 some 50
per cent of people tried in the non-jury court were found not guilty.
128
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trial
The Jury
Criminal trials in Britain have two parties: the prosecution and the defence.
Since the law presumes the innocence of an accused person until guilt has
been proved, the prosecution is not granted any advantage over the defence.
A defendant (in Scotland called an accused) has the right to employ a legal
adviser and may be granted legal aid from public funds. If remanded in
custody, the person may be visited by a legal adviser to ensure a properly
prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the prosecution
usually tells the defence about relevant documents which it is not proposed
to put in evidence and discloses them if asked to do so. The prosecution
should also inform the defence of witnesses whose evidence may help the
accused and whom the prosecution does not propose to call. The defence or
prosecution may suggest that the defendant’s mental state renders him or
her unfit to be tried. If the jury (or in Scotland, the judge) decides that this is
so, the defendant is admitted to a specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence, which are
concerned with the proof of facts, are rigorously applied. If evidence is
improperly admitted, a conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the
trial the defendant has the right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the
prosecution, normally through a lawyer. He or she can call his or her own
witnesses who, if they will not attend voluntarily, may be legally compelled to
do so. The defendant can also address the court in person or through a
lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the trial before the
judge sums up. The defendant cannot be questioned without consenting to
be sworn as a witness in his or her own defence. When he or she does testify,
cross-examination about character or other conduct may be made only in
exceptional circumstances; generally the prosecution may not introduce
such evidence.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland thejudge in complex fraud cases
may order a preparatory open Crown Court hearing to be held at which he
or she can hear and settle points of law and define the issues to be put to the
jury. The law on evidence has been changed to make it possible for courts to
have before them a wider range of written evidence in the form of business
documents which could be relevant to a successful prosecution.
Injury trials thejudge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the
jury and instructs it on the relevant law, and discharges the accused or passes
sentence. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the jury is responsible for
deciding whether a defendant is ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’, the latter verdict
resulting in acquittal. If the jury cannot reach a unanimous verdict, thejudge
may direct it to bring in a majority verdict provided that, in the normal jury
of 12 people, there are not more than two dissenters.
In Scotland the jury’s verdict may be ‘guilty’, ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’;
the accused is acquitted if one of the last two verdicts is given. The jury
consists of 15 people and a verdict of ‘guilty’ can only be reached if at least
eight members are in favour. As a general rule no one may be convicted
without corroborated evidence.
If the jury acquits the defendant, the prosecution has no right of appeal
and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. The
defendant, however, has a right of appeal to the appropriate court if found
guilty.
A jury is independent of the judiciary. Any attempt to interfere with a jury
once it is sworn in is punishable under the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
Potential jurors are empanelled in court before the start of the trial. The
prosecution and the defence may challenge individual jurors on the panel,
giving reasons for doing so.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
129
Coroners’
Courts
TREATMENT OF
OFFENDERS
Custody
People between the ages of 18 and 65 (70 in England and Wales) whose
names appear on the electoral register, with certain exceptions, are liable for
jury service and their names are chosen at random. Ineligible people include
judges, priests, people who have within the previous ten years been members
of the legal profession, the Lord Chancellor’s Department or the police,
prison and probation services, and certain sufferers from mental illness.
Other disqualified people include those who have, within the previous ten
years, served a sentence of imprisonment, youth custody or detention, or
been subject to a community service order. Disqualification also applies to
anyone who, within the previous five years, has been placed on probation.
Anyone who has been sentenced to five or more years’ imprisonment is
disqualified for life.
Coroners investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths where
the cause is unknown. If the death is sudden and the cause unknown, the
coroner need not hold an inquest if, after a post-mortem examination has
been made, he or she is satisfied that the death was due to natural causes. He
or she must do so where there is reason to believe that the deceased died a
violent or unnatural death or died in prison or in other specified
circumstances. It is the duty of the coroner’s court to establish how, when
and where the deceased died. A coroner may sit alone or, in certain
circumstances, with ajury.
In Scotland the local procurator fiscal inquires privately into all sudden
and suspicious deaths and may report the findings to the Crown Office. In a
minority of cases a fatal accident inquiry may be held before the sheriff. For
certain categories, such as deaths resulting from industrial accidents and
deaths in custody, a fatal accident inquiry is mandatory. In addition, the
Lord Advocate has discretion to instruct an inquiry in the public interest in
cases where the circumstances give rise to serious public concern.
The Government’s aim is to ensure that convicted criminals are punished
justly and suitably according to the seriousness of their offences. It believes
that those who commit very serious crimes, particularly crimes of violence,
should receive long custodial sentences, but that many other crimes can best
be punished within the community through compensation and reparation.
Legislation sets the maximum penalties for offences, the sentence being
entirely a matter for the courts, subject to these maxima. The Court of
Appeal (see p 126) issues guidance to the lower courts on sentencing issues
when points of principle have arisen on individual cases which are the
subject of appeal.
The Government is proposing a new and more coherent statutory frame¬
work of guidance on the principles governing sentences.
The Government believes that custody should be used only for offenders
convicted of serious criminal offences or where the public needs to be
protected from a dangerous offender. The Court of Appeal has stated that
sentencers in England and Wales should examine each case in which custody
is necessary to ensure that the term imposed is as short as possible, consistent
with the courts’ duty to protect the interests of the public and to punish and
deter the criminal. The Government is proposing to introduce legislation in
England and Wales which would require a court, before giving a custodial
sentence, to be satisfied that the offence was so serious as to merit custody.
The court would also have to give reasons if it considered a custodial
sentence to be necessary; this would not, however apply to the most serious
offences such as murder, manslaughter, rape or robbery, which invariably
130
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Death
Penalty
Non-custodial
Treatment
Fines
Probation
involve a custodial sentence. Longer custodial sentences—within the sta¬
tutory maxima—would be given to persistent violent and sexual offenders in
order to protect the public.
A magistrates’ court in England and Wales cannot impose a term of more
than six months’ imprisonment for each offence tried summarily, but may
impose consecutive sentences subject to an overall maximum of 12 months’
imprisonment. If an offence carries a higher maximum penalty, the court
may commit the defendant for sentence at the Crown Court, which may
impose—within the permitted statutory maximum—any other custodial
penalty. In all three legal systems there is a mandatory sentence of life
imprisonment for murder. This is also the maximum penalty for a number
of serious offences such as robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter.
In trials on indictment in Scotland the High Court may impose a sentence
of imprisonment for any term up to life, and the sheriff court any term up to
three years. The latter may send any person to the High Court for sentence
if the court considers its powers are insufficient. In summary cases, the
sheriff may normally impose up to three months’ imprisonment or six
months’ for some repeated offences. The district court can impose a
maximum term of imprisonment of 60 days.
In Northern Ireland the position is generally the same as for England and
Wales. A magistrates’ court, however, cannot commit an offender for sen¬
tencing at the Crown Court if it has tried the case.
The death penalty has been repealed for almost all offences. It remains on
the statute book for the offences of treason, piracy with violence and some
other treasonable and mutinous offences. However, it has not been used for
any of these offences since 1946.
The Government believes that more offenders, particularly those convicted
of property crimes and less serious cases of violence, should be punished in
the community. In its view this should involve fines and compensation to the
victim, probation, community service, a new combined order linking pro¬
bation and community service, or a new curfew order to be used by itself or
with other orders.
The most common sentence is a fine. In England and Wales nearly 81 per
cent of offenders convicted by the courts in 1988 received a fine; this
included those convicted of motoring offences. In Scotland in 1988, 78 per
cent of the 177,000 people with a charge proved against them received a
fine. There is no limit to the fine (unless set by statute) which may be
imposed on indictment; on summary conviction the maximum limit, except
in certain exceptional circumstances, is £2,000 in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland, and in Scotland £2,000 in the sheriff court and £1,000 in
the district court.
The Government is proposing reforms under which fines would be more
closely related to ability to pay. The court’s penalty would be given in units
which would then be translated into monetary values according to the
offender’s means.
The main duties of the probation service are to supervise offenders in the
community, both under direct court orders and after release from custody. It
also provides offenders in custody with help and advice. In England and
Wales some 42,000 offenders began probation supervision in 1988; the
figure for Scotland was 3,000.
A probation order can only be made by a court with the consent of the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
131
Community
Service
Curfew Order
offender, who may be sentenced for the original offence if he or she fails to
comply with the order’s requirements or commits another offence while on
probation. Probation orders curtail the freedom of those on whom they are
made. The order requires regular contact to be made with the probation
officer. Special conditions can be attached to the order; these may require
the offender to attend a day centre for up to 60 days. Although intended as a
punishment, the time spent by offenders under supervision in the
community offers an opportunity for constructive work to reduce the
likelihood of reoffending. In England and Wales a probation order can be
made only for offenders aged 17 years or more. In Scotland the minimum
age is 8, though in practice offenders under 16 are rarely considered; in
Northern Ireland the minimum age is 10 years.
The probation service provides and maintains day centres and hostels
together with schemes designed to meet the needs of a broad range of
offenders. In England and Wales it also administers supervision orders, the
community service scheme and supervises those released from prison on
parole. In addition, some probation officers work in custodial es¬
tablishments.
Under government proposals for England and Wales the courts would be
able to combine a probation order with a fine for a single offence and day
centres would be renamed probation centres to which national standards,
including a core curriculum, would be applied. A probation order would also
become a sentence of the court; at present it is imposed ‘instead of
sentencing’, reflecting the original intention that probation should be used
mainly for first, or relatively trivial, offenders.
In England and Wales the cost of the probation service is shared between
central and local government. It is administered locally by probation
committees of magistrates and members co-opted from the local community.
In Scotland probation services are integrated with local authority social work
departments. In Northern Ireland the service is administered by a probation
board, whose membership is representative of the community and which is
funded by central government.
Offenders aged 16 or over (17 in Northern Ireland) convicted of im-
prisonable offences may, with their consent, be given community service
orders. The court may order between 40 and 240 hours’ unpaid service to be
completed within 12 months; for 16-year-olds the maximum in England and
Wales is 120 hours. Examples of work done include decorating the houses of
elderly or disabled people and building adventure playgrounds. The
number of community service orders made in England and Wales in 1988
was about 35,000; the figure for Scotland was 3,300 and that for Northern
Ireland 720. The Government is proposing to introduce a new court order
which could combine community service and probation, as is the case in
Scotland. The maximum term for the probation element would be the same
as a probation order and the maximum period of community service would
be 100 hours.
Legislation is proposed for England and Wales under which the courts
would be empowered to issue a curfew order confining people to their
homes at certain times in a bid to reduce crimes such as public disorder. It
could also be combined with probation, community service or the proposed
order linking probation and community service.
Compensation and The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for personal injury,
Reparation loss or damage resulting from an offence. The Government favours the
132
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Measures
Prisons
courts making full use of their compensation powers. Under the Criminal
Justice Act 1988 courts in England and Wales are required to give reasons
for not awarding compensation to a victim who has suffered loss, injury or
damage.
Courts may order the confiscation of proceeds gained by a criminal from
drug trafficking and other offences such as robbery, fraud, blackmail and
insider dealing in shares. In certain circumstances courts may also order
forfeiture of property involved in the commission of crime; this does not
apply in Northern Ireland.
The court in England and Wales may discharge a person absolutely or
conditionally if it believes that punishment should not be inflicted and a
probation order is not appropriate. If he or she is conditionally discharged,
the offender remains liable to punishment for the offence if convicted of
another offence within a period specified by the court (not more than three
years). The Crown Court may ‘bind over’ an offender by requiring him or
her to keep the peace and/or be of good behaviour. If this requirement is not
complied with, the offender may be brought before the court and dealt with
for the original offence. Alternatively the ‘binding over’ may mean that a
sum of money will be forfeit if conditions stated by the court are not met.
In Scotland the same effects of conditional discharge and binding over are
achieved by a system of deferral of sentence until a future date. During this
period the accused is required to be of good behaviour and to meet any other
conditions stipulated by the court.
Police cautions are used particularly for young offenders; the caution is a
form of warning and no court action is taken.
The Government aims to provide a humane and efficient prison service. The
average inmate population in 1989 was nearly 48,600 in England and Wales,
5,000 in Scotland and 1,800 in Northern Ireland.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are
known as ‘local prisons’. Other prisons, known as training prisons, receive
prisoners on transfer from local prisons. Some training prisons are ‘open’,
with no barriers to prevent escape. In England, Scotland and Wales sen¬
tenced prisoners are classified into groups for security purposes. There are
separate prisons for women.
There are no open prisons in Northern Ireland, where the majority of
offenders are serving sentences for terrorist offences.
People awaiting trial in local prisons or in remand centres are entitled to
privileges not granted to convicted prisoners. Those under 21 awaiting trial
are, where possible, separated from convicted prisoners.
The Government is seeking to foster greater private sector involvement in
the prison system of England and Wales. The building of new prisons is
monitored by a Board, which includes a strong private sector element. The
Government is to seek legislative powers to enable competitive tenders to be
invited from the private sector for the operation of remand centres and for
the work of escorting prisoners to and from courts and safeguarding them at
court.
Many of the prisons in Great Britain were built in the nineteenth century
and require major repairs. In order to cut down on overcrowding and ensure
that all prisoners are housed in decent conditions, a major programme of
improvement is in progress which will reduce substantially the number of
cells without access to night sanitation. Eight new prisons have been opened
in England and Wales and one in Scotland since 1985, and 13 others are
at various stages of design and construction. Three of these are due to be
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
133
Remission of
Sentence
Northern Ireland
Parole
Proposals for
Reform
completed by March 1991 and the remainder will follow in the period
between 1992 and 1994. By March 1994 over 7,000 places at new prisons will
have been added in England and Wales, and about 3,000 new places at
existing establishments. In Northern Ireland there is no overcrowding in the
six prison establishments, five of which have been built since 1970.
Most prisoners in Great Britain are eligible for remission of one-third of
their sentence. Prisoners serving a sentence of 12 months or less in England
and Wales are entitled to half remission. Release on remission is un¬
conditional and does not involve any official supervision in the com¬
munity. It may be forfeited for serious misconduct in prison.
In Northern Ireland prisoners serving a sentence of more than five days are
eligible for remission of half their sentence. A prisoner serving a sentence of
more than 12 months who is released from prison with remission is liable to
be ordered to serve the remainder of this sentence if convicted of fresh
imprisonable offences during this period.
Under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989 the
rate of remission for those convicted of terrorist-type offences and serving
sentences of five years or more has been reduced to one-third. Any released
prisoners convicted of another such offence before the expiry of the original
sentence must serve the remainder of that sentence before serving any term
for the second offence. Both these provisions apply to offences committed
on or after 16 March 1989.
In England and Wales prisoners serving determinate sentences of more than
12 months become eligible for consideration for conditional release on
parole licence when they have served one-third of the sentence, or six
months, whichever expires the later. In Scotland they only qualify after 12
months.
The first stage in England and Wales is consideration by a local review
committee attached to each prison. This is followed by scrutiny by Home
Office officials, who refer the more difficult and complex cases to the Parole
Board, which makes recommendations for release on parole. Home Office
ministers take the final decision on whether to accept the recommendation.
Less serious cases are dealt with by the Home Office without reference to the
Board. A similar procedure operates in Scotland, where there is a separate
Parole Board.
About three-quarters of prisoners serving sentences of less than two years
receive parole. However, for those serving sentences of over five years for
violence, arson, sexual offences or drug trafficking parole is granted only in
exceptional circumstances, or for a few months at the end of the sentence.
The parole licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner
would otherwise have been released from prison. It prescribes the con¬
ditions, including the maintenance of contact with a supervising officer, with
which the offender must comply. Parole is not available in Northern Ireland,
which has more generous remission terms.
The Government intends to introduce legislation reforming the remission
and parole systems in England and Wales. Remission would be abolished, as
would parole, for prisoners serving under four years and, instead, they
would spend 50 per cent of their sentence in custody and then be released.
For the remainder there would be a selective system of parole based on clear
and published criteria. All prisoners sentenced to a year or more would be
supervised on release until three-quarters of their sentence had passed. If
Life Sentence
Prisoners
Repatriation
Independent
Oversight of the
Prison System
Prison Industries,
Physical
Education and
Education
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
convicted of another offence punishable with imprisonment and committed
before the end of the original sentence, a released prisoner would be liable to
serve all or part of the original sentence outstanding at the time the fresh
offence was committed.
Proposals for the reform of the parole and remission systems in Scotland
are under consideration.
The release of prisoners serving life sentences is at the discretion of the
Home Secretary or in Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, subject to
a favourable recommendation by the relevant parole board and after
consultation with the judiciary. The Secretaries of State do not, however,
have to accept such a recommendation for release, nor are they bound by the
views of the judiciary. People serving life sentences for the murder of police
and prison officers, terrorist murders, murder by firearms in the course of
robbery and the sexual or sadistic murder of children are normally detained
for at least 20 years. At the end of 1989 there were about 2,600 life sentence
prisoners detained in prisons in England and Wales, of whom about 200 had
been detained for 15 years or more. The equivalent figures in Scotland were
437 and 31 respectively. On release, life sentence prisoners remain on
licence for the rest of their lives and are subject to recall should their
behaviour suggest that they might again be a danger to the public.
In Northern Ireland the Secretary of State reviews life sentence cases on
the recommendation of an internal review body in such a way as to reflect
their gravity and to take account of Northern Ireland’s special circumstances.
Sentenced prisoners who are nationals of countries which have ratified the
Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons or
similar international arrangements may apply to be returned to their own
country to serve the rest of their sentence there.
Each establishment has appointed to it a board of visitors (visiting committee
in Scotland), who act as independent observers on behalf of the Secretary of
State. They are unpaid volunteers drawn from the local community. In
England and Wales two members of the board must be magistrates. Their
principal duty is to satisfy themselves as to the state of the prison premises,
the administration of the prison, and the treatment of prisoners. They have
the right of access at any time to any part of the establishment, and to any
inmate, and may interview an inmate in private. They are required to make
an annual report to the Secretary of State about the state of the prison and its
administration, and can bring any matter to his attention.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them
when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison
system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufacture, en¬
gineering, woodwork, laundering, farming and horticulture. Most pro¬
duction caters for internal needs and for other public services. A few
prisoners are employed outside prison, some in community service projects.
Inmates are paid at pocket money rates for work done; in some prisons
incentive payment schemes provide an opportunity for higher earnings on
the basis of output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and staffed by local education
authorities. Full-time education of 15 hours a week is compulsory for young
offenders below school leaving age. For older olfenders it is voluntary. Some
prisoners study for public examinations, including those of the Open
University. Within the resources available there is an adult education
Overseas Aid
A CARE Britain health worker
teaches basic health education to
a family in Bangladesh. CARE
Britain receives funding from the
Overseas Development
Administration (ODA).
ODA-sponsored British experts
run pesticide application courses
for small farmers in Bolivia.
Defence
British forces
contributed to the
United Nations
Transition
Assistance Group,
which monitored
Namibia’s
transition to
independence in
1990.
HMS Sandown,
the Navy’s first
single-role
minehunter,
demonstrates its
manoeuvrability.
Changing the engine
of a Hawk aircraft of
the Royal Air Force’s
63 Squadron.
A simulated radar
training exercise
on board
HMS Gloucester. In
February 1990 it was
announced that
members of the
Women’s Royal Naval
Service would be
allowed to serve on
board ship.
Universities
Medical artist
Richard Neave, of the
University of
Manchester’s
Department of
Medical Illustration,
reconstructs the
likeness of a young
girl killed in an
earthquake on the
island of Crete
around 3700 years
ago. His expertise is
widely used by police
forces in their
forensic
investigations.
Researchers at the Spacecraft
Engineering Research Unit at the
University of Surrey have pioneered
low-cost access to space with their
‘microsats! In 1990 the unit
launched two new satellites, one of
which is being used to evaluate
equipment for the European Space
Agency.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
135
Medical and
Psychiatric Care
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
Religion and
Spiritual Care
Preparation for
Release
curriculum. Library facilities provided through the local public library
authority are available in all establishments. Voluntary vocational training
courses are taught by prison and civilian instruction officers. Physical
education is voluntary for adult offenders but compulsory for young
offenders. Practically all prisons have physical education facilities, some of
which are purpose built.
Education is offered on a voluntary basis to all prisoners and young
offenders in Northern Ireland, the courses ranging from basic education to
primary degrees and postgraduate research. At any one time around 55 per
cent of the prison population are engaged in some form of education and
training. A comprehensive library service, available in each establishment, is
linked to a province-wide inter-library loan service.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has ac¬
commodation for sick people, and patients can also be transferred to
National Health Service hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
Prisoners may write and receive letters and be visited by relatives and friends,
and those in some establishments may make telephone calls. Privileges
include a personal radio, books, periodicals and newspapers, and the
opportunity to make purchases from the canteen with money earned in
prison. Depending on facilities prisoners may be granted the further
privileges of dining and recreation in association, and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the
boards of visitors, who have power to order forfeiture of remission.
Prison officers deal with welfare matters and are supported in this by
probation staff (in Scotland, social workers), who use their own professional
skills to help individual prisoners understand more about the nature of their
offending behaviour.
Anglican, Church of Scotland, Roman Catholic and Methodist chaplains
share in a ministry to prisoners, providing opportunities for worship and
spiritual counselling. They are supported by visiting ministers of other
denominations and faiths as required. In a multi-faith and multicultural
society particular attention is given to the needs of those of other major
world faiths and ethnic minorities.
Many medium- and long-term prisoners in the later parts of their sentences
may be granted home leave for periods of between two and five days. Its
purpose is to to give the prisoner the opportunity to maintain links with
family and friends, and, where leave is taken near the end of the sentence, to
contact prospective employers and make firm plans for release.
The Pre-Release Employment Scheme provides an opportunity for
selected long-term prisoners to spend their last six months before release in
one of eight hostels, which are attached to prisons, to help them re-adapt to
society. Hostellers work in the outside community and return to the hostel
each evening. Frequent weekend leaves allow hostellers to renew ties with
their families.
In Northern Ireland arrangements exist for prisoners serving fixed
sentences to have short periods of leave near the end of their sentences and
at Christmas. Life-sentence prisoners are given a nine-month pre-release
programme which includes employment outside the prison.
136
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aftercare
Young
Offenders
England and
Wales
The probation service (in Scotland, the local authority social work
departments) provides professional social work support to offenders
following their release. Most young offenders under the age of 22, adult
offenders released on parole and those released on licence from a life
sentence receive a period of compulsory supervision from the probation
service. The National Association for the Care and Resettlement of
Offenders (NACRO) and the Apex Trust (and their counterparts in
Scotland) organise training—financed by the Government—for ex¬
offenders. Other government-aided assistance by voluntary bodies such as
NACRO includes accommodation. The Northern Ireland Association for
the Care and Resettlement of Offenders, also a voluntary group, is mainly
concerned with assisting petty criminals and alcoholics towards rehabilitation
and social awareness.
In England and Wales criminal proceedings cannot be brought against
children below the age of 10 years. Children between 10 and 17 charged with
committing a criminal offence may be brought before a court, usually a
juvenile court. A local authority may bring a child of any age under 17 to a
juvenile court in a civil procedure known as care proceedings if, for example,
it suspects that he or she is in moral danger or beyond parental control.
Under both care and criminal proceedings a court may make a care order or
a supervision order or, if the parents consent, an order requiring them to
exercise proper care or control over the child. Before an order may be made
in care proceedings or a care order made in criminal proceedings, it must be
shown that the child is in need of care or control which he or she is unlikely
to receive unless the order is made.
Under a care order, which is reviewed every six months and normally
expires when the young person reaches 18 or 19, the local government social
services authority becomes responsible for the child’s accommodation. It
may allow him or her to remain at home under supervision or place him or
her with foster parents or in a voluntary or community home. For children
too severely disturbed or disruptive to be treated in local authority homes,
there are two special Youth Treatment Centres run by the Department of
Health.
When implemented, the Children Act 1989 will reform both the grounds
for, and effects of, care and supervision orders in care proceedings. Under
the Act juvenile courts will no longer hear care proceedings and the care
order in criminal proceedings will be abolished.
Under a supervision order (which may remain in force for not more than
three years) a child normally lives at home under the supervision of a social
worker or a probation officer. The court has power to require that the child
complies with directions given by his or her supervisor or, in criminal
proceedings, with requirements made by the court. The supervision order
can be used to provide for a programme of constructive and remedial
activities by means of a short residential course or, more usually, attendance
at a day or evening centre.
In criminal proceedings, the courts may order payment of compensation,
impose a fine or grant a conditional or absolute discharge. The Government
believes that parents should be required to pay fines and compensation
incurred by juvenile offenders. It is therefore proposing to tighten the law,
under which courts would have to take into account parents’ means as well as
those of the juvenile when deciding the amount of a fine or compensation.
Offenders may be ordered to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their
Saturday leisure time (up to three hours on any one occasion) at an
attendance centre. The centres, which provide physical education and
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
137
Scotland
Northern Ireland
instruction in practical subjects, are for those found guilty of offences for which
older people could be sent to prison. Offenders aged 16 may be ordered to
perform up to 120 hours of community service.
Boys aged between 14 and 16, for whom a non-custodial sentence would not
be appropriate, may be sent to a young offender institution; for those aged 14
the period is between three weeks and four months and for those aged 15 or 16
the maximum is 12 months. This sentence is also available for girls from the age
of 15. In the case of a very serious crime, detention in a place approved by
the Home Secretary may be ordered, and must be ordered in the case of homi¬
cide.
The custodial sentence for those aged between 17 and 20 years is also
detention in a young offender’s institution. The use of custody for this group,
as with younger juvenile offenders, has dropped in recent years. From June
1985 to February 1990 the number detained as young offenders decreased
from 10,104 to 6,238; of these the number of juveniles declined from 1,078
to 289. Detainees are eligible for parole and all are supervised on release.
Alternative penalties include fines and compensation, attendance centre orders
and community service (between 40 and 240 hours).
The Government is proposing major changes in arrangements for dealing
with young offenders aged 16 and 17. In future both would appear in the
juvenile court, which would be renamed the youth court. The maximum length
of a community service order for 16-year-olds would be extended to 240 hours,
thereby bringing this into line with the arrangements for 17-year-olds. In
addition, both groups would be eligible for the proposed combined probation
and community service order. The Government believes that custody could be
abolished for 15-, 16- and 17-year-old girls and for 14-year-old boys, but that it
should remain as an option for boys between 15 and 17. Custodial sentencing
arrangements for 17-year-olds would be the same as those for 15- and 16-year-
olds.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children under the age of 16 years in court is rare and normally takes place only
where the offence is of a serious nature, or where a child is prosecuted together
with an adult. Instead, children under 16 (or in certain circumstances those
aged between 16 and 18 if subject to a supervision requirement) who have
committed an offence or are considered to be in need of care and protection
may be brought before a children’s hearing consisting of three lay people
drawn from a panel for each region or islands area. The hearing determines in
an informal setting whether compulsory measures of care are required and, if
so, the form they should take. An official ‘reporter’ decides whether a child
should come before a hearing. If the grounds for referral are not accepted by
the child or parents, or if the child is incapable of understanding the
explanation of the grounds, the case goes to the sheriff for proof. If he finds the
grounds established, the sheriff remits the case to the reporter to arrange a
hearing. The sheriff also decides appeals against any decision of a children’s
hearing.
Custody is available to the courts for young people aged between 16 and 21;
as in England and Wales they serve their sentence in a young offenders’
institution. Remission of part of the sentence for good behaviour, release on
parole and supervision on release are available.
Children between the ages of 10 and 13 and young persons between the ages of
14 and 16 who are charged with a criminal offence will normally be brought
before a juvenile court. If found guilty of an offence punishable in the case of
138
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Civil Law
CIVIL COURTS
England and
Wales
an adult by imprisonment, the court may order the child or young person to be
placed in the care of a fit person, under supervision (if a child) or on probation.
The offender may also be required to attend a day attendance centre, be sent to
a training school or committed to custody in a remand home. Other options
include a conditional or absolute discharge, a fine, costs, damages or payment
of compensation. Parents or guardians may be required to ensure the person’s
good behaviour. If the court decides that care, protection or control are
necessary, or if the child or young person has consistently failed to attend
school, it may place the individual in a training school, commit him or her to the
care of a fit person, order the parent or guardian to exercise proper care or
guardianship, or make a supervision order.
Offenders aged between 17 and 21 who receive custodial sentences of less
than three years serve them in a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The civil law of England, Wales and Northern Ireland covers business related
to the family, property, contracts and torts (non-contractual wrongful acts
suffered by one person at the hands of another). It also includes constitutional,
administrative, industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has
its own, often similar, branches.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders, guard¬
ianship orders and family protection orders. The courts also have juris¬
diction regarding public health and the recovery of community charge debts.
Committees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 286 county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and actions
for the recovery of land. Other matters dealt with by them include landlord and
tenant, adoption and divorce cases. Some cases are determined in those courts
designated as divorce county courts, and outside London bankruptcies are dealt
with in certain county courts. The courts also deal with complaints of race and
sex discrimination. Where small claims are concerned, especially those
involving consumers, there are special arbitration facilities and simplified
procedures.
Each county court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it by the Lord
Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by them. The
judge normally sits alone, although, in exceptional cases, a trial may be with a
jury.
The High Court is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench
Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction covers civil and some criminal
cases, and it also deals with appeals. The Family Division is con¬
cerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that relating to adop¬
tion and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the inter¬
pretation of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and commercial
law is the responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s
Bench Division.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division. In London the High
Court sits at the Royal Courts of Justice; elsewhere sittings are held at 26 district
registries at county court centres.
At present all cases above the upper financial limit of the county courts’
jurisdiction—currently £5,000 in contract and tort—must start in the High
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
139
Appeals
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
Court. The Courts and Legal Services Bill would enable the Lord Chancellor
to abolish this county court limit and to reserve the High Court for special¬
ist cases and for general cases of exceptional substance, complexity or
importance. It is expected that in early 1991 an order made by the Lord
Chancellor will require all but the most substantial personal injury cases to
start in a county court. The Bill would also give the county courts wider
powers to grant non-fmancial remedies such as injunctions.
New court rules have been introduced to help cut pre-trial delays.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the High
Court. Appeals against decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates
are heard by the Crown Court. Appeals from the High Court and county
courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division), consisting of the
Master of the Rolls and 27 Lords Justices of Appeal, and may go on to the
House of Lords, the final court of appeal in civil and criminal cases.
The judges in the House of Lords are the ten Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary, who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of
five. Lay peers do not attend the hearings of appeals, which normally take
place in a committee room, but peers who hold or have held high judicial
office may also sit. The president of the House in its judicial capacity is the
Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the Court of Session and the sheriff court. The
sheriff court deals with most civil litigation including all cases with a value of
less than £1,500. Appeals may be made to the sheriff principal or directly to
the Court of Session. This does not apply where the value of the case is
under £1,500, when an appeal must first be made to the sheriff principal,
who may sanction an appeal to the Court of Session on a point of law.
The Court of Session sits in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. It is divided into the Outer House, a court of
first instance; and the Inner House, mainly an appeal court. Appeals to the
Inner House may be made from the Outer House and from the sheriff
court. From the Inner House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The
judges of the Court of Session are the same as those of the High Court of
Justiciary.
The Scottish Land Court deals exclusively with matters concerning
agriculture. Its chairman has the status and tenure of a judge of the Court of
Session and its other members are lay specialists.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain limited classes of civil case. The
superior civil law court is the High Court of Justice, from which an appeal
may be made to the Court of Appeal. The House of Lords is the final civil
appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved
person. Actions in the High Court are usually begun by a writ served on the
defendant by the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. Before the case is
set down for trial in the High Court, documents (pleadings) setting out the
scope of the dispute are filed with the court; the pleadings are also served on
the parties. County court proceedings are initiated by a summons served on
the defendant by the court. In order to reduce delays, the High Court and
the county courts have power to order pre-trial exchange of witness
statements in certain cases. From early 1991, such exchange will be
140
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
compulsory in most High Court and county court cases. Courts may impose
penalties in costs on parties who unreasonably refuse to admit facts or
disclose documents before trial.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure
for most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court
and permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended
by settlement between the parties at any time. Actions brought to court are
usually tried without a jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or
malicious prosecution cases, when either party may, except in certain special
circumstances, insist on trial by jury; or a fraud case, when the defendant
may claim this right. The jury decides questions of fact and awards damages
to the injured party; majority verdicts may be accepted. Under the Courts
and Legal Services Bill the Court of Appeal would be able to increase or
reduce damages awarded by a jury if it considered them inadequate or
excessive. At present this can only be done if the parties agree; otherwise the
Court must order a retrial.
In civil cases heard by a magistrates’ court, the court issues a summons to
the defendant setting out details of the complaint and the date on which it
will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence at the court hearing.
Domestic proceedings are normally heard by not more than three lay
justices, including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public are
not allowed to be present. The court may order provision for custody, access
and supervision of children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses
and children. The law is being changed to speed up civil proceedings in
magistrates’ courts by allowing written statements, expert opinions and
hearsay evidence to be accepted in court without the presence of the witness
unless the evidence is disputed and the disputing party requests the presence
of the witness.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable by the court. Most are for sums of
money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure of the debtor’s
goods or by a court order requiring an employer to make periodic payments
to the court by deduction from the debtor’s wages. Other judgments can take
the form of an injunction restraining someone from performing an unlawful
act. Refusal to obey a judgment may result in imprisonment for contempt
of court. An arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a
warrant.
Normally the court orders the costs of an action to be paid by the party
losing it, but, in the case of family law maintenance proceedings, a
magistrates’ court can order either party to pay the whole or part of the
other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the
sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial
writ in the sheriff court). A defender who intends to contest the action must
inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a decree in
absence in favour of the pursuer.
In summary cases (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the statement
of claim is incorporated in the summons. The procedure is designed to
enable most actions to be carried through without the parties involved
having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representatives) need
appear only when an action is defended. A new small claims procedure was
introduced in 1988.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and
Wales. County court proceedings are begun by a civil bill served on the
defendant; there are no pleadings in the county court. Judgments of civil
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
141
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
courts and orders in respect of certain civil matters are enforceable through a
procedure administered by the Enforcement of Judgments Office.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court deal¬
ing with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges
and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public
life.
Administrative tribunals exercise judicial functions separate from the courts
and tend to be more accessible, less formal and less expensive.
A number of important tribunals decide disputes between private
citizens—for example, industrial tribunals have a major role in employment
disputes. Some (such as those concerned with social security) resolve claims by
private citizens against public authorities. A further group (including tax
tribunals) decide disputed claims by public authorities against private citizens,
while others decide such issues as the right to enter or visit the United
Kingdom. Tribunal members are normally appointed by the minister
concerned with the subject, but other authorities have the power of
appointment in some cases. For example, the Lord Chancellor (and, in
Scotland, the Lord President of the Court of Session) makes most ap¬
pointments where a lawyer chairman or member is required.
In the case of many tribunals, a two-tier system operates, with an initial right
of appeal to a lower tribunal and a final right of appeal, usually on a point of
law, to a higher one. Appeals from some of the higher tribunals on a point of
law only may be made to the High Court in England and Wales, to the Court of
Session in Scotland, and to the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland. There are
a few exceptions including, for example, immigration appeals, where there is
no right of appeal directly from the Immigration Appeals Tribunal to the
courts.
The independent Council on Tribunals exercises general supervision over
many tribunals, advising on draft legislation and rules of procedure,
monitoring their activities and reporting on particular matters. A Scottish
Committee of the Council exercises the same function in Scotland. The Council
has a similar responsibility with regard to public inquiries.
Administration of the Law
Responsibility for the administration of justice rests with the Lord Chancellor,
the Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland. The Prime Minister recommends the highest judicial appointments to
the Crown.
The judiciary is independent and its adjudications are not subject to
ministerial direction or control.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary. He is concerned with court
procedure and is responsible for the administration of all courts other than
magistrates’ and coroners’ courts, and for a number of administrative tribunals.
He recommends all other judicial appointments to the Crown and appoints
magistrates. He has general responsibility for the legal aid and advice schemes
and for the administration of civil law reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law, the police service,
prisons, and the probation and after-care service. He has general supervision
over magistrates’ courts, together with some specific responsibilities (such as
approving the appointment of justices’ clerks). He appoints a board of visitors
to each prison establishment (see p 134). He is advised by the Parole
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE PERSONNEL
OFTHE LAW
Judges
The Legal
Profession
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Board on the release of prisoners on licence. The Home Secretary is also
responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal prerogative
of mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to remit all or part of a
penalty imposed by a court.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General are the Government’s
principal advisers on English law, and they represent the Crown in appro¬
priate domestic and international cases. They are senior barristers, elected
members of the House of Commons and hold ministerial posts. The
Attorney General is also Attorney General for Northern Ireland. As well as
exercising various civil law functions, the Attorney General has final
responsibility for enforcing the criminal law. The Solicitor General is, in
effect, the deputy of the Attorney General. As head of the Crown
Prosecution Service, the Director of Public Prosecutions is subject to
supervision by the Attorney General, as is the Director of the Serious Fraud
Office.
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all
judges other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court
of Justiciary and the Court of Session, and is responsible for the composition,
staffing and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and
administered by the district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of
State is also responsible for the criminal law of Scotland, crime prevention,
the police, the penal system and legal aid; he is advised on parole matters by
the Parole Board for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief
legal advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal
representatives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. Both
are government ministers. The Lord Advocate is closely concerned with
questions of legal policy and administration and is responsible for the
Scottish parliamentary draftsmen. He must exercise an independent
discretion in carrying out his overall responsibility for the prosecution of
crime.
The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the Lord Chancellor,
while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of State, deals with
the police and the penal system. The Lord Chancellor has general res¬
ponsibility for the legal aid and advice scheme in Northern Ireland.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts, since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of
ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Judges are normally appointed from practising barristers, advocates (in
Scotland), or solicitors (see below). Lay magistrates in England and Wales
need no legal qualifications but are trained to give them sufficient
knowledge of the law, including the rules of evidence, and of the nature and
purpose of sentencing. The Scottish district court justices of the peace need
no legal qualifications, but they too must take part in training. In Northern
Ireland members of a lay panel who serve in juvenile courts undertake
training courses; resident magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or
barristers.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and
collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
143
LEGAL AID
Green Form
Scheme
Legal Aid
in Civil
Proceedings
for individual and corporate clients, while barristers advise on legal problems
submitted through solicitors and present cases in the higher courts. Certain
functions are common to both, for example, presentation of cases in the
lower courts. Although people are free to conduct their own cases, most
people prefer to be legally represented in the more serious cases.
Bills before Parliament are designed to increase the provision of good
quality legal services for clients in Great Britain by lifting restrictions on who
can provide these services. Under the proposals solicitors would be able to
acquire new rights of audience in the higher courts; building societies, banks
and other financial organisations would be able to offer conveyancing
services under a scheme providing important new safeguards to clients; and
people in England and Wales wanting to take legal action would be able, like
those in Scotland, to negotiate a form of ‘no win, no fee’ agreement with
their legal advisers. The Bills also propose to strengthen the system of
complaints against legal practitioners by creating Legal Services Om¬
budsmen able to investigate how the professional bodies handle these
complaints. Similar proposals for Northern Ireland are being considered.
The professional organisations for barristers and advocates are the
General Council of the Bar in England and Wales, the Faculty of Advocates
in Scotland, and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland and the
Executive Council of the Inn of Court of Northern Ireland. For solicitors
they are the Law Society of England and Wales, the Law Society of Scotland
and the Law Society of Northern Ireland.
A person in need of legal advice or legal representation in court may qualify
for help with the costs out of public funds, either free or with a contribution
according to means under the ‘Green Form’ scheme. Civil legal aid schemes
are administered by the Legal Aid Board, the Scottish Legal Aid Board and
the Law Society of Northern Ireland.
People whose income and savings are within certain limits are entitled to
help from a solicitor on legal matters (with the exception of wills and
conveyancing in England and Wales). Such help includes advice on the
relevant law, writing letters on the client’s behalf, and taking the opinion of a
barrister or advocate. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland it may be
extended to cover representation in civil proceedings in the magistrates’
court, Mental Health Review Tribunal hearings and certain disciplinary
proceedings before prisons’ boards of visitors.
The scheme provides for initial work to be done up to a specified time
limit of three hours for matrimonial work and two hours for other work.
Legal aid, which covers representation before the court, may be available for
most civil proceedings to those who satisfy the financial eligibility conditions.
An applicant for legal aid must also show not only that he or she has
reasonable grounds for taking or defending proceedings but also that it is
reasonable that he or she should receive legal aid. If legal aid is granted the
case is conducted in the normal way, except that in England and Wales no
money passes between the client and the solicitor; all payments are made
through the Legal Aid Fund.
In certain limited circumstances the successful unassisted opponent of a
legally aided party may recover his or her costs in the case from the Legal
Aid Fund. Where the assisted person recovers or preserves money or
property in the proceedings, the Legal Aid Fund may have a first charge on
that money or property to recover money spent on the assisted person’s
behalf.
144
Legal Aid
in Criminal
Proceedings
Law Centres
LAW REFORM
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made
by the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a
defendant qualifies for financial help. An order must be made (subject to
means) when a person is committed for trial on a murder charge or where
the prosecutor appeals or applies for leave to appeal from the Court of
Appeal (Criminal Division) to the House of Lords. No person who is un¬
represented can be given a custodial sentence for the first time unless given
the opportunity to apply for legal aid.
The Legal Aid Board makes arrangements for duty solicitors to be present
at magistrates’ courts to provide initial advice and representation to
unrepresented defendants, and also for them to be available, on a 24-hour
basis, to give advice and assistance to suspects at police stations. The services
of a duty solicitor are free.
In Scotland there is a duty solicitor scheme for accused people in custody
in sheriff and district court cases. An ‘interests of justice’ and ‘means’ test
applies only in summary cases, where decisions on applications for legal aid
are taken by the Scottish Legal Aid Board. In Northern Ireland a voluntary
duty solicitor scheme has been introduced at the principal magistrates’ court
in Belfast. Legal aid for criminal cases in Scotland and Northern Ireland is
free.
In a number of urban areas law centres provide free legal advice and
representation. Financed from various sources, often including local
authorities, they usually employ full-time salaried lawyers and many have
community workers. Much of their time is devoted to housing, employment,
social security and immigration problems. Free advice is also available in
Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and housing advice centres and in
specialist advice centres run by various voluntary organisations.
In England and Wales the Law Commission is responsible for reviewing the
law and making recommendations for its simplification and modernisation.
A permanent body, the Commission reports to the Lord Chancellor and
consists of a High Court judge and four other members who are required to
be practising or academic lawyers. The Lord Chancellor also occasionally
refers specific topics to the Law Reform Committee, nominating as members
experts in the particular field of law involved. In criminal law matters the
Home Secretary acts similarly with the Criminal Law Revision Committee.
Any changes in the law are a matter for legislation.
Law reform in Scotland is the responsibility of the Scottish Law Com¬
mission, which reports to the Lord Advocate. Its constitution and func¬
tions are similar to those of the Law Commission for England and Wales.
In Northern Ireland the Law Reform Advisory Committee, which reports
to the Secretary of State, reviews certain aspects of the civil law and makes
recommendations for reform.
6 Social Welfare
National Health
Service and
Community
Care Act 1990
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service
(NHS), the personal social services and social security. The NHS provides a
full range of medical services which are available to all residents, irrespective
of means. Local authority personal social services and voluntary organ¬
isations provide help and advice to the most vulnerable members of the
community. These include elderly, physically disabled, mentally ill and
mentally handicapped people and children in need of care. The social
security system is designed to secure a basic standard of living for people in
financial need by providing income during periods of inability to earn
(including periods of unemployment), help for families and assistance with
costs arising from disablement.
Central government is directly responsible for the NHS, administered by a
range of health authorities and boards throughout Britain acting as its
agents, and for the social security system. Personal social services are
administered by local authorities but central government is responsible for
establishing national policies, issuing guidance and overseeing standards.
Joint finance and planning between health and local authorities aims to
prevent overlapping of services and to encourage the development of
community services.
Planned spending on social welfare in 1990-91 is: health over £28,000
million and social security benefits nearly £55,600 million, while the standard
spending assessment for personal social services is almost £4,400 million.
Spending on the health service has increased substantially in real terms
since 1980, and is planned to grow further over the next two years. More
patients are being treated than ever before. Spending on social security is
rising because of increased numbers of beneficiaries, especially retirement
pensioners, and the long-term sick and disabled. The value of retirement
and most other long-term benefits has also increased in real terms since
1980. Major reforms to the social security system have been introduced
under the Social Security Act 1986 to provide a clearer, simpler system more
capable of meeting genuine need (see p 171). Spending on the personal
social services is determined by local authorities. Central government has
restricted the total expenditure of individual local authorities, but spending
has risen substantially in real terms since the late 1970s, reflecting the
priority given to this sector.
The National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 provides for
wide-ranging reform in management and patient care in the health and
social care services. The provisions on reforming the NHS are based on
proposals set out in a White Paper issued in 1989. These seek to offer
patients better health care and a greater choice of services and to give greater
satisfaction and rewards to those working in the service who respond to local
needs. When implemented, the measures will enable the NHS to continue to
be open to all, based on medical priority regardless of patients’ income, and
financed mainly out of general taxation.
146
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The reforms in community care provision are based on a separate White
Paper issued in November 1989. These will establish a new financial and
managerial framework which will help to secure the delivery of good quality
services in line with national objectives. They are intended to enable
vulnerable groups in the community to live as normal a life as possible in
their own homes, and to give them a greater say in how they live and how the
services they need should be provided.
The reforms are designed to shape health and social care for the 1990s.
The reforms in the NHS will be implemented in stages from April 1990 to
April 1991; those for community care will take effect between April 1991
and April 1993. The reforms apply to England, Wales and Scotland;
separate legislation is planned for Northern Ireland.
National Health Service
The NHS is based upon the principle that there should be a full range of
publicly provided services designed to help the individual stay healthy. The
services are intended to provide effective and appropriate treatment and
care where necessary while making the best use of available resources. All
taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its cost so that those
members of the community who do not require health care help to pay for
those who do. Some forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are provided
free; others (see pp 147 and 148) may be charged for.
Growth in real spending on the health service is being used to meet the
needs of increasing numbers of elderly people, to take full advantage of
advances in medical technology and to remedy shortfalls in areas such as
renal services. It is also used to provide more appropriate types of care, often
in the community rather than in hospital, for priority groups such as the
elderly, the mentally ill and people with mental handicaps. Increased
spending is, in addition, intended to combat the growing health problems
arising from alcohol and drug misuse; and to remedy disparities in provision
between the regions of Britain.
The Government emphasises the importance of preventive health
services, and the responsibility of individuals for their own health. While
great progress has been made in eliminating infectious diseases such as
poliomyelitis and tuberculosis, there has been less success in controlling the
major causes of early death and disability—heart disease, cancer and stroke.
Most recently the threat of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,
see p 157) has proved a serious problem for public health services. Because
of the close link between such diseases and individual life-styles or social
habits, emphasis is placed on helping people to adopt healthier ways of living
through education and other policies. A £3-8 million campaign was launched
in 1987 to inform the public of the main risks of heart disease.
The Government stresses the need for a partnership between the public
and private health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the
best value for money and the maximum patient care. In order to achieve
more effective management of resources in the NHS, general managers
drawn from inside and outside the health service have been appointed at
regional, district and unit levels. Further measures have included improving
the accountability of health authorities for the planning and management of
their resources; increasing the proportion of total staff who provide direct
patient care, such as doctors and nurses; and introducing a range of
programmes to provide services at lower cost. Considerable savings have
SOCIAL WELFARE
147
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
Changes in
Local
Management
Finance
been generated through the policy of competitive tendering for hospital
cleaning, catering and laundry services. Economies are also made in
prescribing by restricting the use of expensive branded products in favour of
cheaper but equally effective generic equivalents.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Health in England and the
Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are res¬
ponsible for all aspects of the health services in their respective countries.
The health departments (the Department of Health in England, the Scottish
Home and Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of
Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for national
strategic planning.
District health authorities in England and Wales and health boards in
Scotland are responsible for planning and operational control of all health
services in their areas. England, because of its greater size and population,
also has regional authorities responsible for regional planning, resource
allocation, major capital building work and certain specialised hospital
services. The authorities and boards co-operate closely with local authorities
responsible for social work, environmental health, education and other
services. Family health services authorities (health boards in Scotland)
arrange for the provision of services by doctors, dentists, pharmacists and
opticians. Community health councils represent local opinion on the health
services provided. (In Scotland this function is exercised by local health
councils.)
In Northern Ireland health and social services boards are responsible for
all health and personal social services in their areas. The representation of
public opinion on these services is provided for by district committees.
Under the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 regional
health authorities, district health authorities (health boards in Scotland) and
family practitioner committees have been replaced by smaller bodies
consisting of both executive and non-executive members. The new regional
health authorities came into operation in July 1990, while the new district
health authorities and the new family health services authorities (which have
replaced the family practitioner committees) came into force in September
1990. K
The Act will enable a wide variety of health service bodies to make
contracts with one another for the provision of hospital and other services.
Hospitals will be funded directly for the patients treated, making it easier for
general practitioners to refer patients outside their area if treatment
elsewhere is faster and better. Powers will exist for allocating resources
where the urgent need for treatment does not allow NHS contracts to be
arranged in advance.
Nearly 80 per cent of the cost of the health service in Great Britain is paid for
through general taxation. The rest is met from the NHS contribution paid
with the National Insurance contribution and from the charges towards the
cost of certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family doctor, and dental
treatment. Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary sources.
Certain hospitals increase their revenue by taking private patients who pay
the full cost of their accommodation and treatment.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to the following:
children under 16 years (or students under 19 and still in full-time
education); expectant mothers and women who have had a baby in the last
12 months; women aged 60 and over and men aged 65 and over; patients
148
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Health Service
Commissioners
PRIMARY
HEALTH CARE
suffering from certain medical conditions; war and armed forces dis¬
ablement pensioners (for treatment of their disability); people who are re¬
ceiving income support or family credit (see p 175); and families with low
incomes. Around 75 per cent of prescription items are supplied free.
The Health and Medicines Act 1988 introduced charges for dental
examinations and a system of proportional charges for all types of dental
treatment. However, women who are pregnant or who have had a baby in
the last year, anyone under the age of 18 (or 19 if in full-time education), and
people receiving income support or family credit, do not have to pay. The
Act also introduced charges for sight tests, but these remain free to children,
those on low incomes, and certain other priority groups. Grants for the
repair and replacement of spectacles are made for certain disadvantaged
groups.
Family practitioners (doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists) are self-
employed and have contracts with the NHS. Family doctors (also known as
general practitioners or GPs) are paid by a system of fees and allowances
designed to reflect responsibilities, workload and practice expenses. Dentists
providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed scale of
fees. Pharmacists dispensing from their own premises are refunded the cost
of the items supplied, together with professional fees. Ophthalmic medical
practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the general ophthalmic
service receive approved fees for each sight test made.
The Health and Medicines Act 1988 clarifies the powers of health
authorities to act in a more commercial manner in selling facilities and
services for non-NHS use to the public and outside organisations, while
maintaining safeguards in relation to patient care.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland
and Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about
the health service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Com¬
missioner for Administration (Ombudsman), who reports annually to
ministers. The powers of the Health Service Commissioner cover the failure
of a health authority or family health services authority to carry out its
statutory duties, a failure in a service provided, or maladministration causing
injustice or hardship. It does not cover actions taken solely in the exercise of
clinical judgment or the actions of family practitioners, for which separate
complaints procedures exist. In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for
Complaints has a similar role.
Primary health care is offered by doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists
working within the NHS as independent practitioners, and by health visitors,
district nurses and midwives employed by the health authorities. A wide
range of other services is also available, including the school health service
and the chiropody service. The remedial professions of physiotherapy,
occupational therapy and speech therapy are making an increasingly
important contribution to primary care.
There have been substantial increases in primary health care staff in
recent years. For example, in England and Wales between 1978 and 1988,
the number of family doctors increased by 19 per cent (to 27,000) while the
average patient list size fell by 14 per cent (to 2,000).
Special funds have been earmarked by the Government for improving the
quality of primary health care in inner city areas. Efforts have also been
made to improve health services for black and ethnic minority groups. These
include new health projects in Britain’s Chinese communities, and increased
SOCIAL WELFARE
149
Family
Practitioner
Services
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
Recent
Developments
Medical Audit
Health Visitors,
District Nurses
and Midwives
central funding for health information material to be produced in many
minority languages. 7
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors,
dentists, opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors
provide the first diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a suitable
course of treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services and
hospital consultants. Only ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic
opticians may test sight; patients requiring treatment for a defect in sight or
an eye disease are dealt with through the Hospital Eye Service. Spectacles are
supplied by registered ophthalmic and dispensing opticians but unregistered
opticians may also sell spectacles to adults under carefully prescribed
conditions.
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of primary health-care teams, which also include
health visitors and district nurses, and sometimes midwives, social workers
and other professional staff. About a quarter of family doctors in Great
Britain and over half in Northern Ireland work in modern and well-
eqmpped health centres, where medical and nursing services are provided.
Health centres may also have facilities for health education, family planning,
speech therapy, chiropody, assessment of hearing, physiotherapy and
remedial exercises. Dental, pharmaceutical and ophthalmic services, hospital
outpatient and supporting social work services may also be provided.
A new contract of service for general practitioners, which came into effect in
April 1990, expands the range of services available to patients. It is intended
to make the family doctor service more responsive to the needs of patients
and to provide incentives for all doctors to reach the highest standards. The
c anges are designed to make it easier to see doctors at times convenient to
patients, to encourage doctors to promote preventive medicine; and to make
it easier for patients to change doctors. Doctors will receive supplements for
patients living in deprived areas, for teaching students and carrying out their
own night visits. More funds will be made available to improve facilities at
doctors’ practices.
Under the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990, CP
practices with at least 9,000 patients may apply for fund-holding status. This
means that they will be responsible for their own NHS budget (the main
elements of which would be the cost of drugs and of arranging mostly non¬
urgent hospital services). Practices without fund-holding status will be given
annual amounts to cover their prescribing costs.
A new contract for dentists comes into force in October 1990. Under this
patients will be offered continuing care, and dentists will be encouraged to
practise more preventive dentistry for children. There will be incentives for
dentists to undertake further training.
Medical audit systems intended to enable doctors to review the quality of
their medical care are to be set up in all health authorities by April 1991. The
Government has made £31 million available for the development of medical
audit in 1990-91.
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education
of families, particularly those with young children. They work closely with
general practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District nurses
give skilled nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside hospital;
150
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
they also play an important role in health promotion and education.
Although almost all babies are born in hospital, some antenatal care and
most postnatal care is given in the community by midwives and general
practitioners, who also care for women having their babies at home.
Midwives are responsible for educating and supporting women and their
familiesrluring the childbearing period.
HOSPITALS AND A full range of hospital services is provided by district general hospitals.
SPECIALIST These include treatment and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients
SERVICES and outpatients; maternity departments; infectious disease units; psychiatric
and geriatric facilities; rehabilitation facilities; convalescent homes and all
forms of specialised treatment. There are also specialist hospitals or units for
children, people suffering from mental illness or mental handicaps, and
elderly people, and for the treatment of specific diseases. Examples of these
include the world-famous Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street,
and the Brompton Heart and Chest Hospital in London. Hospitals desig¬
nated as teaching hospitals combine treatment facilities with training medical
and other students, and research work.
Many of the hospitals in the NHS were built in the nineteenth century;
some, such as St Bartholomew’s and St Thomas in London, trace their
origins to much earlier charitable foundations. Much has been done to
improve and extend existing buildings and many new hospitals have been or
are being opened. Since 1979 in England 475 health building schemes, each
costing £1 million or more, have been completed. Over 500 schemes, worth
over £5,000 million in total, are at various stages of planning and
construction. In Scotland 64 major health building schemes, providing over
7,300 beds, have been completed since 1979. A further 40 schemes are at
various stages of development.
Recent policy in England and Wales has been to provide a balanced
hospital service centred around a district general hospital, complemented as
necessary by smaller, locally based hospitals and facilities.
The latest development in hospital planning in England is the nucleus
hospital. This is designed to accommodate a full range of district general
hospital facilities and is capable of being built in self-contained phases or as
an extension to an existing hospital. By mid-1991, 61 nucleus hospitals had
been completed and a further 24 were under construction. Those already
open have proved economical to build and are providing high-quality and
cost-effective services to patients. The world’s first low-energy nucleus
hospital, which is expected to use less than half the energy of a conventional
nucleus hospital, is due to open on the Isle of Wight in late 1990. A similar
hospital is being built in Northumberland.
In England NHS hospitals provide about 282,900 beds and have some
512,000 medical, dental, nursing and midwifery staff. The hospital service is
now treating more patients a year than ever before: between 1978-79 and
1988-89 the number of in-patient cases treated rose by 23 per cent to over
6-6 million; the number of day case attendances by 81 per cent to T2 million,
and outpatient attendances by 6 per cent to 36 million. Newer forms of
treatment and diagnosis are being made more widely available. These
include kidney dialysis, hip replacements, laser treatment for certain eye
conditions, and body scanning.
In 1986 the Government launched a drive to reduce hospital waiting lists
and times. By 1990 it had invested £109 million in a variety of projects,
including mobile operating theatres and the purchase of equipment, to
improve waiting times for patients.
Community services such as the psychiatric nursing service, day hospitals,
SOCIAL WELFARE
151
Self-governing
NHS Trusts
Private Medical
Treatment
Organ
Transplants
and local authority day centres have expanded so that more patients remain
in the community and others are sent home from hospital sooner.
The National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 sets out the
procedure for enabling hospitals and other units to become independent of
health authority control and establish themselves as self-governing NHS
trusts. I hese will be run by boards of directors, and will be able to employ
their own staff, conduct research and provide facilities for medical education
and other forms of training. Self-governing NHS trusts will derive their
income mainly through NHS contracts to provide services to health
authorities and GP fund holders. Under the 1990 Act the trusts will be able
to treat private patients.
The Government’s policy is for the NHS and the independent sector to co¬
operate in meeting the nation’s health needs. It believes that this will benefit
the NHS by adding to the resources devoted to health care and offering
flexibility to health authorities in the delivery of services. Some health
authorities share expensive facilities and equipment with private hospitals,
and NHS patients are sometimes treated (at public expense) in the private
sector to reduce waiting lists.
The scale of private practice in relation to the NHS is, however, small.
There are 78,500 beds in the independent health care sector, while
approximately 3,000 beds in health service hospitals in England are
authorised for private patients.
It is estimated that about three-quarters of those receiving acute treatment
in private hospitals or NHS hospital pay-beds are covered by health
insurance schemes which make provision for private health care in return
for annual subscriptions. Over 3-2 million people subscribe to such schemes,
half of them within group schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of
employees. Subscriptions often cover more than one person (for example,
members of a family) and the total number of people covered by private
medical insurance in Britain is estimated at nearly 6-8 million. The
Government has introduced tax relief on private health insurance premiums
paid by people aged 60 and over to encourage the increased use of private
health facilities.
Many overseas patients come to Britain for treatment in private hospitals
and clinics, and Harley Street in London is an internationally recognised
centre for medical consultancy.
There is a growing interest in alternative therapies such as homoeopathy,
osteopathy and acupuncture, which are mainly practised outside the NHS.
Over the past 25 years there have been significant developments in
transplant surgery in Britain. The United Kingdom Transplant Service
provides a centralised organ matching and distribution service. At the end of
1987 about 7,600 people were living with functioning kidney transplants and
during 1989 over 1,700 kidney transplants were performed. A similar service
exists for corneas, and in 1989 2,500 were transplanted.
Heart transplant operations have been conducted at Papworth Hospital in
Cambridgeshire since 1979. There are other heart transplant centres at
Harefield Hospital, West London, at the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle
upon Tyne and at Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester. Two further centres,
in London and Sheffield, opened in April 1990. A programme of combined
heart and lung transplants is in progress and in 1989 295 heart and 94
heart-lung transplants were performed. The world’s first combined heart,
lungs and liver transplant operation was carried out at Papworth in 1987.
Blood
Transfusion
Ambulance
Services
Rehabilitation
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Over 295 liver transplants were also performed in 1989. Pancreas
transplants are also carried out.
A voluntary organ donor card system enables people to indicate their
willingness to become organ donors in the event of their death. A publicity
campaign to increase the number of card carriers was launched in 1988,
when some 14 million donor cards were distributed to the public. The
Human Organ Transplants Act 1989 bans commercial dealing in organs
intended for transplant.
The blood transfusion service in England and Wales collects over 2 million
donations of blood and over 108,000 donations of plasma each year from
voluntary unpaid donors; in Scotland the figures are over 298,000 and over
13,000 respectively. Regional transfusion centres recruit donors and
organise donor sessions in towns and villages, factories and offices, and
within the armed forces. Donors are normally aged between 18 and 65. The
centres are also responsible for blood grouping and testing, maintaining
blood banks, providing a consultancy service to hospitals, teaching in
medical schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and technicians.
The Central Blood Laboratories Authority is responsible for the manu¬
facture of blood products as well as for research. There is also increasing
emphasis on the most effective use of blood and in particular its separation
into components such as plasma for specific uses. A laboratory at Elstree,
Hertfordshire, was opened in 1987 with the aim of meeting the needs for all
blood products in England and Wales. Facilities in Scotland are being
expanded to cope with rising demand.
The health authorities provide free transport by ambulance where necessary
on medical grounds. The ambulance service performs accident and emer¬
gency work, dealing with sudden illness, and urgent maternity cases. It also
carries out non-urgent work, providing transport for certain categories of
people needing outpatient treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals.
In some areas voluntary organisations using their own vehicles or volunteers
using their own cars help with non-urgent cases. In Scotland an air
ambulance service is available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the
mainland. Helicopter ambulances also serve several parts of England.
Rehabilitation begins at the onset of illness or of injury and continues
throughout with the aim of helping people to adjust to changes in life-style
and to live as normally as possible. Rehabilitation services are primarily
intended for elderly, young, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped
people who need such help to resume life in the community. These services
are offered in hospitals, centres in the community and in people’s own
homes through co-ordinated work by a range of professional workers. The
staff may also work closely with the disablement resettlement service of the
Department of Employment (the Department of Economic Development in
Northern Ireland); the housing, education and social services departments
of local authorities; and with the voluntary sector.
Medical services may provide free artificial limbs and eyes, hearing aids,
surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances. Following assessment,
very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with
environmental control equipment which enables them to operate devices
such as alarm bells, radio and television, telephones, and heating appliances.
Nursing aids may be provided on loan for use in the home.
Local authorities may provide a range of facilities to help patients in
the transition from hospital to their own homes, including the provision of
SOCIAL WELFARE
153
Hospices
Parents and
Children
Human
Fertilisation
and
Embryology
aids, care from home helps, and professional help from occupational
therapists and social workers. Voluntary organisations also provide
help, complementing the work of the statutory agencies and widening the
range of services.
A number of hospices provide care for the terminally ill (including children)
either directly in residential homes or through nursing and other assistance
in the patient s own home. Control of symptoms and psychological support
for patients and their families form the central features of the modern
hospice movement, which started in Britain and is now worldwide. Some
hospices are administered entirely by the NHS; the remainder, some of
which receive support from public funds, are run by independent charities.
The Government intends to move towards providing a level of public
funding for the hospice movement which matches voluntary donations. In
1990-91 public funding amounts to £20 million, an increase of 70 per cent
compared with 1988—89. I he Government is encouraging greater co¬
operation between the voluntary sector and health authorities in this field.
Special preventive services are provided under the health service to safe¬
guard the health of expectant mothers and of mothers with young children.
Services include free dental treatment, dried milk and vitamins; health
education, which is available to parents before and after childbirth through
talks, discussion groups and demonstrations; and vaccination and
immunisation of children against certain infectious diseases (see p 159).
Pregnant women receive antenatal care from their family doctor and
hospital clinics, and women in paid employment have the right to visit the
clinics during working hours. Some 99 per cent of women have their babies
in hospital, returning home shortly afterwards to be attended by a midwife
or health visitor and, where necessary, the family doctor. The Government
attaches great importance to improving the quality of maternity services, and
to making them more sensitive to the needs and wishes of mothers and their
families. The perinatal mortality rate (the number of stillbirths and deaths in
the first week of life) has fallen in England and Wales from 14-7 per 1,000
births in 1979 to 8-3 per 1,000 births in 1989.
A network of child health clinics run by district health authorities, and
increasingly by general practices, enables doctors, dentists and health visitors
to oversee the physical and mental health and development of pre-school
children. Information on preventive services is given and welfare foods are
distributed. The school health service offers health care and advice for
schoolchildren, including medical and dental inspection and treatment
where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
In recent years special efforts have been made to improve co-operation
between the community-based child health services and local authority social
services for children. This is particularly important in the prevention of child
abuse and for the health and welfare of children in care.
The birth of the world’s first ‘test-tube baby’ occurred in Britain in 1978,
using the technique of in vitro fertilisation. This opened up new horizons for
helping with problems of infertility and for the science of embryology. The
social, ethical and legal implications were examined by a committee of
inquiry under Baroness Warnock. Reporting in 1984, the committee
concluded that certain specialised forms of infertility treatment, including
artificial insemination by donor and in vitro fertilisation, were ethically
154
Proposed
Legislation
Family
Planning
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
acceptable, but recommended that surrogate motherhood (the practice
whereby one woman bears a child for another) organised by agencies should
be prohibited. Research on human embryos was considered acceptable, but
only up to the fourteenth day after fertilisation. The committee concluded
that a licensing authority should be established to regulate infertility services
and research. Legislation to ban commercial surrogacy agencies, and ad¬
vertising of or for surrogacy services, was passed in 1985.
The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill, now before Parliament, seeks
to implement the main recommendations of the Warnock report, including
the setting up of a licensing authority to regulate certain infertility
treatments. Parliament was given a free vote on whether to ban human
embryo research or to allow it under strict controls; it voted for the latter
option. The Bill would also provide for the status of children born as a result
of such treatments and would clarify the position on surrogacy where
contracts were not legally enforceable. If implemented, these proposals
would constitute one of the fullest and most wide-ranging pieces of
legislation on assisted reproduction and embryo research in the world.
Free family planning facilities are available from family doctors and from
health authority family planning clinics, which also make services available to
men.
Abortion
Drug Misuse
Publicity
Campaigns
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the ending of pregnancy by a doctor if two
doctors consider that its continuance would involve a greater risk to the life
of the pregnant woman (or of injury to her physical or mental health or that
of any existing children in the family) than if an abortion was carried out. An
abortion may also be allowed if two doctors consider there is a substantial risk
that if the child were born it would suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.
Abortions are carried out in NHS hospitals or in private premises
approved for the purpose by the Secretary of State. Over half of the legal
abortions to women resident in England and Wales in 1989 were performed
in private hospitals and clinics; in Scotland, 97 per cent of abortions take
place in NHS hospitals.
The Act does not apply in Northern Ireland.
The growing misuse of dangerous drugs such as heroin and cocaine has
emerged as a serious social and health problem, and the Government has
made the fight against such misuse a major priority. Its strategy comprises
action to reduce the supply of illicit drugs from abroad; provide more
effective law enforcement by the police and customs services; and tighten
controls on drugs produced and supplied in Britain. It also includes action to
increase the deterrent effects of the law; to develop effective programmes to
treat and rehabilitate misusers; and to discourage young people from
experimenting with drugs. An interdepartmental ministerial group was
established in 1984 to oversee the implementation of this strategy.
Research on various aspects of drug misuse is funded by several
government departments. The Government is advised on a wide range of
matters relating to drug misuse and connected social problems by the
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs.
As part of its prevention policy, the Government began a major publicity
campaign in 1985 to persuade young people not to take drugs, and to advise
parents, teachers and other professional staff on how to recognise and
SOCIAL WELFARE
155
Treatment and
Rehabilitation
Prevention
Other Sources
of Provision
Solvent Misuse
combat the problem. Subsequent phases of the campaign have warned of the
risks of transmitting HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), the virus which
causes AIDS (see p 157), through the sharing of injecting equipment and of
the dangers of heroin misuse. In February 1990 the Government launched a
further £3-8 million campaign to promote awareness of the dangers of drug
misuse among young people.
Over £17-5 million was provided for local treatment and rehabilitation
projects over a six-year period to 1989. Additional sums have been made
available since 1986—87 through the health authorities in England for the
further expansion of services for drug misusers. In 1990-91 over £15-5
million is allocated, including £9-5 million in response to the spread of HIV
infection among drug misusers. Similar projects are in progress in Wales and
in Scotland, where over £2 million is made available annually to health
boards for the support of drug misuse services. A number of trial schemes
are in progress, involving counselling and the exchange of clean for used
syringes and needles.
Treatment for drug dependence is provided mainly on an outpatient
basis. Many hospitals provide specialist treatment for drug misusers, mainly
in psychiatric units, or have special drug treatment units. An increasing
number of family doctors also treat drug misusers, but only certain specialist
doctors are licensed to prescribe heroin, cocaine and dipipanone (Diconal).
All doctors must notify the authorities of any patient they consider to be
addicted to certain controlled drugs, and guidelines on good medical
practice in the treatment of drug misuse have been issued to all doctors in
Great Britain. The Home Secretary has statutory powers for dealing with
doctors found to have prescribed irresponsibly.
The Government has set up a drugs advisory service to advise district health
authorities on the development of facilities in their areas. It continues to
make funds available for local education authorities in England and Wales to
appoint staff to promote and co-ordinate preventive work in their areas,
especially for anti-drug misuse work in schools. The Government has also
provided funding for the establishment of locally based drug prevention
teams in nine selected areas in England and Wales, chiefly targeted at young
people who may be at risk from drugs. Separate measures have been
introduced in Scotland to discourage drug misuse through publicity
campaigns and action in the education service and the community.
A number of non-statutory agencies work with and complement the health
service provision. Advice and rehabilitation services including residential
facilities, for example, are provided mainly by voluntary organisations.
Support in the community is provided by the probation service and local
social services departments.
Action is also being taken by the Government to curb the problem of solvent
misuse (the breathing in of vapour from glue, lighter fuel and other solvents)
by young people. In 1985 legislation was passed in England and Wales
making it an offence to supply such substances to children under 18 if the
supplier knows or has reason to believe they are to be used to cause
intoxication. (Such sales have been prosecuted successfully under common
law in Scotland.) Information and guidance material have been distributed
to retailers, parents, teachers and other professional workers to help them
educate young people on the dangers of the habit and warn them against
experimenting.
156
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smoking
Health Education
Voluntary
Agreements
Legislative
Measures
Alcohol Misuse
Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of illness and death in
Britain. It accounts for around 110,000 premature deaths and 30 million lost
working days each year, and costs the NHS an estimated £500 million a year
for the treatment of diseases caused by smoking (for example, heart disease,
lung cancer and bronchitis). In addition, smoking by pregnant women can
cause premature births and low birth weight in infants. Concerned at these
harmful effects, the Government is following an active health education
policy supported by voluntary agreements with the tobacco industry aimed
at reducing the level of smoking.
The Government aims to reduce adult smoking from the present level of 32
per cent and to reduce smoking by young people by one-third by 1994. A
£2 million a year campaign directed at those aged 11 to 15 started in late
1989 and is planned to last until 1994. Education on the harmful effects of
smoking is to be included in the National Curriculum for all pupils in
publicly maintained schools in England and Wales. The Government also
supports the work of the voluntary organisation Action on Smoking and
Health (ASH), whose workplace services consultancy was introduced in 1989
to offer advice and help to employers in formulating smoking policies. The
Government encourages the voluntary restriction of smoking in trains,
buses, theatres and other public places. Health authorities have been asked
to promote non-smoking as the normal practice in health service buildings
and to give help and advice to people who want to give up smoking. The
Government estimates that ‘passive smoking’, especially in the workplace
and the home, may cause several hundred deaths through lung cancer every
year.
Voluntary agreements between the Government and the tobacco industry
regulate the advertising and promotion of tobacco products, changes in
tobacco products and sports sponsorship by the industry. The agreement on
tobacco advertising provides for the use of six different health warnings
about the dangers of smoking and contains measures to protect groups at
particular risk, such as children, young people and women in early
childbearing years. Cigarette advertising is banned on television and radio by
law. The voluntary agreement on sports sponsorship covers levels of
spending, restrictions on sponsorship of events chiefly for spectators under
18 years and controls over the siting of advertising at televised events.
The Protection of Children (Tobacco) Act 1986 makes the sale of any type of
tobacco product to children illegal. Regulations banning certain oral tobacco
products known to cause oral cancer have been in force since March 1990.
The Government proposes to replace some aspects of the voluntary system
by legislation in 1992.
The far-reaching effects of alcohol misuse in terms of illness, family break¬
ups, inefficiency at work, loss of earnings, accidents and crime are widely
acknowledged. The Government considers that the reduction of such misuse
requires a range of action by central and local government, voluntary and
community bodies, the health professions, business and trade unions.
The Government believes that emphasis should be placed on policies to
prevent alcohol misuse and continues to seek better information about the
causes of problem drinking. It also seeks to encourage healthier life-styles,
and to provide earlier help for the problem drinker.
Treatment and rehabilitation include in-patient and outpatient services in
general and psychiatric hospitals and specialised alcoholism treatment units.
SOCIAL WELFARE
157
AIDS
Public Education
Campaigns
Primary care teams (general practitioners, nurses and social workers) and
voluntary organisations providing hostels, day centres and advisory services
also play an important role.
There is close co-operation between statutory and voluntary organisations.
The national voluntary agency, Alcohol Concern, which is in receipt of a
government grant of £583,000 for 1990—91, plays a prominent role in the
prevention of misuse, training for professional and voluntary workers, and
improving the network of local voluntary agencies and their collaboration
with statutory bodies. In March 1990 Alcohol Concern launched a workplace
advisory service with initial government funding of £100,000 as part of a
campaign to persuade companies that alcohol misuse is an industrial as well
as a social problem. In 1990—91 Alcohol Concern is receiving additional
funds to develop a network of services for all alcohol misusers. The Scottish
Council on Alcohol undertakes similar work in Scotland. Research and
surveys on various aspects of alcohol misuse are funded by several
government departments.
In 1987 the Government established an interdepartmental group to
develop strategy for combating the misuse of alcohol. Measures taken
include legislative changes as well as steps to secure better health education
and more effective action by local services and organisations. Legislation
came into force in 1988 to strengthen the law banning the sale of alcohol to
people under 18 years. At the same time, stricter controls on alcohol
advertising were introduced. People appearing in advertisements must now
be seen to be over 25 years of age; excessive drinking is not to be
encouraged, shown or implied; and alcohol is not to be advertised alongside
aggressive or anti-social behaviour. Independent television restricts the
advertising of alcohol in programmes aimed at young people.
In 1989 the Government announced increased funding for the Health
Education Authority’s expanded alcohol education programme. This aims to
reduce the harm caused by the misuse of alcohol by promoting sensible
drinking as part of a healthy way of life. It also seeks to develop a climate of
opinion which favours appropriate measures to prevent alcohol-related
harm. Alcohol misuse co-ordinators have been appointed in each of the 14
regional health authorities with the aim of developing strategies to counter
the misuse of alcohol.
The number of cases of the disease AIDS reported in Britain has continued
to rise: up to August 1990 there were 3,688 cases, of whom 1,975 (54 per
cent) had died. Recent statistics show a steady increase in the number of
AIDS cases among injecting drug users and people infected through
heterosexual intercourse.
Government measures to limit the spread of AIDS have included
measures to maintain the safety of blood and blood products through
publicity aimed at blood donors, the screening of blood donations, the
treatment of blood products for haemophiliacs, and the running of public
education campaigns.
The first major public education campaign was launched in 1986. This
involved national press, television, radio, cinema and poster advertising, a
free national telephone advisory service and the delivery of leaflets to all
households in Britain. Subsequent campaigns have been directed at the
general population, students and young people, practising male homo¬
sexuals, people travelling overseas, and at drug misusers who risk
contracting AIDS through injections of drugs by using shared needles and
syringes. By the end of 1989 the Government had allocated £44 million for
Funding for
Services
Research
Voluntary
Agencies
International
Co-operation
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
this work. Separate educational packages have also been prepared for
particular groups of people, including prison staff and prisoners, school-
children, and employers. It is thought that these campaigns have had
considerable success in raising public awareness and knowledge about HIV-
and AIDS-related issues.
The Government continues to make additional funding available to health
authorities and local authorities for treatment and advisory services, needle |
exchange schemes for drug misusers (see p 155) and training staff. In 1990-
91 £128 million is being provided to health authorities and £9-8 million to !
local authorities towards the costs of providing HIV-related services.
Government grants of £34 million have established the Macfarlane Trust to
help haemophiliacs in Britain who have become infected with the AIDS virus
as a result of treatment with infected blood products. In 1988 the
Government announced two new steps to monitor the spread of HIV
infection. These were anonymous and voluntary named screening tests for
HIV; the surveys began in January 1990.
In 1987 a £14-5 million research programme was launched with the aim of
developing both a vaccine to prevent HIV infection and new anti-viral drugs
to treat people already infected. A new drug, ‘Retrovir’ (zidovudine—AZT),
which can prolong the life and improve the health of some AIDS sufferers,
has been developed by a British pharmaceutical company.
A number of voluntary agencies receive financial support from the
Government (some £1-8 million in 1990-91). Among them, the Terrence
Higgins Trust, London Lighthouse and the Scottish AIDS Monitor promote
knowledge about the disease and help people with AIDS. Both London
Lighthouse and the Mildmay Mission Hospital provide hospice care and
community support.
Britain considers international co-operation to be of primary importance in j
the fight against AIDS and plays an active role in international efforts to
combat its spread. Following a British initiative in 1986, the European
Community decided to exchange information about the spread of the
disease, and its prevention and treatment. It also agreed to consider what
further co-operative measures should be taken by member states and the
scope for further joint work in research. Britain has also co-sponsored
resolutions on AIDS at the World Health Assembly, the United Nations
Economic and Social Council and at the 1987, 1988 and 1989 United
Nations General Assemblies.
The Government fully supports the work of the World Health Organ¬
isation (WHO) in leading and co-ordinating international action against the
disease, and has so far committed nearly £7 million to WHO’s Global
Programme on AIDS, which is helping developing countries to set up nation¬
al AIDS control programmes. Britain has agreed to give nearly £7 million in
support of national efforts in Africa and the Caribbean and is also giving
about £3 million over six years to the International Planned Parenthood
Federation for AIDS-related activities.
In 1988 Britain and WHO organised jointly the World Summit of
Ministers of Health on Programmes for AIDS Prevention. This issued the
London Declaration, stressing the need for governments to take urgent
action against the global threat from AIDS, the central role of education and
the need to protect human rights.
SOCIAL WELFARE
159
Infectious
Diseases
District health authorities (health boards in Scotland) carry out programmes
of immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (for women of child¬
bearing age and girls only), poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and
whooping cough. A new combined vaccine against measles, mumps and
rubella was introduced in 1988 to replace that for measles for children in the
second year of life. A new programme for immunisation, which is designed
to provide earlier protection for children, was introduced in 1990.
Immunisation is voluntary, but parents are encouraged to protect their
children. The proportion of children being vaccinated has been increasing
since the end of 1978. 8
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bac¬
teriological and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales
which conduct research and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of
communicable diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health
Laboratory at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National
Collection of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms. Two centres,
one in England and one in Scotland, investigate and monitor human
communicable diseases. Microbiological work in Scotland and Northern
Ireland is carried out mainly in hospital laboratories.
Cancer
Screening
Health
Education
The cervical screening programme aims to reduce deaths from cancer of the
cervix by inviting women at risk to be screened regularly to identify and treat
conditions that might otherwise develop into cancer. All district health
authorities in England have had computerised call and recall systems since
1988, which enable all women aged between 20 and 64 to be invited
regularly for cervical cancer screening. Similar arrangements apply in Wales
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The Government is setting up a nation-wide breast cancer screening
service for all women aged between 50 and 64. The service is now in force in
most areas, and all eligible women in England and Wales should have their
screening invitations by 1993 (and in Scotland by 1994).
Health education aims to increase information, raise awareness and
influence behaviour. Priority areas include heart disease, smoking, drugs
and AIDS. In England health education is promoted by the Health
Education Authority, a part of the National Health Service with the major
executive responsibility for public education in Britain about AIDS (see
p 157). In addition, in England the Authority’s functions are to advise the
Government on health education; plan and carry out programmes in co¬
operation with health authorities and other bodies; and sponsor research
and evaluation. It also assists the provision of training, and provides a
national centre of information and advice on health education In Wales
these functions are undertaken by the Welsh Health Promotion Authoritv.
At present health education in Scotland is promoted by the Scottish Health
Education Group, although there are plans to establish a new body Health
education support services in Northern Ireland are provided at present by
a Health Promotion Unit; a statutory health promotion agency is to be
established in October 1990.
Almost all health authorities have their own health education service,
which works closely with health professionals, health visitors, community
groups, local employers and others to determine the most suitable local
programmes. Increased resources in the health service are being directed
towards health education and preventive measures.
160
Healthier
Eating
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Safety of Food
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There has been growing public awareness in recent years of the importance
of a healthy diet. In 1984 a report on diet and cardiovascular disease
produced by the government Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy
advised that a reduction of saturated fatty acids and fat in the diet could help
to reduce the incidence or delay the onset of cardiovascular disease. To help
people reduce their fat intake, the Government produced guidelines on the
labelling of food to show nutrient content in a standard format. Nutritional
labelling indicating the energy, fat, protein and carbohydrate content of
food is being encouraged on a voluntary basis. Some supermarket chains
have already introduced voluntary labelling schemes. Current work by the
Committee includes a review of the relationship between diet and
cardiovascular disease; matters relating to the nutrition of infants, children
and the elderly; and revising the recommended daily amounts of energy and
nutrients. In 1989 the Committee issued a report on the role of dietary
sugars in human disease and on the diets of British schoolchildren. The
Scottish Health Education Group (see above) has also produced a guide to
healthier eating.
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible
for the control of air pollution and noise, and food hygiene and safety. Their
duties also cover the occupational health and safety aspects of a variety of
premises, including offices and shops, the investigation of unfit housing, and
in some instances refuse collection and home safety. Doctors who specialise
in community medicine and are employed by the health authorities advise
local authorities on the medical aspects of environmental health, infectious
diseases and food poisoning. They may also co-operate with the authorities
responsible for water supply and sewerage. Environmental health officers at
ports and airports carry out duties concerned with shipping, inspection of
imported foods and disease control. In Northern Ireland district councils are
responsible for noise control; collection and disposal of refuse; clean air; and
food composition, labelling and hygiene.
It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any
treatment, process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health.
Places where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must
conform to certain hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may
take for analysis or other examination samples of any food on sale or being
distributed. Special regulations control the safety of particular foods such as
milk, meat, ice-cream and shellfish.
The Food Safety Act 1990 contains measures to improve food safety in
England, Wales and Scotland. These include tighter controls on unfit food
new enforcement measures, extended powers to cover new technical
developments, the compulsory registration of commercial food premises,
and greatly increased penalties for offenders. Separate legislation will be
prepared for Northern Ireland. . . ,
In 1989 the Government established the Committee on Microbiological
Food Safety, whose function is to examine the increasing incidence of food-
borne illnesses, particularly from salmonella, listeria and Campylobacter, and
to recommend action where appropriate.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are
responsible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and import of
medicines for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission
advises the ministers on policy regarding such products. The Committees
on Safety of Medicines, on Dental and Surgical Materials and on the Review
SOCIAL WELFARE
161
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
Doctors and
Dentists
Nurses
Pharmacists
o Medicines advise on the safety, quality and effectiveness of medicinal
products. The Committee on Safety of Medicines also monitors adverse
reactions to drugs. The Act also controls the advertising, labelling,
packaging, distribution, sale and supply of medicinal products.
In 1989-90 the health departments spent about £15-4 million on health
research, in addition to expenditure by the Medical Research Council (the
mam government agency for the support of biomedical and clinical
research). Priority areas include research into AIDS, primary health care
community care and child care, the NHS and personal social services
workforce, public health and the NHS acute sector.
For England and Wales the Director of Research and Development at the
Department of Health advises health ministers on the direction of centrally
supported research, and, as a director of the NHS Management Execu¬
tive, oversees research in the NHS. In Scotland the directly funded
programme is administered by the Chief Scientist of the Scottish Home and
Health Department.
The Department of Health is involved in international research and
development, and takes part in the European Community’s medical and
public health research programme.
Only people on the medical or dentists’ registers may practise as doctors or
dentists in the NHS. University medical and dental schools are responsible
for teaching; the NHS provides hospital facilities for training. Full regis¬
tration as a doctor requires five or six years’ training in a medical school and
hospital, with a further year’s experience in a hospital. For a dentist four or
more years’ training at a dental school is required. The regulating body for
the medical profession is the General Medical Council and for dentists, the
General Dental Council. The main professional associations are the British
Medical Association and the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of training required to qualify for registration as a first
uTj nurse in general> mental or mental handicapped nursing (and sick
children s nursing in Scotland) is normally three years. Registration as a
nurse at second level (enrolled nurse) takes two years (in Scotland 18
months). The Government is committed to a major reform of nurse
education which is intended to place particular emphasis on health
promotion as well as disease prevention. Midwifery training for registered
general nurses takes 18 months, and for other student midwives in England
three years. Health visitors are registered general nurses with midwifery or
approved obstetric experience who have completed a one-year course in
health visiting. District nurses are registered general nurses who have
completed a six-month course followed by a period of supervised practice in
district nursing. r
The examining bodies for all nurses, midwives and health visitors are the
National Boards for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting established in
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The United Kingdom
Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting is responsible
for regulating and registering these professions.
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered with the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain or the Pharmaceutical Society of
Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course approved by the Phar¬
maceutical Society followed by a year’s approved training is necessary before
162
Opticians
Other
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
registration. The majority of medicines can be supplied only by, or under the
supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic
optician and dispensing optician. Only registered ophthalmic opticians (or
registered ophthalmic medical practitioners) may test sight. Training
of ophthalmic opticians takes four years, including a year of practical
experience under supervision. Dispensing opticians take a two-year full-time
course with a year’s practical experience or a part-time day-release course
while employed with an optician.
State registration may also be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physio¬
therapists and radiographers. The governing bodies are seven boards,
corresponding to the professions, under the general supervision of the
Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine. Training lasts one to
four years and only those who are state registered may be employed in the
NHS and some other public services.
Dental therapists (who have taken a two-year training course) and dental
hygienists (who have taken a training course of about a year) may carry out
some simple dental work under the supervision of a registered dentist.
In mid-1990 a new group of NHS staff—health care assistants—began
work in hospitals and the community. They are intended to support the
work of more highly qualified staff.
The member states of the European Community have special health
arrangements under which Community nationals resident in a member state
are entitled to receive any treatment, either free or at a reduced cost, during
visits to other Community countries. There are also arrangements to cover
people who go to work or live in other Community countries. In addition,
there are reciprocal arrangements with some other countries under which
medical treatment is available to visitors if required immediately. Visitors are
generally expected to pay if the purpose of their visit is to seek medical
treatment. Visitors who are not covered by reciprocal arrangements are
obliged to pay for any medical treatment they receive.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for providing personal social services rests with the social
services authorities (local authority social services departments in England
and Wales, social work departments in Scotland, and health and social
services boards in Northern Ireland). Their services are directed towards
elderly people, children and young people, families, people with mental
illness or with a physical or mental handicap, young offenders and other
disadvantaged people and their carers. The major services include res¬
idential care, day care, services for those confined to their homes and various
forms of social work. Close co-operation is maintained between local
authority social services departments and health authorities (and other
Much of the care given to elderly and disabled people is provided in the
community, by families, self-help groups and voluntary agencies. The
statutory sector offers the skilled care needed in paiticular services.
The demand for personal social services is expected to rise over the next
few years, owing to the increasing number of elderly people and the
changing pattern of care for people suffering from mental illness or mental
SOCIAL WELFARE
163
Recent
Developments
Elderly People
Disabled People
handicap, and for the long-term sick. (Britain expects to have 4-5 million
people over 75 and 0-5 million over 90 by the year 2001.) The Government’s
policy, based on the ‘Care in the Community’ programme, is to transfer from
hospital to care in the community patients who do not need hospital care It
believes that groups such as the elderly, the disabled, and mentally ill or
handicapped people can lead more normal lives in the community, given
suitable support and facilities.
The National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 sets out the
Government s policy for the future organisation and management of
community care services. The legislation, which will be introduced in stages
rom Apnl 1991, gives local authorities the responsibility for assessing
individual needs, planning care arrangements and implementing them
within available resources. There will be a new system of funding for those
seeking public support for residential and nursing home care. Local
authorities will take responsibility for financial support of people in private
and voluntary homes in addition to general social security entitlements
People living in residential care and nursing homes will retain their
entitlement to receive help with their fees through the current scheme of
special income support payments. The Government will transfer to local
authorities the funds which it would otherwise have provided to finance care
through social security payments to people in residential care and nursing
homes. Wider powers will be given to the Social Services Inspectorate, which
oversees the quality of management and care provided by social services
departments. The Government believes that the new arrangements will
provide more suitable services which are closer to individual needs and
wishes, and offer better value for public money.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to
help them to live at home whenever possible. (Only about 5 per cent of the
elderly over 65 live in institutional accommodation.) These services may
include advice and help given by social workers, domestic help, the provision
of meals in the home, sitters-in, night attendants and laundry services as well
as day centres, luncheon clubs and recreational facilities. Adaptations to the
home can overcome difficulties in moving about, and a wide range of aids is
available for people with difficulties affecting their hearing or eyesight.
Alarm systems have been developed to help elderly people obtain help in an
emergency. In some areas ‘good neighbour’ and visiting services are
arranged by the local authority or a voluntary organisation.
Many local authorities provide free or subsidised travel to elderly people
within their areas. Social services authorities also provide residential home
care for the elderly and those in poor health, and register and inspect homes
run by voluntary organisations or privately.
As part of their responsibility for public housing, local authorities provide
homes designed for elderly people; some of these developments have
resident wardens. Housing associations and private builders also build such
accommodation.
Britain has an estimated 6 million adults with one or more disabilities of
whom around 400,000 (7 per cent) live in communal establishments Liical
social services authorities provide a range of personal social services for
disabled people to help with social rehabilitation and adjustment to dis¬
ability. They are also required to establish the number of disabled people in
their area and to publicise services, which may include advice on personal
and social problems arising from disability, as well as occupational
164
People with
Mental
Handicaps
Mentally 111
People
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
educational, social and recreational facilities, either at day centres or
elsewhere. They may also include adaptations to homes (such as ramps for
wheelchairs, and ground-floor toilets); the delivery of cooked meals; and
help in the home. In cases of special need, help may be given with installing a
telephone or a television. Local authorities and voluntary organisations may
provide severely disabled people with residential accommodation or
temporary facilities to allow their carers relief from their duties. Specially
designed housing may be available for those able to look after themselves.
Some authorities provide free or subsidised travel for disabled people on
public transport, and they are encouraged to provide special means of access
to public buildings. Special government regulations cover the provision of
access for disabled people in the construction of new buildings.
The Independent Living Fund was set up in 1988 to provide financial help
to very severely disabled people who need paid domestic support if they are
to live in their own homes. The Fund, for which the Government provided
over £20 million in 1990, will run for five years.
Results from the most comprehensive series of national surveys yet
undertaken among people with disabilities in Great Britain were published
between 1988 and 1989. The surveys covered adults and children both in
private households and in communal establishments, with all types of
disabilities, including those caused by mental illness and mental handicap.
On the basis of this data the Government set out its proposals for reforming
the structure of social security payments for disabled people in a White
Paper published in January 1990. The measures would provide additional
help to 850,000 disabled people.
The Government’s policy is to encourage the development at local level of
a range of services for mentally handicapped people and their families
through mutual co-operation between health and local authorities and
voluntary and other organisations.
Services provided by social services authorities include short-term care,
support for families in their own homes, provision for accommodation in
ordinary housing and various types of day care. The main aims of the
services are to ensure that as far as possible people with mental handicaps
can lead full lives in their communities and that no one should be admitted
to hospital unless it is necessary on health grounds.
Social services departments now provide most community services for
mentally handicapped people. Specialised residential health provision,
which may consist of small units in the community, is also provided for
people with special needs, as is specialist health service support for those
living elsewhere.
The transfer of mentally handicapped children in institutions to more
ordinary living arrangements remains a priority.
Arrangements made by social services authorities for providing preventive
care and after care for mentally ill people in the community include day
centres, social centres and residential care. Social workers help patients and
their families with problems caused by mental illness. In some cases they can
apply for a mentally disordered person to be compulsorily admitted to and
detained in hospital. The rights of such patients were extended by legislation
in 1983, and a Mental Health Act Commission was set up to provide better
safeguards. Corresponding legislation was introduced for Scotland in 1984,
and came into force in Northern Ireland in 1986.
In 1989 the Government announced a number of measures to improve
the provision of services for mentally ill people. These include requiring
SOCIAL WELFARE
165
Help to
Families
Child Care
Child Abuse
district health authorities (health boards in Scotland) to plan individual
health care programmes for all patients leaving hospital and a code of
practice for compulsorily admitting and treating patients in hospital. Other
measures include a review of public funding of voluntary organisations con¬
cerned with mental health and a new grant to local authorities to help meet
the social care needs of patients. The National Health Service and
Community Care Act 1990 contains a provision for implementing the last-
mentioned proposal.
There are many voluntary organisations concerned with mental illness
and mental handicap which play an important role in the provision of
services for both of these groups of people.
The Government believes in the central importance of the family to the well¬
being of society and considers that stable adult relationships are needed to
support and enhance family life. Social services authorities, through their
own social workers and others, give help to families facing special problems.
This includes services for children at risk of injury or neglect who need care
away from their own families, and support for family carers who look after
elderly and other family members in order to give them relief from their
duties. They also help single parents, including unmarried mothers. There
are now many refuges run by local authorities or voluntary organisations for
women, often with young children, whose home conditions have become
intolerable. The refuges provide short-term accommodation and support
while attempts are made to relieve the women’s problems. Many authorities
also contribute to the cost of social work with families (such as marriage
guidance) carried out by voluntary organisations.
In 1983 the Family Policy Studies Centre was established with public funds
to review the impact of public policies on the family and to bring together
research findings. The Self-help and Families Project provides funding for
nine voluntary agencies to develop the ability of groups of families to help
themselves. ^
The Government launched a three-year initiative in 1989 to increase
voluntary sector provision in England for disadvantaged families with
children under five. With funds of £2 million, it is enabling voluntary
organisations to research and develop day care services, particularly for
single parents and families living in temporary accommodation.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities,
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in their day nurseries
and other facilities, local authorities give priority to children with special
social or health needs. Local authorities also register childminders, private
day nurseries and playgroups in their areas and provide support and advice
services for them.
The authorities can offer advice and help to families in difficulties to
promote the welfare of children. The aim is to act at an early stage to reduce
the need to put children into care or bring them before a court.
Cases of child abuse are the joint concern of many authorities, agencies and
professions, and local review committees provide a forum for discussion and
co-ordination and draw up policies and procedures for handling these cases.
The Government established a central training initiative on child abuse in
1986. This consists of a variety of projects, including training for health
visitors, school nurses, and local authority social services staff.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland children under the age of 14 in
child abuse cases are able to give evidence to courts through television links,
thus sparing them from the need to give evidence in open court.
166
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Children in Need
Fostering and
Community Homes
Authorities must take into care any child under the age of 17 who has no
parent or guardian, who has been abandoned, or whose parents are unable
to provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the
best interests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless
placed in the care of foster parents, other relations or friends. The local
authority may find it necessary to assume the rights and duties of one or both
parents. The parents must be notified and if they object the matter is decided
in a court of law. When taking a decision concerning a child in care, the
authorities have to give priority to the need to safeguard and promote the
welfare of the child. Where children are in care, every effort is made to work
with their families in order to enable the children to return home if
appropriate.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if
they are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the
control of parents, are not attending school or (if ten years or over) have
committed an offence other than homicide. At the same time it must be
shown that the children need care or control which they are unlikely to
receive unless a care order or another order is made by the court. Local
authorities are responsible for carrying out inquiries through social workers
and consulting parents, schools and the police. Children may be committed
to the care of a local authority under a care order if the court considers this
appropriate. Alternatively, the court may order supervision by a social
worker or a probation officer for up to three years.
Increasing use is being made of intermediate treatment, especially for
young offenders. This is a community-based service which provides
supervised activities, groupwork and individual advice; a short residential
period may be included. A requirement to undergo intermediate treatment
may be added to a supervision order by the court.
The Children Act 1989 contains a series of measures which reform the law
on child care and family services in England and Wales. These are expected
to come into force by October 1991. The legislation will help local authorities
make better provision for children in need; strengthen the powers of the
courts to protect children from abuse or neglect; and improve the balance
between parents’ and children’s rights.
In Scotland children in trouble or in need may be brought before a
children’s hearing, which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if
it thinks that compulsory measures are appropriate. Under these require¬
ments most children are allowed to remain at home under the supervision of
a social worker but some may live with foster parents or in a residential
establishment while under supervision. Supervision requirements are
reviewed at least once a year until ended by a children’s hearing or by the
Secretary of State. A review of child care legislation in Scotland is in progress.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children in need or in trouble to a
training school, commit them to the care of a fit person (including a health
and social services board), or make a supervision order. Children in trouble
may be required to attend an attendance centre or may be detained in a
remand home. There is no provision for intermediate treatment to be
included as part of a supervision order in criminal cases. New child care
legislation is being prepared in Northern Ireland. Where appropriate it will
reflect the changes introduced in England and Wales and will make a
distinction between the treatment of children in need of care and young
offenders.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive payments to cover living costs. If a foster home is not considered
SOCIAL WELFARE
167
Adoption
Custodianship
Social Workers
appropriate or cannot be found, the child may be placed in a children’s
home, voluntary home or other suitable residential accommodation.
Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise local
authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and include community
homes with education on the premises which provide long-term care, usually
for more difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for
placing children in their care in foster homes, in local authority or voluntary
homes, or in residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential
homes for children in the care of the health and social services boards;
training schools and remand homes are administered separately.
Regulations concerning registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of
children in care are made by central government.
Local authorities are required by law to provide an adoption service, either
directly or by arrangement with a voluntary organisation. Agencies may
offer adoptive parents an allowance if this would help to find a family for a
child. Adoption is strictly regulated by law, and adoption societies must
be approved by social services ministers. The Registrars-General keep
confidential registers of adopted children. Adopted people may be given
details of their original birth record on reaching the age of 18, and
counselling is provided to help them understand the circumstances of their
adoption. A review of adoption law is in progress.
A person who has cared for a child for some time (for example, a foster
parent, step-parent or relative) may apply to a court for a custodianship
order giving him or her legal custody of the child. This gives the custodian
most of the rights and duties of a natural parent and enables him or her to
make decisions about a child’s day-to-day care and upbringing in the same
way as a parent. Unlike an adoption order, a custodianship order may be
revoked. The custodianship provisions do not extend to Northern Ireland.
The effective operation of the social services depends largely on pro¬
fessionally qualified social workers. Training courses in social work are
provided by universities, polytechnics (in Scotland, central institutions) and
colleges of further education. The length of courses depends on educational
qualifications and experience and can extend from one to four years. The
Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work is the statutory
body responsible for social work training and offers advice to people
considering entering the profession. The Council has proposed a range of
improvements to the present system of qualifying training.
Professional social workers (including those working in the NHS) are
mainly employed by the social services departments of local authorities.
Others work in the probation service, the education welfare service, or in
voluntary organisations.
Voluntary Social Services
There is a long tradition in Britain of voluntary service to the community,
and the partnership between the voluntary and statutory sectors is
encouraged by the Government. It has been estimated that about a third of
all adults take part in some form of voluntary work during the course of a
Voluntary
Organisations
Funding
Charities
Co-ordinating
Bodies
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
year. Local and health authorities plan and carry out their duties taking
account of the work of voluntary organisations. Voluntary provision enables
these authorities to continue the trend towards local community care rather
than institutional care for the elderly, and for mentally ill and mentally
handicapped people. Funding voluntary organisations also provides op¬
portunities to try out new approaches to services which, if successful, can be
included in mainstream statutory provision.
An Opportunities for Volunteering Scheme, together with an Un¬
employed Voluntary Action Fund in Scotland and a Community Vol¬
unteering Scheme in Northern Ireland, has assisted almost 3,000 local
voluntary projects to enable unemployed volunteers to help disadvantaged
groups in the community. Voluntary organisations also take part in several
other government schemes, including the Employment Training pro¬
gramme and Youth Training.
Co-ordination of government interests in the voluntary sector throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit.
Voluntary organisations receive income from several sources, including
voluntary contributions, central and local government grants and earnings
from commercial activities and investments. They also receive fees (from
central and local government) as an increasing number of services are
provided by the voluntary sector on a contractual basis. Some 500 bodies
receive direct grants from government health and social services
departments. In 1988-89 these amounted to over £38 million out of total
central government funding of £344 million to voluntary organisations. A
government report published in April 1990 provides the basis for improving
arrangements to ensure that funds provided by Government to the
voluntary sector are used efficiently and for good purposes. Tax changes in
recent budgets have helped the voluntary movement secure more funds
from industry and individuals. The Gift Aid scheme introduced in the 1990
Budget, for example, provides tax relief on gifts of between £600 and £5
million in any one year. Voluntary organisations benefit not only from direct
donations from the private sector but also from gifts of goods, sponsorship,
secondments and joint promotions.
Over 168,000 voluntary organisations are registered as charities, and in
England and Wales the Charity Commission gives advice to trustees of
charities, setting up schemes to modernise their purposes or improve their
administration where necessary. The Commission also maintains a register
of charities, gives consent to land transactions by charities and holds
investments for them. Voluntary organisations may qualify for charitable
status if they are established for purposes such as the relief of poverty, the
advancement of education or religion or the promotion of certain other
purposes of public benefit. These include good community relations, the pre¬
vention of racial discrimination, the protection of health and the promotion
of equal opportunity. Legislation to strengthen the powers of the Charity
Commissioners and improve the supervision of charities is proposed.
The Charities Aid Foundation, an independent body, is one of the main
organisations that aid the flow of funds to charity from individuals,
companies and grant-making trusts.
The National Council for Voluntary Organisations is the main co-ordinating
body in England, providing central links between voluntary organisations,
official bodies and the private sector. It works to extend the involvement of
voluntary organisations with a broad range of social issues, to protect the
*
SOCIAL WELFARE
169
Types of
Voluntary
Organisations
Personal and
Family Problems
Health and
Disability
Other
Organisations
interests and independence of voluntary agencies, and to provide them with
advice, information and other services. Councils in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland perform similar functions. The National Association for
Councils for Voluntary Service is another network providing resources, with
over 200 local councils for voluntary service throughout England en¬
couraging the development of local voluntary action, mainly in urban areas.
The rural equivalent is Action with Rural Communities in England,
representing 38 rural community councils.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations concerned with health and
social welfare, ranging from national bodies to small local groups. ‘Self-help’
groups have been the fastest expanding part of the voluntary sector over the
last 20 or so years—examples include bodies which provide playgroups for
pre-school children, or help their members to cope with a particular
disability. Groups representing ethnic minorities and women’s interests have
also developed in recent years. Many organisations belong to larger as¬
sociations or are represented on local or national co-ordinating councils or
committees. Some are chiefly concerned with giving personal service, others
with influencing public opinion and exchanging information. Some perform
both functions. They may be staffed by both professional and voluntary
workers.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family
problems include family casework agencies like the Family Welfare
Association, Family Service Units and the National Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children. They also include marriage guidance
centres affiliated to Relate: National Marriage Guidance; Child Care (the
National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisations); the National
Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group and the
Claimants’ Union, which provide advice on social security benefits; and the
Samaritans, which helps lonely, depressed and suicidal people.
Voluntary service to both sick and disabled people is given by—among
others—the British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s
Royal Voluntary Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies
which help people with disabilities and difficulties include the Royal
National Institute for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf,
the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation, the Disabled Living
Foundation, the Disablement Income Group, MIND (National Association
for Mental Health), MENCAP (Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped
Children and Adults), the Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age
Concern, Help the Aged and their equivalents in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
National organisations whose work is religious in inspiration include the
Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Board of Social Responsibility
of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society, the
Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s Christian
Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic
Marriage Advisory Council, the Jewish Welfare Board and the Church’s
Urban Fund.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people, often through
organisations such as Community Service Volunteers, Scouts and Girl
Guides, and the ‘Time for God’ scheme run by a group of churches.
170
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Volunteer
Centre
Administration
A wide range of voluntary personal services is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service. These include bringing ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound
invalids and old people, providing flats and residential clubs for the elderly,
help with family problems, and assistance in hospitals during emergencies.
Over 1,300 Citizens Advice Bureaux help people who are in doubt about
their rights or are not aware of the state or voluntary services available. Some
areas have law centres and housing advisory centres.
The Volunteer Centre UK is a national voluntary organisation and centre
for information and research on voluntary work. Its Scottish counterpart is
Volunteer Development Scotland. There are many local volunteer bureaux,
some part-time, which direct volunteers to opportunities in both the
voluntary and statutory sectors.
Social Security
The general aim of the social security programme is to provide an efficient,
responsive system of financial help for people who are elderly, sick, disabled,
unemployed, widowed or bringing up children. Certain benefits provide an
income for people who earn little or nothing because they are retired,
unemployed or sick. Others provide income for widows; help with expenses
arising from disablement; compensation for injury or disease caused at work
or while in the armed forces; and help with the cost of bringing up children.
There are also certain income-related benefits for people with inadequate
incomes.
Social security benefits fall into two broad categories—contributory and
non-contributory. Contributory benefits are paid from the National Insu¬
rance Fund, which consists of contributions from employed people and their
employers, self-employed people and the Government. Non-contributory
benefits are linanced from general taxation revenue. Some non-contributory
benefits are income-related (for example, income support) but others are not
(for example, child benefit and mobility allowance), and the benefit is
payable if the qualifying conditions are met. Appeals about claims for bene¬
fits are decided by independent tribunals.
Spending on social security has nearly doubled in real terms since 1970.
Trends over the last five years have included a steady growth in the numbers
of retirement pensioners and those receiving income-related benefits, and a
steep rise in those getting disability benefits. There has also been a decline in
the numbers of families receiving child benefit (due to a fall in the birth rate),
and the numbers of widows and those receiving unemployment benefit.
The Department of Social Security administers most of the services in Great
Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of
Health and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners
and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Social
Security throughout Britain. The costs, including spending on adminis¬
tration, fall on central government. The housing benefit scheme is
administered mainly by local authorities, which recover most of the cost from
the Department of Social Security. Advice on social security is given to the
Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
As part of a major government policy launched in 1988 to achieve better
value for money and to improve services to the public, executive agencies
set up within the Department of Social Security are to take responsibility for
the major social security operations. An Information Technology Services
SOCIAL WELFARE
171
Major Reforms
Advice about
Benefits
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Agency, handling computing and telecommunications technology, was es¬
tablished in April 1990, while a Benefits Agency and a Contributions Unit
are planned for April 1991.
As part of its plans to improve the management of the social security
system and the quality of its service to the public, the Department of Social
Security has begun the largest computerisation programme in Europe. This
aims to link all of its local and central offices and the local offices of the
unemployment benefit service into a single network.
The Social Security Act 1986 implemented a wide-ranging reform of the
social security system. Its main objectives are to make the system simpler,
fairer and more effective in meeting genuine need in a way which
encourages independence. The main reforms, introduced from 1988, in¬
clude changes to the State Earnings-related Pension Scheme, which is
additional to the basic state pension, and new arrangements to encourage
personal and occupational pension schemes. The reforms include the
introduction of new income-related benefits, entitlement to which is assessed
using the same basic rules. These are: family credit; income support; and a
restructured housing benefit scheme. The social fund in the form of loans or
grants was introduced to help people on low incomes who have exceptional
needs.
The demand for advice about benefits is partly met by the Freeline Social
Security Service, which handled over one million calls between April 1989
and March 1990. A complementary Advice Line service provides advice on
social security for employers and the Ethnic Freeline Service provides
information on social security matters in Urdu and Punjabi.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, maternity allowance
and widow’s benefit is dependent upon the payment of contributions.
Industrial injuries benefits are non-contributory, but are also payable from
the National Insurance Fund. There are four classes of contributions. Class 1
contributions are related to earnings and are paid by employees and em¬
ployers. The contribution is lower if the employer operates a ‘contracted-out’
occupational pension scheme (see p 172). Self-employed people pay a flat
rate Class 2 contribution and may have to pay a Class 4 contribution which is
assessed as a percentage of profits or gains within certain limits; they are not
eligible for unemployment and industrial injuries benefits. Voluntary Class 3
contributions are made by people wanting to safeguard rights to some
benefits.
Employees who work after pensionable age (60 for women and 65 for
men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable.
People earning less than the lower earnings limit do not pay contributions;
neither do their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below a set
amount may apply for exemption; those over pensionable age do not pay
contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions have to be paid.
Secondly, the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have
been made up to a specific level over a set period. Benefits are increased
annually, the uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main
benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below. The rates given are those
effective from April 1990 until April 1991.
172
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Retirement
Pension
Occupational
and Personal
Pensions
Mothers and
Children
A state retirement pension is payable, on making a claim, to women at the
age of 60 and men at the age of 65. The Sex Discrimination Act 1986
protects employees of different sexes in a particular occupation from being
required to retire at different ages. This, however, has not affected the
payment of state retirement pensions at different ages for men and women.
The state pension scheme consists of a basic weekly pension of £46-90 for a
single person and £75-10 for a married couple, together with an additional
earnings-related pension. Pensioners may have unlimited earnings without
affecting their pensions. Those who have put off their retirement during the
five years after minimum pension age may earn extra pension. A non¬
contributory retirement pension of £28-20 is payable to people over the age
of 80 who meet certain residence conditions, and who have not qualified for
a contributory pension. People whose pensions do not give them enough to
live on may be entitled to income support ranging from £11-80 to £17-05 for
a single person and £ 17-95 to £24-25 for a couple.
Rights to basic pensions are safeguarded for mothers who are away from
paid employment looking after children or for people giving up paid
employment to care for severely disabled relatives. Women contributors
receive the same basic pension as men with the same earnings, provided they
have paid full-rate National Insurance contributions when working. From
the year 2000 the earnings-related pension scheme will be based on a
lifetime’s revalued earnings instead of on the best 20 years. It will be
calculated as 20 per cent rather than 25 per cent of earnings, to be phased in
over ten years from 2000. The pensions of people retiring this century will
be unaffected.
Employers are free to ‘contract out’ their employees from the state scheme
for the additional earnings-related pension and to provide their own
occupational pension instead. However their pension must be at least as
good as the state additional pension. The State remains responsible for the
basic pension. There are at present around 50,000 occupational schemes,
with over 10 million members—about half the working population.
As part of its reforms of the occupational pensions system, the
Government has introduced measures to protect against inflation the
pension rights of people who change jobs before pension age. The measures
also give workers leaving a scheme the right to a fair transfer value; and
require pension funds and other pension schemes to make available more
information about their schemes.
The Social Security Act 1986 gives all employees the right to choose a
personal pension rather than staying fully in the State Earnings-related
Pension Scheme or in an employer’s scheme. Such pensions qualify for
contracting out of the State Earnings-related Pension Scheme and enable
people to choose from a wide range of schemes available from banks,
building societies and other financial institutions. Almost 3-7 million people
have taken out personal pensions. The Social Security Act 1990 contains
provisions which are designed to improve protection for occupational and
personal pension schemes, including the appointment of a Pensions
Ombudsman.
Under the statutory maternity pay scheme, women who leave employment
to have a baby receive their maternity pay directly from their employer. To
qualify, a woman must have worked for the same employer for at least six
months up to and including the fifteenth week before the week her baby is
due and have had average weekly earnings in the last eight weeks of that
SOCIAL WELFARE
173
period which are not less than the lower earnings limit for National
Insurance contributions. Statutory maternity pay is normally paid for 18
weeks. There are two rates: where a woman has been working for the same
employer for at least two years, she is entitled to 90 per cent of her average
weekly earnings for the first six weeks and to the lower rate of £39-25 for the
remaining 12 weeks; where a woman has been employed for between six
months and two years, she is entitled to payments for the full 18 weeks at the
lower rate.
Women who are self-employed, have recently changed jobs or given up
their job, and are therefore ineligible for maternity pay, may qualify for a
weekly maternity allowance of £35-70, which is payable for 18 weeks. To
qualify for this, a woman must have been employed or self-employed and
paid standard rate National Insurance contributions for at least six months
of the year ending 15 weeks before the baby is expected.
A payment of £100 from the social fund is available for each living child
born or for a stillborn child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks. It is
also payable for an adopted baby if the mother or her partner are receiving
income support or family credit.
Non-contributory child benefit of £7-25 is the main social security benefit
for children. Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for
children up to the age of 16 and for those up to 19 if they continue in full¬
time non-advanced education. In addition, one-parent benefit of £5-60 is
payable to certain people bringing up one or more children on their own,
whether as their parents or not. A non-contributory guardian’s allowance of
£9-65 for an orphaned child is payable to a person who is entitled to child
benefit for that child. In certain circumstances it can be paid on the death of
only one parent.
Widows All women widowed receive a tax-free single payment of £1,000 following
the death of their husbands, providing that their husbands had paid a
minimum number of National Insurance contributions. Women whose
husbands have died of an industrial injury or disease may also qualify,
regardless of whether their husbands had paid National Insurance con¬
tributions. A widowed mother with a young family receives a widowed
mother’s allowance of £46-90 with a further £9-65 for each child. A widow’s
pension of £46-90 is payable to a widow who is 45 years or over when her
husband dies or when her entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ends.
Payment continues until the widow remarries or begins drawing retirement
pension. Widows also benefit under the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of
sickness or disablement. Employers are responsible for paying statutory sick
pay of between £39-25 and £52-50 with additions for a wife or other adult
dependant for up to a maximum of 28 weeks to employees who satisfy the
qualifying conditions. Employees who are not entitled to statutory sick pay
can claim state sickness benefit of £35-70 instead, as can self-employed
people.
Invalidity Pension An invalidity pension of £46-90 with additions of £28-20 for a husband or
and Allowance wife or other adult dependant and £9-65 for each child is payable when
statutory sick pay or sickness benefit ends, if the beneficiary is still incapable
of work. In the case of statutory sick pay the person must have satisfied the
contribution condition for sickness benefit. An invalidity allowance of up to
Sick and
Disabled People
Statutory Sick
Pay and
Sickness Benefit
Severe
Disablement
Allowance
Industrial
Injuries
Benefits
Other Benefits
Unemployment
Benefit
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£ 10 may be paid with the pension to people who become sick more than five
years before minimum retirement age. An additional earnings-related
pension may also be payable. (The Social Security Act 1990 will end en¬
titlements to the additional pension element of invalidity benefit after the
1990-91 tax year.) If a person qualifies for both of these, he or she is paid an
amount equal to the higher of the two.
A severe disablement allowance of £28-20 may be payable to people of
working age who are unable to work and do not qualify for the National
Insurance invalidity pension because they have not paid sufficient
contributions.
Various benefits are payable for disablement caused by an accident at work
or a prescribed disease. Disablement benefit of up to £76-60 is usually paid
after a qualifying period of 15 weeks if, as a result of an industrial accident or
a prescribed disease, a person is physically or mentally disabled. During the
qualifying period statutory sick pay or sickness benefit may be payable if the
person is incapable of work. The degree of disablement is assessed by a
medical authority and the amount paid depends on the extent of the
disablement and how long it is expected to last. Disablement of 14 per cent
or more attracts a weekly pension. Except for certain progressive respiratory
diseases, disablement of less than 14 per cent does not attract basic benefit.
In certain circumstances disablement benefits may be supplemented by a
constant attendance allowance. An additional allowance may be payable in
certain cases of exceptionally severe disablement.
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance of £37-55 or £25-05 may
be payable to severely disabled people depending upon the amount of
attention they require. There is no upper age limit. A non-contributory
invalid care allowance of £28-20 may be payable to men and women aged
between 16 and pension age who cannot take up paid employment because
they are caring for a person receiving attendance allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be
entitled to a tax-free mobility allowance of £26-25 to help with their
transport costs. People aged between 5 and 66 may claim and payment can
continue up to the age of 80.
An independent organisation called Motability helps disabled drivers and
passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a vehicle.
The Government has proposed that the attendance and mobility
allowances should be replaced by a disability allowance for people disabled
before the age of 65, and that a disability employment credit should be
introduced to encourage those on disability benefits to take up employ¬
ment.
Unemployment benefit of £37-35 for a single person or £60-40 for a couple
is payable for up to a year in any one period of unemployment. Periods
covered by unemployment or sickness benefit, maternity allowance or some
training allowances which are eight weeks or less apart, are linked to form a
single period of interruption of work. Everyone claiming unemployment
benefit has to be available for work, but unemployed people wishing to do
voluntary work in the community may do so in some cases without losing
entitlement to benefit. The Social Security Act 1989 aims to ensure that
people seeking unemployment benefit actively look for work and have good
cause for rejecting any employment offered.
SOCIAL WELFARE
175
Income
Support
Housing
Benefit
Community
Charge Benefit
Family Credit
Social Fund
War Pensions
and Related
Services
Income support is payable to people who are not in work, or who work for
less than 24 hours a week, and whose financial resources are below certain
set levels. It consists of a personal allowance ranging from £21 -90 for a single
person or lone parent aged under 18 to £57-60 for a couple, at least one of
whom is aged under 18, with additional sums for families, single parents,
pensioners, and long-term sick and disabled people.
The housing benefit scheme offers help with the cost of rents to people with
low incomes, using general assessment rules and benefit levels similar to
those for the income support scheme. People whose net income is below
certain specified levels receive housing benefit equivalent to 100 per cent of
their rent.
Both income support and housing benefit schemes set a limit to the
amount of capital a person may have and still remain entitled, and any
income is taken into account after income tax and National Insurance
contributions.
The community charge benefit is a rebate scheme which offers help with the
cost of the community charge (a local tax) to those claiming income support
and others with low incomes. Subject to rules similar to those governing the
provision of income support and housing benefit (see above) people can
receive rebates of up to 80 per cent of their community charge.
Family credit is payable to working families on modest incomes with
children. The amount payable depends on a family’s net income (excluding
child benefits) and the number and ages of the children in the family. A
maximum rate, consisting of an adult rate of £36-35 plus a rate for each child
varying with age, is payable when the net income does not exceed £57-60 a
week. The rate is then reduced by 70 pence for each pound by which net
income exceeds this amount.
Discretionary payments, in the form of loans or grants, are available to
people on low incomes who have special or emergency needs. There are
three types: budgeting loans to help meet important occasional expenses,
crisis loans for help in an emergency or a disaster, and community care
grants to help people re-establish themselves or remain in the community
and to ease exceptional pressure on families.
Payments are also made from the social fund to help with the costs of
maternity or funerals or with heating during very cold weather. These
payments are entitlements and are not subject to the same budgetary
considerations as other social fund payments.
Pensions are payable for disablement or death as a result of service in the
armed forces or of certain injuries received in the merchant navy or civil
defence during war-time, or to civilians injured by enemy action. The
amount paid depends on the degree of disablement and rank held in service:
the maximum disablement pension for a private soldier is £76-60. An
allowance is also paid for dependants.
There are a number of extra allowances. The main ones are for
unemployability, restricted mobility, the need for constant attendance, the
provision of extra comforts, and as maintenance for a lowered standard of
occupation. An age allowance of between £5-40 and £16-70 is payable to war
pensioners aged 65 or over whose disablement is assessed at 40 per cent or
more. Pensions are also paid to war widows and other dependants. (The
pension for a private’s widow is £60-95.)
Taxation
Other Benefits
Arrangements
with Other
Countries
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department of Social Security maintains a welfare service for war
pensioners, war widows and other dependants. It works closely with ex-
Service organisations and other voluntary bodies which give financial aid
and personal support to those disabled or bereaved as a result of war.
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity and
disablement benefit, are regarded as taxable income. Various income tax
reliefs and exemptions are allowed on account of age or a need to support
dependants. The following benefits are not taxable: income support (except
when paid to the unemployed and to people involved in industrial disputes),
family credit, attendance allowance, mobility allowance, severe disablement
allowance, industrial injuries disablement benefit, reduced earnings al¬
lowance, and war pensions.
Other benefits for which unemployed people and those on low incomes may
be eligible include exemption from health service charges (see p 147), grants
towards the cost of spectacles, free school meals and free legal aid. Reduced
charges are often made to the unemployed, for example, for adult education
and exhibitions, and pensioners usually enjoy reduced transport fares.
As part of the European Community’s efforts to promote the free movement
of labour, regulations provide for equality of treatment and the protection of
benefit rights for employed and self-employed people who move between
member states. The regulations also cover retirement pensioners and other
beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed, as well as
dependants. Benefits covered include child benefit and those for sickness
and maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at work and
occupational diseases.
Britain also has reciprocal social security agreements with a number of
other countries. Their scope and the benefits they cover vary, but the
majority cover most National Insurance benefits and family benefits.
7 Education
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both
young and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole.
Compulsory schooling takes place between the ages of 4 or 5 and 16,
although some provision is made for children under school age, and many
pupils remain at school beyond the minimum leaving age. Post-school
education, mainly at universities, polytechnics and colleges of further and
higher education, is organised flexibly to provide a wide range of
opportunities for academic and vocational education and continuing study
throughout life.
Major Reforms During the last five years the education service has undergone the most far-
reaching reform since the second world war (1939-45). Two major Acts of
Parliament covering education mainly in England and Wales, and separate
legislation for Scotland and for Northern Ireland, have been introduced in
order to implement the principal aims of the Government’s education
policies. These are to raise standards at all levels of ability, increase parental
choice, make further and higher education1 more widely accessible and
more responsive to the needs of the economy, and to achieve the best
possible return from the resources invested in the education service.
In schools, the Government has aimed to improve school management,
secure a broader and more balanced curriculum for all pupils so that they
can develop the qualities and skills required for adult life and work in a
technological age, reform the public examination system and improve the
quality of teaching through better teacher selection, training and
deployment. Schools are also encouraged to be more responsive to the needs
of a multi-ethnic society. Measures are being taken to widen the choice of
schools available and to ensure that schools respond effectively to the
demands of parents and the broader community. Special attention is paid
both to the provision of better pre-vocational education and training in
schools and colleges for the 14- to 18-year-old age-group, and to the 40 per
cent of lower-attaining pupils in the final years of compulsory education. An
important objective has been to extend the knowledge and use of
information technology in schools.
The Government’s principal aims for the further education sector are to
enable local education authorities and colleges to meet more fully the
requirements of students and employers through the provision of a wide
range of full- and part-time courses and to increase participation in further
education and training, particularly among 16- to 19-year-olds. It is
'The terms ‘higher education’ and ‘further education’ are variously understood. However, under the
Education Reform Act 1988, higher education is defined as higher courses in any institution—broadly,
those of a standard higher than General Certificate of Education (GCE) Advanced (A) level or its
equivalent—and further education as all other post-school courses.
178
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Primary and
Secondary
Education
Post-school
Education
committed to maintaining a high quality, cost-effective higher education
system which helps to satisfy the nation’s economic and social needs and at
the same time offers the necessary opportunities for the advancement of
knowledge and the pursuit of scholarship. Over the next 25 years the
Government looks forward to a large increase in higher education in Britain,
despite a forecast decline in the number of 18-year-olds by a third between
1985 and 1995. To help achieve this increase, it will seek to raise
participation rates among 18-year-olds and to recruit more students from
non-traditional groups, including ethnic minorities, by offering more
flexible and varied courses.
Measures to improve the quality and breadth of education and to extend
parental choice and delegated decision-making in state-maintained schools
in England and Wales are embodied in two recent Acts. The Education
(No 2) Act 1986 contains provisions to reform the composition of school
governing bodies (see p 183) and reallocate functions between school
governors, local education authorities and head teachers; appraise the
performance of teachers; and introduce more effective in-service training of
teachers. The Education Reform Act 1988, covering both school and post¬
school education, provides for the establishment of a National Curriculum
for children aged 5 to 16 in all state schools and for regular assessments of
performance. From September 1990 secondary schools are required to
admit pupils up to the limit of their available physical capacity if there is
sufficient demand on behalf of children eligible for admission. This policy,
known as ‘more open enrolment’, will further increase parental choice of
schools. The 1988 Act gives all secondary as well as larger primary schools
responsibility for managing the major part of their budgets, including
staffing costs, as well as the opportunity to withdraw from local authority
control (see pp 183 and 184). It also makes provision for the development of
city technology colleges in disadvantaged urban areas (see p 179).
The School Boards (Scotland) Act 1988 requires Scottish education
authorities to establish boards with the aim of increasing parental
involvement in school management (see p 183). The Self-Governing Schools
etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 contains provisions to enable parents to vote for
local self-management of schools in place of control by education authorities.
It also provides for the establishment of technology academies outside
education authority control (with a similar role to that of city technology
colleges—seep 179).
In Northern Ireland legislation which came into force in February 1990 makes
provision for reforms broadly in line with those being implemented in England
and Wales under the Education Reform Act 1988, and seeks to encourage further
the development of integrated education (see pp 183 and 184).
Under the Education Reform Act 1988, changes have also been introduced
in the structure and funding of higher education to help institutions
improve their management and planning, and become more flexible and
more responsive to economic and social needs. The system of university
funding has been reformed in England, Wales and Scotland: the University
Grants Committee has been replaced by the Universities Funding Council,
with executive powers to allocate finances to individual universities.
Polytechnics and other major higher education colleges in England have
been removed from local authority control, and incorporated as higher
education corporations with boards of governors, half of whose members are
drawn from industry, commerce and the professions. Their work is financed
by the Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council, with responsibilities
Primary and
Secondary
Education
Post-school
Education
EDUCATION
179
Education-
Business Links
Secondary School
Education
parallel to those of the Universities Funding Council. Those further and
higher education colleges remaining under local authority control are taking
on greater responsibility for their annual budgets and including more
employers on their governing bodies.
The Government intends to alter the balance of public funding for full¬
time undergraduate higher education from institutional grant paid through
the funding bodies to tuition fees paid for individual students through the
awards system (see p 193) from late 1990. This is intended to create a more
direct link between institutional income and recruitment, encouraging
institutions to increase their efficiency by making full use of capacity.
Legislation was introduced in both Scotland and Northern Ireland in 1989
to allow further education colleges to assume increased financial powers
and managerial responsibilities so as to improve their efficiency and
responsiveness to local demand.
The Government considers that co-operation between the education system
and business is essential to help people of all ages acquire the skills necessary
to maintain Britain’s position as a leading industrial and trading nation at a
time of rapid technological change and intense international economic
competition. Many organisations already work to strengthen such links, and
further contacts are being encouraged.
Much is being done under the Government’s Technical and Vocational
Education Initiative (TVEI—see p 187), to which £900 million has been
allotted from 1987 to 1997. As a result of this and other initiatives, industrial
and commercial matters are being allocated a more prominent place in
school, college and university curricula and examinations. Businessmen and
women are involved in curriculum development and enterprise activities for
schoolchildren, and they have been enabled to take a bigger part in the
management of schools, colleges and polytechnics by joining their governing
bodies in greater numbers. The relevance of classroom activities to working
life was central to the thinking behind the introduction of the General
Certificate of Secondary Education and the Education Reform Act 1988.
In line with the concern to maintain British expertise in science,
engineering and technology, a shift in provision is occurring in post-school
education away from the arts and social sciences towards these subjects and
towards directly vocational courses, while business and higher education
institutions are being encouraged to collaborate more closely for their
mutual benefit. The latter have been invited to provide enterprise training to
students under the Government’s Enterprise in Higher Education scheme,
which is designed to ensure that students acquire the aptitudes and
competence required by industry in the 1990s.
Under a government plan to promote further education, it is proposed
that everyone up to the age of 19 should receive systematic education or
training. A government review of the prospective needs for highly qualified
staffing by industry, commerce and the public services was published in
April 1990. This showed that the broad match between the supply of and
demand for new graduates would be maintained over the next few years.
Under the Enterprise and Education Initiative, announced in 1988, the
Government intends all pupils to have at least two weeks of suitable work
experience before leaving school. It also aims to ensure that every year 10
per cent of teachers should be given the opportunity to gain some business
experience; and that every trainee teacher should have an appreciation of
the needs of employers.
City technology colleges, sponsored by industry and commerce, are being
180
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Post-school
Education
Administration
set up in urban areas in England and Wales to provide broadly based
secondary education with a strong technological and business element. They
are state-aided but independent of local education authorities. The colleges
are managed by sponsors from universities and commerce, educational
trusts, charities and other voluntary organisations. The first college opened
in Solihull (West Midlands) in 1988, and by September 1990 seven were in
operation.
In 1988 the Government launched the Compacts scheme as part of the
Action for Cities programme (to regenerate inner city areas). Compacts are
local agreements between employers, local education authorities and
training providers in which young people, supported by their school or
college, work to reach agreed targets, and employers undertake to provide
further training or jobs for those attaining the targets. By August 1990, 38
Compacts were in operation, with over 300 schools participating, covering
nearly 55,000 young people. The Government is providing more than £21
million over four years from 1990 to support Compacts.
The Government’s local education and business partnerships initiative,
announced in April 1990, is designed to foster the development of wide-
ranging, formal partnerships between businesses and schools and other
educational institutions at local level throughout Britain. It seeks to improve
the coherence and co-ordination of government support and the integration
of local and national education—business links programmes and activities.
A network of employer-led Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) is
being built up by the Government in England and Wales. TECs are intended
to make training and enterprise activities more relevant to the needs of
employers and individuals locally. A total of 82 are expected to be established
and, by June 1990, 15 had been set up. In Scotland, 22 local enterprise
companies are being formed with a similar role to that of the TECs. In
Northern Ireland a Training and Employment Agency was set up in April
1990 with responsibilities for a broad range of training and employment
programmes and activities.
Some 11 TECs and local enterprise companies, working in close co¬
operation with local education authorities and other education interests, will
run pilot schemes of Training Credits for young people to take effect from
April 1991. The Training Credits schemes would offer an entitlement to
train to approved standards for young people leaving full-time education.
Over 40 science parks have been set up by higher education institutions in
conjunction with industrial scientists and technologists to promote the use of
advanced technology, and more are planned. In addition, a network of
regional technology centres has been established, bringing into contact
colleges, polytechnics and universities within particular areas and linking
them with local firms; the centres’ incomes are derived from charges to
companies which send their employees for training.
The Government’s LINK scheme, announced in 1986, aims to encourage
firms to work jointly with higher education institutes on government-funded
research relevant to industrial needs. By July 1990, 22 LINK programmes
had been approved, involving total government funding of some £151
million.
One of the distinctive features of the education service is the degree to which
responsibility for provision is decentralised. Overall responsibility for all
aspects of education in England, and for the Government’s relations with
and support for universities throughout Britain, rests with the Secretary of
State for Education and Science. The Secretaries of State for Wales and for
EDUCATION
181
Finance
Primary,
Secondary
and Further
Education
Scotland have responsibility in their respective countries for non-university
education, and are consulted about education in universities. The Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland is responsible for both university and non¬
university education in the Province.
The government departments responsible for education are the
Department of Education and Science in England, the Welsh Office, the
Scottish Education Department, and the Department of Education for
Northern Ireland. Their chief concerns are formulating education policies,
allocating resources and influencing the other partners in the education
service (the local education authorities, governing bodies of educational
institutions, the teaching profession, the churches and voluntary organ¬
isations). The departments are also responsible for the supply and training
of all teachers.
The provision of maintained, that is, publicly financed, school education
and most post-school education outside universities has traditionally been
the responsibility of local education authorities, which are funded by central
government and (except in Northern Ireland) by local taxes. Their role,
however, is being modified as a result of the Education Reform Act 1988 and
other legislation (see pp 183 and 184). Until April 1990 education in inner
London was the responsibility of a single body, the Inner London Education
Authority (ILEA). However, with the aim of achieving a more cost-effective
and responsive education service for the area, the ILEA has been abolished
and its responsibilities transferred to individual inner London borough
councils.
The local education authorities employ teachers and other staff, provide
and maintain buildings, supply equipment and materials and, in England
and Wales, award grants to students progressing to further and higher
education. Universities are self-governing institutions receiving most of their
income indirectly from central government grants. In Scotland the central
institutions, which are roughly equivalent to the English polytechnics, and
colleges of education, providing teacher training, are administered by
independent governing bodies. In Northern Ireland colleges of education
are controlled by the Department of Education and by a voluntary agency.
Estimated spending on education and science in Britain in 1989-90 was
almost £25,000 million, more than 14 per cent of total public expenditure on
services. About 70 per cent was incurred by local education authorities,
which are directly responsible for the funding of most maintained schools
and colleges of further education. The authorities make their own
expenditure decisions according to local needs and circumstances, such as
the number of school-age children.
In England and Wales education support grants and local education
authority training grants enable the Government to support local education
authority expenditure on educational activities of national priority. In
1990—91 the Government intends to provide grants of £209 million
supporting total spending of £356 million. Most spending will be deployed
on the implementation of the Education Reform Act, including activities
related to the National Curriculum (nearly £100 million), local management
of schools and colleges (£51 million), information technology in schools and
colleges (£20 million), science and technology in primary schools (£8 million)
and assessment (£20 million). The balance of the programme is aimed at
improving the general efficiency and effectiveness of the education service.
The Government funds directly the recurring and capital costs both of
grant-maintained schools which have opted to leave the local authority sector
182
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Higher Education
SCHOOLS
(see p 183) and of city technology colleges (see p 179) in England and Wales
and comparable institutions in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Central government assistance for universities and other higher education
institutions, together with grants and loans to students, accounts for some
£4,500 million in 1990—91. The greater part of universities’ income comes
from public funds, largely as grant paid by the Government to the
Universities Funding Council and to individual institutions such as the Open
University, and as tuition fees paid for students through the awards system.
The independent University of Buckingham receives no publicly funded
grant, but some of its students have their fees paid from public funds
through the awards system. In Northern Ireland grant is paid directly to the
universities by central government following advice from the Universities
Funding Council.
The Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council, with funds from central
government, was established under the Education Reform Act 1988 to
finance higher courses in polytechnics and colleges of higher education in
England that have become independent of local education authorities, as
well as some higher education courses in establishments remaining under
local authority control. Higher courses in Wales continue to be financed by
local authorities. In Scotland all courses offered by the central institutions
are funded by central government; advanced courses provided by local
authority further education colleges are financed by the local authorities.
Many universities, polytechnics and other higher education institutions
undertake training, research or consultancy for commercial firms, and the
Government is encouraging them to secure a larger flow of funds from these
sources. Further and higher education institutions are authorised to market
inventions resulting from their research work and to sell goods and services
arising as by-products of educational activities. A number of establishments
have endowments or receive grants or gifts from foundations and from
benefactors.
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full¬
time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16 in Great
Britain and 4 and 16 in Northern Ireland. Some 9 million children attend
Britain’s 35,000 schools (of which about 25,600 are primary or nursery and
4,900 secondary schools in the state sector). Most pupils receive free
education financed from public funds, but a small proportion attend schools
wholly independent of direct public financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools, and almost
90 per cent of pupils in maintained secondary schools in England and
Wales and 61 per cent in Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In
Scotland nearly all secondary schools are mixed. Most independent
schools for younger children are co-educational; the majority providing
secondary education are single-sex, although the number of mixed schools is
growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, grant-
maintained schools or city technology colleges, and books and equipment are
free. In Northern Ireland at present a small proportion of grammar school
pupils are fee-payers, but under legislation passed in 1989 Northern Ireland
grammar schools will be required to discontinue the practice of admitting fee¬
paying pupils.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level (there are plans to extend this to Northern
EDUCATION
183
Management
England and
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Ireland). Schools are obliged to publish basic information about themselves
and their public examination results.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided
and maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds.
Voluntary schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also
wholly maintained from public funds but the governors of some types of
voluntary school contribute to capital costs. Around one-third of the 23,300
maintained primary and secondary schools in England are voluntary schools,
most of them Anglican or Roman Catholic.
Each publicly maintained school has a governing body which includes
governors appointed by the local education authority and teacher and
parent representatives. Under the Education (No 2) Act 1986, most
maintained schools must have equal numbers of parent and local authority
governors so that no single interest predominates. Governing bodies are
responsible for the main policies of their schools and for the preparation of a
statement of their schools’ curricular aims and objectives. They also have
final responsibility for school discipline and a large say in the appointment
and dismissal of staff.
The role of governing bodies in England and Wales has been further
enlarged by the Education Reform Act 1988. Since April 1990 local
education authorities have delegated responsibility for the management of
school budgets to all secondary schools and primary schools with more than
200 pupils. The Act also enables all English and Welsh secondary schools, as
well as primary schools with over 300 pupils, to seek to withdraw from local
authority control, following a ballot of parents, and to be directly financed by
central government as grant-maintained non-fee-paying schools.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term
is used for a type of independent school—see p 185). The School Boards
(Scotland) Act 1988 requires education authorities to establish school boards
to play a part in the administration and management of schools. The boards
consist of elected parent and staff members as well as co-opted members and
their aim is to provide an opportunity for greater parental involvement and
to promote closer links between home, school and local community. The Self-
Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Act 1989 allows parents of children at
public schools to opt for local self-management, following a ballot, and to
receive funding directly from central government (see p 178).
In Northern Ireland there are three main categories of grant-aided school:
controlled schools, owned and managed by the area education and library
boards and having all their expenditure met from public funds; voluntary
schools, mainly under Roman Catholic management and also maintained
largely by public funds; and voluntary grammar schools, which may be
under Roman Catholic or non-denominadonal management and receive
grants from the Department of Education. All grant-aided schools include
elected parents and teachers on their boards of governors. While all
Northern Ireland schools must be open to pupils of all religions, most
Catholic pupils attend Catholic schools and most Protestant children are
enrolled at local authority schools. The policy of successive governments has
been to encourage integrated education, providing for both Protestant and
Roman Catholic pupils, where there is a local desire for it. A small number of
integrated schools have been opened with assistance from charitable trusts
184
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and there are five integrated primary and two secondary schools grant-aided
by the Department of Education.
The Education Reform (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 provides for the
introduction of financial delegation in Northern Ireland, initially only to
secondary schools; this includes the power to manage staff numbers.
Primary and nursery school governors will have delegated responsibility for
managing part of their budget. To assist those parents and schools with a
commitment to the co-education of Protestant and Roman Catholic children,
the legislation contains provision for grant-aided schools to opt for grant-
maintained integrated status after a ballot of parents. Controlled grant-
maintained integrated schools will be run by boards of governors under the
supervision of local authorities and are to be directly financed by central
government. New and independent schools can also apply for grant-
maintained status. Integrated schools must be conducted in such a way as to
be likely to attract reasonable numbers of both Protestant and Catholic
children.
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
Secondary
Schools
Although there is no statutory requirement to provide education for the
under-fives, successive governments have enabled nursery education to
expand. Just under half of three- and four-year-olds receive education in
nursery schools or classes or in infants’ classes in primary schools. In
addition, many children attend pre-school playgroups, most of which are
organised by parents and affiliated to the Pre-School Playgroups Association.
Compulsory education begins at five (four in Northern Ireland), when
children go to infant schools or departments; at seven many go on to junior
schools or departments. The usual age for transfer from primary to
secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, but some
local authorities in England have established ‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5
to 8, 9 or 10 and ‘middle’ schools covering various age-ranges between 8 and
14. In Scotland primary schools take children from 5 to 12.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an
education suited to their particular abilities. Almost nine-tenths of the
maintained secondary school population in Great Britain attend com¬
prehensive schools, which take pupils without reference to ability or apti¬
tude and provide a wide range of secondary education for all or most of the
children in a district. The schools can be organised in a number of ways.
They include those that take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to
18; middle schools, whose pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools
at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18; and schools with an age-range of 11 or 12
to 16, combined with a sixth-form or a tertiary college for pupils over 16.
Tertiary colleges offer a full range of vocational courses for students over 16,
as well as academic courses. Most other children receive secondary education
in ‘grammar’ or ‘secondary modern’ schools, to which they are allocated after
selection procedures at the age of 11. By August 1990, 48 schools had
achieved grant-maintained status under the Education Reform Act s opting
out’provisions (seep 178).
Scottish secondary education is almost completely non-selective; the
majority of schools are six-year comprehensives. Because of local
circumstances some comprehensive schools run courses lasting only four
years or less; their pupils may transfer at the end of the second or fourth
years to a six-year comprehensive. The Government, in partnership with
private sponsors, intends to set up technology academies in Scotland with a
role similar to that of the city technology colleges in England and Wales
(see p 179).
EDUCATION
185
Independent
Schools
Special
Educational
Needs
Teachers
In Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along
selective lines, based on a system of testing, although in certain areas
secondary schools are run on a non-selective basis.
Independent schools are outside the publicly maintained sector, but they
must register with the appropriate education department and are open to
inspection. They can be required to remedy serious shortcomings in their
accommodation or instruction, and to exclude anyone regarded as unsuit¬
able to teach in or to be the owner of a school. About 7 per cent of British
schoolchildren attend independent schools.
There are about 2,400 independent schools educating 600,000 pupils of
all ages. They charge fees varying from around £250 a term for day pupils at
nursery age to £2,900 a term for senior boarding pupils. Many offer
bursaries to help pupils from less well-off families. Such pupils may also
be helped by local education authorities—particularly if the authorities’
own schools cannot meet the needs of individual children—or by the
Government’s Assisted Places Scheme, under which assistance is given
according to parental income. Over 350 schools participate in the scheme.
The Government also gives income-related help with fees to pupils at certain
specialist music and ballet schools.
There is great variety of provision within the independent sector, ranging
from small kindergarten to large day and boarding schools and from new
and in some cases experimental schools to ancient foundations. The 600
boys’, girls’ and mixed preparatory schools are so called because they
prepare children for the Common Entrance Examination to senior schools.
The normal age-range is from seven-plus to 11, 12 or 13, but many of the
schools now have pre-preparatory departments for younger children. A
number of independent schools have been established by religious and
ethnic minorities.
Independent schools for older pupils—from 11, 12 or 13 to 18 or
19—include about 550 which are sometimes referred to as ‘public schools’.
These are schools belonging to the Headmasters’ Conference, the
Governing Bodies Association, the Society of Headmasters and Head¬
mistresses of Independent Schools, the Girls’ Schools Association and the
Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Association. They should not be con¬
fused with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
Special educational needs comprise learning difficulties of all kinds, in¬
cluding mental and physical disabilities which hinder or prevent learning.
Local education authorities are required, in the case of children whose
learning difficulties are severe or complex, to assess the child’s special
educational needs and to provide a statement or record of these needs.
Wherever possible, children with special educational needs are educated in
ordinary schools, provided that the parents’ wishes have been taken into
account, and that this is compatible with meeting the needs of the child, with
the provision of efficient education for the other children in the school, and
with the efficient use of resources. In Scotland the choice of school is a
matter for agreement between education authorities and parents.
There are nearly 1,900 special schools (both day and boarding), including
those run by voluntary organisations. They cater for a wide variety of pupils
with special educational needs (some 120,000) who cannot be educated at
ordinary schools.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are over 530,000 teachers in
186
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Curriculum
England
and Wales
Scotland
maintained and independent schools, and the average pupil-teacher ratio
for all schools is 17 to 1. Teachers in maintained schools must hold qual¬
ifications approved by the appropriate education department (see p 197).
Under the Education (No 2) Act 1986, head teachers in England and Wales
have been responsible for determining and organising the curriculum within
their schools, taking into consideration the policy of their local education
authority and that of their governing body. The Government favours
widening educational opportunities as much as possible through a broad and
balanced curriculum which is differentiated to meet the individual needs of
pupils and is relevant to the requirements of the modern world.
Under the Education Reform Act 1988, the introduction of a National
Curriculum in primary and secondary schools in England and Wales began
in 1989 and is being phased in over several years. The National Curriculum,
which the Government believes should occupy not less than 70 per cent of
teaching time, consists of the core subjects of English, mathematics and
science, as well as the other foundation subjects of history, geography,
technology, music, art, physical education and (for secondary level pupils) a
modern foreign language. Economic and industrial awareness are important
cross-curricular themes in the National Curriculum.
In Wales the Welsh language constitutes a core subject in Welsh-speaking
schools and a foundation subject elsewhere under the National Curriculum.
In the primary sector 80 per cent of schools either use Welsh as a teaching
medium or teach it as a second language, while nearly 90 per cent of
secondary schools teach Welsh as a first or second language.
Attainment targets are being devised to establish what children should
normally be expected to know’, understand and be able to do at the ages of 7,
11, 14, and 16, enabling the progress of each child to be measured against
national standards. Pupils’ performance in relation to attainment targets will
be assessed and reported on at the four key stages. Regulations have been
introduced covering the manner and form in which assessments of
individual pupils are to be made available to parents and others (see p 190).
Religious education, already compulsory under the Education Act 1944, is
required for all pupils as part of the basic curriculum, although parents have
a right to withdraw’ their children from religious education classes (see
p 188). The content of religious education courses is determined locally.
The content and management of the curriculum in Scotland are the
responsibility of education authorities and individual head teachers, though
guidance is provided by the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Scottish
Consultative Council on the Curriculum. The Council has issued guidelines
to secondary head teachers recommending that secondary level pupils
should follow’ a broad and balanced curriculum consisting of English,
mathematics, science, a modern European language, social studies,
technological activities, art, music or drama, religious and moral education,
and physical education. A major programme of curricular review and
development is in progress for the 5-to-14 age-range. The Government is to
issue new guidelines on all aspects of the curriculum. New guidelines are also
to be published on assessment, and standardised tests in English and
mathematics will be introduced for primary school pupils at stages 4 and 7
(normally at ages 8 and 12).
A flexible system of vocational courses for 16- to 18-year-olds based on
modules or short units of study has been introduced in schools and colleges
in disciplines ranging from business and administration to engineering and
industrial production. Though designed primarily to improve the
EDUCATION
187
Northern Ireland
Ethnic Minority
Children
Curriculum
Development
Technical and
Vocational
Education
Initiative
preparation of young people for working life, the courses are also intended
to meet the needs of many adults entering training or returning to
education. The courses lead to the award of a National Certificate.
A committee has been established to review courses and assessment
arrangements in the final two years of secondary schooling. Provision is
made for teaching in Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas.
In Northern Ireland major programmes of curriculum review and
development are in progress in both primary and secondary schools. The
aim in the secondary sector is to improve the quality and relevance of
education for all pupils in the 11-to-16 age-group by promoting, in
particular, courses in science and technology, and the development of
economic awareness and information technology across the curriculum.
A common curriculum is being introduced in all grant-aided schools,
based on six broad areas of study: English, mathematics, science and
technology, the environment and society, creative and expressive studies,
and (for secondary and Irish-speaking primary schools) language studies.
Religious education will be compulsory at all stages. Attainment targets,
programmes of study and methods of assessment (at ages 8, 11, 14 and 16)
will be specified for all compulsory subjects. In addition, the school
curriculum will include six compulsory cross-curricular themes: ‘education
for mutual understanding’, cultural heritage, health education, information
technology, and (in secondary schools) economic awareness and careers
education.
Over the last 20 years or so the education authorities have done much to
meet the special needs of ethnic minority children. English language
teaching has received priority, but attention has been increasingly directed at
the use of mother tongues, especially in the early years. Emphasis has been
placed on the need for schools to take account of the ethnic and cultural
backgrounds of pupils. Measures are being taken not only to improve the
achievement of ethnic minority pupils but also to prepare all children, not
just those of ethnic minority origin, for living in a multi-ethnic society.
In England curriculum development is promoted by the National
Curriculum Council and in Wales by the Curriculum Council for Wales. At
some 480 teachers’ centres, teachers meet for curriculum development work,
discussion and in-service training. In Scotland such development work is
undertaken by the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum and in
Northern Ireland by the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Development (NICED). A Northern Ireland Curriculum Council, which will
take over the functions of the NICED and keep all aspects of the curriculum
under review, is being established.
Recognising the need to equip pupils of all abilities with the skills needed for
adult and working life, the Government launched the Technical and
Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) in England and Wales in 1983 and in
Scotland in 1984. Originally a series of pilot projects, it was extended into a
national scheme in 1987. The scheme is funded and administered by the
Department of Employment working in close co-operation with local
education authorities. The TVEI is intended to ensure that the education of
14- to 18-year-olds provides them with learning opportunities which will
equip them for working life. This is implemented by ensuring that the school
curriculum relates to the working environment, and by improving skills and
188 BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
qualifications, particularly in science, technology and modern languages.
The initiative aims to include all students aged 14 to 18 in maintained
schools and colleges by mid-1993. An estimated 500,000 students in some
3,000 schools and colleges are participating in the TVEI.
In Northern Ireland the Vocational Education Programme was in¬
troduced in 1987 with the same broad objectives as the TVEI. The Pro¬
gramme will come to an end during 1990-91, but the key curricular areas of
science, technology, information technology and economic awareness, which
it has sought to encourage, will be covered fully under the new common
curriculum.
Religious
Education and
Collective
Worship in
Schools
In England and Wales county and voluntary schools are required to provide
religious education and a daily act of collective worship for all pupils except
those withdrawn by their parents. Under the Education Reform Act 1988
due recognition must be given to the place of Christianity within religious
education and collective worship in county schools. The Act allows daily
collective worship to be organised at times other than the beginning of the
day, and permits separate acts of worship for different groups of pupils. In
county schools, and sometimes in voluntary schools, non-denominational
religious education is given in accordance with a locally agreed syllabus
which may include the comparative study of religions. Syllabuses have been
revised in many areas to take account of the faiths of the local population. In
all kinds of voluntary schools there is the opportunity for denominational
religious education.
In Scotland education authorities are required to see that schools practise
religious observance and give pupils religious instruction; parents may
withdraw their children if they wish. Certain schools provide for Roman
Catholic children but in all schools there are safeguards for the individual
conscience.
In Northern Ireland, too, schools are obliged to offer religious education
and collective worship, although parents have the right to withdraw their
children from both. In controlled schools clergy have a right of access which
may be used for denominational instruction and in voluntary schools
collective worship and religious education are controlled by the management
authorities. Provision has been made for religious education to have an
agreed core syllabus which schools can expand according to their own needs
and wishes.
Examinations
England,
Wales and
Northern Ireland
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland around the age of 16 are those leading to the
General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE). This replaced the
General Certificate of Education (GCE) Ordinary (O) level and the
Certificate of Secondary Education (CSE) in 1988. GCSE courses were
introduced in 1986 with a view to raising standards of performance. GCSE
examinations are usually taken after five years of secondary education and
have a seven-point scale of grades denoted by the letters A to G. Grades A to
C have standards at least as high as GCE O level grades A to C and CSE
grade 1, which were the normal qualifying grades for more advanced
education or training. The Government intends the GCSE to be the
principal means for assessing attainment at stage 4 of the National
Curriculum.
The GCE Advanced (A) level is normally taken after a further two years of
study. New examinations, Advanced Supplementary (AS) levels, were
examined for the first time in 1989 and provide an opportunity for sixth-
form pupils to study a wider range of subjects than before. Students
EDUCATION
189
Scotland
School
Examinations
and Assessment
Councils
specialising in the arts and humanities, for example, are able to continue to
study mathematics and technological subjects at the new level. Requiring the
same standard of work but with only half the content of A levels, AS levels
are designed to occupy half the teaching and study time of an A level. A
levels or a mixture of A and AS levels are the main standard for entrance to
university and other higher education and to many forms of professional
training.
The Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education, awarded for the first time in
1986, is intended for those at school or college who wish to continue in full¬
time education for a year after the age of 16 to prepare either for work or for
vocational and other courses. In common with other Business & Technician
Education Council (BTEC—see p 196) qualifications, it can serve as a
stepping stone into higher education. The Certificate is devised by BTEC
and the City and Guilds of London Institute (see p 196).
The public examination system in Scotland is different from that in other
parts of Britain. Scottish pupils take the Scottish Certificate of Education
(SCE) at Standard grade and Ordinary grade at the end of their fourth year
of secondary education (equivalent to the fifth year in England and Wales).
Pupils in the fifth and sixth years sit the SCE Higher grade; passes at this
grade are the basis for entry to university, colleges of education or
professional training. For those who have completed their main studies at
the Higher grade but wish to continue studies in particular subjects there is
the Certificate of Sixth Year Studies (CSYS). The Standard grade courses
and examinations, which are replacing the Ordinary grade, cater for the
whole ability range. The Higher and CSYS examinations are being revised to
ensure compatibility with the Standard grade, and are undergoing review.
Under the Government’s plan for the reform of non-advanced further
education in Scotland, the National Certificate was introduced in 1984—85
for students over 16 who had successfully completed a programme of
vocational courses based on study units known as modules (see p 186). These
modules are now being used in schools for pupils in the 14-to-18 age-range,
and other short courses specifically for use in schools are being devised.
A new system of Scottish Vocational Qualifications similar to that of
the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (see p 196) is being
introduced.
All GCSE and other qualifications offered to pupils of compulsory school
age in maintained schools in England and Wales must be approved by the
Government. Associated syllabuses and assessment procedures must comply
with national guidelines and be approved by the School Examinations and
Assessment Council. The aim is to secure a reasonably wide choice of
qualifications and syllabuses which promote a broad, balanced curriculum
and support the National Curriculum.
The Council keeps under review all aspects of examinations and
assessment in England and Wales and carries out research and development.
It co-operates with the National Curriculum Council (for England) and the
Curriculum Council for Wales on work connected with the National
Curriculum in schools.
The Northern Ireland School Examinations and Assessment Council was
established in April 1990. It inherited the full range of duties of
its predecessor, the Northern Ireland School Examinations Council, and
its functions also include formal assessments associated with the statutory
curriculum.
190
Progress
Reports
Educational
Standards
Information
Technology
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A system of school reporting of individual pupils’ achievement was
introduced in April 1990, under which parents in England and Wales will
receive a yearly progress report on their child’s National Curriculum
achievements and results in public examinations. In Scotland the report card
system is being reformed to give parents a clearer view of their children’s pro¬
gress. In Northern Ireland there is a commitment for all pupils to be issued
with a record of their performance on leaving primary and secondary school.
Her Majesty’s Inspectors report to the Government on the quality of
education provided in all schools and in most further and higher education
establishments outside the universities, and advise education authorities and
schools as well as the Government. They also report on the youth service and
education provision in hospitals, prisons and youth custody centres, and the
armed services. Their reports on individual establishments are published.
Local education authorities employ inspectors or advisers to guide them on
maintained schools.
The Evaluation and Monitoring Unit, which is part of the School
Examinations and Assessment Council (see p 189), is mainly concerned with
the evaluation of the assessment arrangements for the National Curriculum.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland programmes of monitoring have
been carried out in English language and mathematics at the ages of 11 and
15, in science at the ages of 11, 13 and 15, and in the first foreign language at
the age of 13. A survey of performance at the age of 15 in design and
technology was undertaken in 1988. In Scotland the Assessment of
Achievement research programme has surveyed attainments of pupils in
English and mathematics at ages 8, 12 and 14.
Britain has developed a world lead in several aspects of the use of
information technology (IT) in education. In 1987 the Government
announced a major five-year strategy to integrate the use of IT throughout
the school curriculum and extend its benefits as widely as possible to children
of all ages, aptitudes and abilities. The main objectives of the first three years
of the programme, which began in 1988, are to increase the number of
microcomputers in schools; provide support for the appointment of advisory
teachers trained in the applications of IT; and offer in-service training for
teachers in the effective use of IT in their specialist subject areas.
Government-supported expenditure in the first three years amounts to some
£81 million.
The application of IT is featuring in programmes of study and attainment
targets for core and foundation subjects of the National Gurriculum. The
Government is making available £410,000 to the National Educational
Resources Information Service (an electronic database, see p 191) to place all
National Curriculum programmes of study, attainment targets and
statements of attainment on the database between 1989 and 1992. New
computer software to help teach the National Curriculum is being financed
by the Government at a cost of £750,000 from 1989—90 to 1992—93. The
development programme, which is managed by the National Council for
Educational Technology (see below), will provide software and related
materials for the National Curriculum for such areas as handling data in
mathematics lessons; supporting practical work in science; and creating
design projects in design and technology.
The National Council for Educational Technology has been set up by the
Government to evaluate the newest technologies in terms of their application
to education. Financed by the Department of Education and Science, its
objectives are to support, encourage, develop and apply the use of learning
EDUCATION
191
Educational
Aids
Careers
Education and
Guidance
Health and
Welfare of
Schoolchildren
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
systems and new technologies, including microcomputers, electronic systems
and other aspects of information technology, to all aspects of education and
training. In this way, the Council provides an integrated professional service
covering educational and information technology throughout Britain.
Teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of teaching
and learning. The government-funded National Educational Resources
Information Service enables schools to find out about a large range of
teaching aids. Most schools have audio-visual equipment such as slide
projectors and overhead projectors, and educational broadcasting is of major
importance. Each year almost 500 hours of school radio and over 900 hours
of television are transmitted nationally by the BBC and the independent
broadcasting companies. Teachers’ notes, pupils’ pamphlets and computer
software accompany many broadcast series. Virtually all primary and
secondary schools now have microcomputers which are used for computer-
assisted learning (see p 190).
Increasing importance is being attached by schools and colleges to careers
education to increase young people’s awareness of further and higher
education and careers opportunities, and generally help them to prepare for
adult and working life. As a result, links between schools and the careers
service are being strengthened. The work of the careers service at local level
is supported by careers information material produced by the Government’s
Careers and Occupational Information Centre. The Government is sponsor¬
ing the development of a computer-assisted careers guidance system for stu¬
dents in universities, polytechnics and colleges, known as PROSPECT (HE).
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of
all maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over
the age of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical
inspection of schoolchildren and for advice on, and treatment of, specific
medical and dental problems associated with children of school age. The
Government believes that the education service has a role to play in
preventing and dealing with juvenile drug misuse and in helping to prevent
the spread of AIDS.
Local education authorities are free to decide what milk, meals or other
refreshment to offer at their schools, and what charges to make. (In
Northern Ireland school meals must be provided for primary school pupils.)
Provision has to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families
receiving certain social security benefits. Under certain conditions the
authorities must supply free school transport, and they have discretionary
powers to help with the cost of travel to school.
Corporal punishment is prohibited by law in maintained schools in
Britain.
About two-fifths of young people receive some form of post-school
education, compared with a fifth in 1965, and 1 in 6 of all young people
enter higher education. The number of degrees awarded by age-group is
comparable with that of other developed countries, and the proportion of
people in further and higher education also compares well, taking into
account the large proportion of part-time students and the large group of
students receiving professional training in firms rather than in educational
institutions.
Post-school education is provided at universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
192
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Higher
Education
Further
Education
central institutions and colleges of education, further and higher education
colleges, adult education centres, colleges of technology, tertiary colleges,
colleges of art and design, and agricultural and horticultural colleges. There
are also many independent specialist establishments, such as secretarial and
correspondence colleges, and colleges for teaching English as a foreign
language. Several voluntary and public bodies offer cultural and general
education, sometimes with assistance from local education authorities and
central government, and many education and training schemes are run by
public or private organisations, or firms.
The Government aims to improve awareness of the opportunities for
further and higher education and training through the development of
national information services, such as the Educational Counselling and
Credit Transfer Information Service funded by the Department of
Education and Science.
The Further Education Unit, with funding from the Department of
Education and Science, is an advisory and development body for further
education.
Higher education is provided by universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
central institutions and colleges of education and institutions of further and
higher education, some concerned wholly with teacher training. The
Government considers that access to higher education courses should be
available to all those who can benefit from them and who have the necessary
intellectual competence, motivation and maturity. Although GCE A levels
and their equivalents in Scotland have traditionally been the standard for
entry to higher education courses, other qualifications and courses are now
considered equally appropriate. These are AS levels, some BTEC qualifi¬
cations (see p 196) and access/foundation courses (see p 196).
In 1988-89 there were over 1 million students in higher education, 29 per
cent more than in 1979. The Government aims to secure further increases in
participation, and the number of students in full-time higher education is
expected to rise by some 10 per cent between 1988—89 and 1992—93. One of
the Government’s main aims in higher education is to bring about a change
in the balance of provision in favour of scientific, technological and directly
vocational courses.
In order to maintain British expertise in information technology and
related fields, a number of government schemes have been introduced in the
last eight years to expand higher education and research in electronics,
engineering and computer science by making available extra student places,
and additional staff and research fellowships in universities, polytechnics
and Scottish central institutions. One such scheme, the Engineering and
Technology Programme, announced in 1985, has provided around 5,000
student places in engineering, information technology and related scientific
disciplines. In 1988 the Department of Employment brought in a Graduate
Enterprise Programme offering 450 places on management training courses
for recently qualified graduates intending to start their own businesses.
Further education in England and Wales comprises all provision outside
schools to people aged over 16 of a standard up to and including GCE A
level (or equivalent). Courses are run by some 490 colleges of further
education, many of which also offer higher education courses. The great
majority of such colleges are controlled by local education authorities. In
Scotland the new modular courses at the non-advanced level (see pp 186 and
189) can be taken in schools, further education colleges or as part of
government training schemes.
EDUCATION
193
Students
Much of the provision outside the universities is broadly vocational. It
extends from lower-level technical and commercial courses to advanced
courses for those aiming at higher-level posts in commerce, industry and
administration, or taking up a variety of professions (for example, town
planning or estate management). However, most colleges provide non-
vocational courses, including GCSE and GCE A level courses. The system is
flexible and enables the student to acquire whatever qualifications his or her
capabilities and time allow.
A large number of students on further education courses attend part time,
either by day release or block release from employment or during the
evenings. A particular feature of the further education system is its strong
ties with commerce and industry: a major part of the further education
sector is devoted to work-related studies. Co-operation with the business
world is encouraged by the Government and its agencies, and employers are
often involved in designing courses.
Further education colleges supply much of the education element in
training programmes like Youth Training and Employment Training, both
sponsored by the Training Agency. Youth Training offers two years’
planned work experience and training to 16-year-old school-leavers and one
year’s to 17-year-old school-leavers. All young people on Youth Training will
be offered training and vocational education leading to qualifications at or
equivalent to a minimum of level two in the framework established by the
National Council for Vocational Qualifications (see p 196). Employment
Training provides a flexible training programme of up to 12 months
especially for the longer-term unemployed.
The Education Reform Act 1988 requires every local education authority
in England and Wales to prepare a scheme outlining procedures for
planning further education provision, setting college budgets and delegating
control over budgets to college governing bodies. They must also increase
employer representation on governing bodies. Legislation was introduced in
both Scotland and Northern Ireland in 1989 to institute financial delegation
in further education colleges and to strengthen industrial and commercial
representation on their governing bodies, at least half of whose members
must represent employment interests.
Around one million students took full-time courses in 1988-89, including
sandwich courses (where substantial periods of full-time study alternate with
periods of supervised experience on a relevant job), at universities2 and
major establishments of further and higher education in Britain. Of these
about 330,000 were at universities, while another 310,000 were following
higher courses at colleges of further and higher education, polytechnics and
Scottish central institutions and other colleges. More than 400,000 were
taking further education courses, the majority of which lead to recognised
vocational or educational qualifications.
There were also nearly 4 million part-time students, some of whom are
released by their employers for further education during working hours.
Many of the remainder take part in adult education classes.
Over 90 per cent of full-time students on higher courses are helped by
grants from public funds, which are mandatory for those students taking
first degree and other comparable courses who qualify under national rules.
Grants for other courses may be given at the discretion of a local education
authority. Grants cover tuition fees and maintenance, but parents con¬
tribute to maintenance costs according to their income. They are awarded by
Excluding the University of Buckingham.
194
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Developments
Universities
local education authorities in England and Wales up to first degree level.
Equivalent schemes are administered in Scotland by the Scottish Education
Department, and in Northern Ireland mainly by the education and library
boards. Grants for postgraduate study and research are offered by the
education departments and by the research councils. Some scholarships
are available from endowments and also from particular industries or
companies.
Under the Education (Student Loans) Act 1990 and corresponding
Northern Ireland legislation, all home students in full-time higher education
below postgraduate level will be eligible, from late 1990, for an interest-free
top-up maintenance loan initially averaging over £400 a year, in addition to a
maintenance grant. The standard repayment period will initially be five
years, with repayment beginning in the April following graduation for
students earning more than 85 per cent of the average national wage.
This legislation is designed to share the cost of student maintenance more
equitably between students, parents and the taxpayer, as well as to promote a
stronger sense of self-reliance among students. It is intended that loans will
eventually provide about half of a student’s maintenance entitlement.
There are 47 universities in Britain, including the Open University,
compared with 17 in 1945. They are governed by royal charters or in some
cases by Act of Parliament, and enjoy complete academic freedom,
appointing their own staff and deciding which students to admit, what and
how to teach, and which degrees to award. The English universities are:
Aston (Birmingham), Bath, Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Brunei
(London), Cambridge, City (London), Durham, East Anglia (Norwich),
Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster, Leeds, Leicester,
Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, University of Manchester
Institute of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham,
Oxford, Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex,
Warwick, York and the independent University of Buckingham. The Royal
College of Art, the Cranfield Institute of Technology, the London Graduate
School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business School also have
university status. The federated University of Wales comprises six
constituent institutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee,
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St Andrews, Stirling and
Strathclyde (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen’s University
of Belfast and the University of Ulster.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities in Britain were founded in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or selection. Of the total
number of full-time university students in 1988—89 (excluding those at the
University of Buckingham), 58,000 were postgraduate. About half lived in
colleges, halls of residence and other accommodation owned by universities.
There are around 30,000 full-time university teachers paid wholly from
university funds. The ratio of full-time staff to full-time students is about 1 to
11, one of the most favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full time
and usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses
normally require five or six years. Degree titles vary according to the practice
of each university. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most
EDUCATION
195
The Open
University
Polytechnics
and Other
Institutions
common titles for a first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of
Science (BSc) and for a second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of
Science (MSc), and Doctor of Philosophy (PhD). In the older Scottish
universities Master is used for a first degree in arts subjects. Uniformity of
standards between universities is promoted by employing external
examiners for all university examinations, and the general pattern of
teaching is similar throughout Britain.
Research is an important feature of university work; many staff combine
research with their teaching duties and about half of postgraduate students
are engaged on research projects. The Government intends to pursue a
policy of separate funding for teaching and research in the university sector.
It is encouraging universities to co-operate closely with industry on research
projects. In 1987 a new information technology institute, sponsored jointly
by industry and the Cranfield Institute of Technology, was opened to link
academic and commercial interests.
The Open University is a non-residendal university offering degree and
other courses for adult students of all ages throughout Britain. In the main it
uses a combination of specially produced printed texts, correspondence
tuition, television and radio broadcasts, audio and video cassettes, and
summer schools, together with a network of study centres for contact with
part-time tutors and counsellors, and with fellow students. No formal
academic qualifications are required to register for these courses, but the
standards of the University’s degrees are the same as those of other
universities. Its first degree, for which courses began in 1971, is the BA
(Open), a general degree awarded on a system of credits for each course
completed. In 1990 there were 72,000 registered undergraduates, and in all
102,000 first degrees have been awarded since the University’s inception.
The University also has a programme of higher degrees, BPhil, MPhil and
PhD, available through research, and MA and MSc through taught courses.
More than 2,800 students were registered on higher degree courses in 1990.
A Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree course was introduced
in 1989.
The fastest-growing aspect of the University’s work is the Continuing
Education Programme, which includes short courses of community
education, in-service training for teachers, health and social welfare workers
and other professional staff, and up-dating courses for managers, scientists
and technologists. Some of these are presented as multi-media courses in the
same way as the undergraduate programme, while others are in the form of
self-contained study packs. In 1990 some 130,000 students were following
these courses.
While students must normally be resident in Britain, undergraduate and
Business School courses are also available to English-speakers in Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The University has advised many other
countries on setting up similar institutions. It is also making a substantial
contribution to the new Commonwealth of Learning project, which brings
together distance-teaching establishments and students throughout the
Commonwealth.
A major contribution to post-school education in England and Wales is made
by the 31 polytechnics, which have been established since 1967. They offer
mainly higher education courses in a wide range of subjects, including those
leading to first and higher degrees and certain graduate-equivalent
qualifications. They also offer courses leading to the examinations of the
chief professional bodies, and to qualifications such as those of the Business &
Council for
National
Academic
Awards
Vocational
Qualifications
Other
Examining
Bodies
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technician Education Council (see below). One-year ‘access’ courses provide
a foundation and an appropriate test before enrolment on a course of higher
education for prospective students who lack the standard entry
qualifications. Polytechnics have close links with commerce and industry,
and many polytechnic students have jobs and attend on a part-time basis.
Similar provision is made in Scotland in the 15 central institutions and a
number of further education colleges, and in Northern Ireland by the
University of Ulster.
Institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education
colleges run some, usually specialised, higher education courses.
An increasing number of students on higher education courses in Great
Britain outside the universities take courses leading to the qualifications of
the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA). The Council awards
degrees and other academic qualifications comparable in standard with
those granted by the universities. The courses range from science and
technology to the arts, social studies, business studies and law, but the
proportion of technology, business or other broadly vocational courses is
much higher than in universities.
Since 1987 institutions running CNAA-approved courses have been able
to apply to have delegated responsibility for approving and reviewing their
own courses. By August 1990 a total of 40 institutions had been accredited
by the CNAA for taught degree courses.
The National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) was set up in
1986 to reform and rationalise the vocational qualifications system in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Council aims to make
qualifications more relevant to the needs of employment by basing them on
standards of competence set by industry. It is establishing a new framework
of National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) based on defined levels of
achievement to which qualifications in all sectors can be assigned or
accredited. By January 1990 nearly 200 qualifications drawn from 40
different employment sectors had been accredited. The aim is to have the
framework for levels 1 to 4 (from the most basic level to the management
supervisory level) fully operational by the end of 1992, and eventually it is
expected to extend the framework to cover all occupational levels up to and
including the professions.
The competence-based system is being extended in Scotland (which
already has its own modular system) through a new system of Scottish
Vocational Qualifications (SVQs) along the lines of NVQs. SVQs will be
accredited by the Scottish Vocational Education Council (see below).
The Business Sc Technician Education Council (BTEC) plans and adminis¬
ters a unified national system of courses at all levels for students in industry,
commerce and public administration in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland. Courses leading to BTEC awards are available at polytechnics,
colleges of further and higher education, and in some schools. The Scottish
Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC) is the principal examining and
awarding body in the field of further education in Scotland. SCOTVEC is
responsible for administering and developing the non-advanced SCOTVEC
National Certificate and the advanced level Higher National Certificate and
Higher National Diploma.
Qualifications in a wide range of occupational areas are offered by the City
EDUCATION
197
Teacher
Training
Courses and
Qualifications
and Guilds of London Institute, and a variety of qualifications in commercial
and office practice are awarded by the Royal Society of Arts.
Almost all entrants to teaching in maintained and special schools in England
and Wales complete a recognised course of initial teacher training. Such
courses are offered by university departments of education as well as by
many polytechnics and colleges. Non-graduates usually qualify by taking a
four-year Bachelor of Education (BEd) honours degree. There are also
specially designed two-year BEd courses—mostly in subjects where there is a
shortage of teachers at the secondary level—for suitably qualified people.
Graduates normally take a one-year Postgraduate Certificate of Education
(PGCE), and two-year PGCE courses are available in the secondary shortage
subjects for those whose first degree in an associated subject included at least
one year’s study of the subject they intend to teach.
Articled teacher courses, offering school-based teacher training for
graduates, were introduced in September 1990. Trainees, who receive a
bursary, take on a progressively greater teaching load, and formal training is
provided both in initial teacher-training institutions and in school by college
tutors and school teachers. In 1989 the Government introduced a licensed
teacher scheme in England and Wales to assist entry into the profession for
people who may not have formal teacher-training qualifications but who
have relevant qualifications and experience. Participants generally have to
complete a period of two years as a licensed teacher before achieving
qualified teacher status. Support is also offered for local initiatives to
encourage mature people to return to teaching. In addition, the Govern¬
ment has made it easier for teachers trained abroad to take up posts in
English and Welsh schools.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland. It is government policy that
all entrants to the teaching profession in Scotland should be graduates. New
primary teachers qualify either through a four-year BEd course or a one-
year postgraduate course of teacher training at a college of education.
Teachers of academic subjects at secondary schools must hold a degree
containing two passes in the subject which they wish to teach. In certain
subjects, a relevant specialist diploma has been acceptable in place of a
degree, but this provision is being phased out. Secondary teachers must
undertake a one-year postgraduate training course. For music and tech¬
nology, four-year BEd courses are also available, and for physical education
all teachers take BEd courses.
In Northern Ireland teacher training is provided by the two universities
and the two colleges of education. The principal courses are BEd Honours
(four years), BA Honours (Education) and the one-year postgraduate
Certificate of Education.
Measures
to Improve
Standards
The Government has taken steps to improve the quality of teaching by
revising selection, training and placement procedures for new teachers, and
by making available more in-service training opportunities. Management
training courses for head teachers are also being provided. The Government
believes that more systematic planning is required by schools and local
education authorities to match in-service training to both the career needs of
teachers and to the curricular needs of schools. A major new in-service
training programme to improve the quality of teaching in schools and
institutions of further education was introduced under the Education (No 2)
Act 1986 (see p 178).
Measures to strengthen initial teacher training in England, Wales and
198
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Adult and
Continuing
Education
Northern Ireland have included the issuing of criteria which courses must
meet and the establishment of the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher
Education to review courses against the criteria. The Government intends to
establish a national framework allowing teachers’ employers in England and
Wales to appraise the performance of teachers. Local education authorities,
voluntary-aided schools and grant-maintained schools will be able to decide
whether and how quickly to introduce appraisal.
In Scotland all courses have been revised following recommendations of
working parties on teacher training. All new pre-service and major in-service
courses provided by colleges of education must be approved by the Scottish
Education Department and a validating body. Local education authorities
are to be asked to implement national guidelines for the introduction of
systematic schemes of staff development and appraisal for teachers. The
Government has taken reserve powers requiring authorities to operate
schemes prescribed by it in the event of a breakdown of voluntary
agreements.
The scope of adult and continuing education has widened in recent years. In
addition to the development of the individual through cultural, physical and
craft pursuits, it now covers basic education (for example, in literacy and
numeracy); education for disadvantaged groups and those with special
needs, such as ethnic minorities or disabled people; consumer education;
health education; and pre-retirement education. Continuing education also
includes training for those in employment to enable them to keep pace with
technological change.
The Government has taken a number of initiatives to improve
opportunities for both adult and continuing education. In 1982 it launched
the Professional, Industrial and Commercial Updating Programme
(PICKUP), designed to help colleges, polytechnics and universities to meet
the need to up-date and broaden the skills of those in mid-career in industry,
commerce and the professions. By 1992 the Government aims to have one in
ten of Britain’s workforce attending job skills updating courses every year
under PICKUP.
The availability of open learning opportunities has been extended with the
formation in 1987 of the Open College, an independent company set up
with government support. The College brings together broadcasters,
educationists and sponsors, and provides vocational education and training
courses below degree level. Over 150,000 people have taken courses since
1987 and the College has delivered training for about 1,000 firms. Up to £12
million is being allocated by the Government for the College’s commercial
activities as well as £6 million for broadcasting. The Open College of the
Arts, also launched in 1987, offers an art foundation course to those wishing
to study at home.
Apart from provision for mature students at universities, courses are
offered by the Open University, further education colleges, adult education
centres, residential colleges, extra-mural departments of universities and
other bodies such as voluntary organisations. Most of the provision is made
by the local education authorities in a wide variety of establishments,
including schools used for adult evening classes and ‘community schools’,
which offer educational, social and cultural opportunities for the wider
community. A majority of courses are part time. Local authorities also
maintain or aid many of the short-term residential colleges or centres which
run courses lasting between a weekend and a fortnight. Long-term
residential colleges, grant-aided by central government departments, have
courses of one or two years and aim to provide a liberal education for adults
EDUCATION
199
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
with few or no formal academic qualifications. Most students admitted are
entitled to full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational
Association, the largest recognised voluntary educational body in Britain,
offer extended part-time courses of liberal studies. They also run short
courses for special (including vocational) interests. Various kinds of
education and training are provided by many other organisations, for
example, the National Federation of Women’s Institutes, the Young Men’s
Christian Association and the Pre-Retirement Association.
The National Institute of Adult Continuing Education is a centre of
information, research, development work and publication for adult and
continuing education. It also acts as a channel of co-operation and
consultation for the many interested organisations in England and Wales.
The Institute administers with government funding the Unit for the
Development of Adult Continuing Education, which undertakes research
and development work. The Institute’s counterpart in Scotland is the
Scottish Institute of Adult and Continuing Education.
The Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit (ALBSU) is the central focus for
adult literacy, numeracy and communications skills in England and Wales. A
three-year literacy and numeracy initiative was launched in 1989 as a joint
venture between the Government and the BBC. It involves the use of
television and radio and specially printed material to improve the
communications skills of an estimated 6 million adults. New nationally
recognised qualifications in communication and numeracy are being
developed, and a referral service is being created to put people in contact
with 60 new open-learning centres and other local learning facilities.
In Scotland the Scottish Community Education Council advises the
Government and promotes all community education matters, including
adult literacy and basic education, and the youth service.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing Education advises the
Department of Education on adult and continuing education matters. The
role of the Council is under review.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses of higher
education remains a mixture of lectures; prescribed or suggested reading;
seminars and tutorials; essays, exercises and tests; and, where appropriate,
practical work or work experience. Educational aids are widely used.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and
general, are important media for continuing education and are often linked
to supplementary publications, courses and activities. The BBC, the
independent television companies and Channel 4 present programmes
which range from basic education and progressive vocational training to
domestic, social and craft skills. The BBC also works with the Open
University (see p 195), producing and broadcasting radio and television
programmes that form part of the University’s courses. Channel 4 has a
similar relationship with the Open College.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local
government, the Economic and Social Research Council, philanthropic
organisations, universities and other higher education institutions, teachers’
associations and certain independent bodies.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales. Its
income is derived mainly from funds received from research projects and
from corporate members, including local education authorities, teachers’
200
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
Overseas
Students in
Britain
Government
Scholarship
Schemes
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
organisations and universities; the Foundation also receives a small
government grant. The Scottish Council for Research in Education and the
Northern Ireland Council for Educational Research have similar functions.
Schoolchildren, students, teachers and others concerned with education
come to Britain from overseas to study, and British people work and train
overseas. Many opportunities for such movement are the result of
international co-operation at government level within the European
Community and within the Commonwealth. Educational schemes, courses
and professional contacts are organised in Britain by officially funded and
voluntary organisations. The British aid programme encourages links
between educational institutions in Britain and developing countries.
British membership of the European Community has created closer ties
with other member countries. Member states must seek to incorporate a
European perspective into their education systems. Both in schools and in
the colleges and universities in Britain there has been an expansion of
interest in European studies and languages, and exchanges of teachers,
schoolchildren and students take place. The European Community’s
European Action Scheme for Mobility of University Students (ERASMUS),
for instance, promotes the exchange of students and academic staff
throughout the Community. In 1990-91, 168 further and higher education
institutes in Britain are expected to take part in 828 exchange schemes.
Britain has adhered to the Statute of the European Schools (nine of which
have been established throughout the Community, including one at
Culham, Oxfordshire) to provide education for children of people employed
in Community institutions. The European Community Action Programme
for Education and Training for Technology (COMETT) aims to foster co¬
operation between higher education establishments and companies
throughout the Community. The UK Centre for European Education, with
government financing, promotes a European dimension in education.
Students come to Britain from all over the world to study. British univer¬
sities, polytechnics and other further and higher education establishments
have built up their reputation overseas by offering tuition of the highest
standards, maintaining low student-to-staff ratios, and providing relevant
courses and qualifications.
In the academic year 1988-89 there were about 49,000 overseas students at
universities and 23,000 at polytechnics and other public sector es¬
tablishments of further and higher education. In addition, many thousands of
people from abroad were training for nursing, law, banking and accountancy,
and service and other industries. Almost half of all overseas students were from
the Commonwealth and Britain’s dependencies. Many come to Britain for
advanced training: one-third of students enrolled for full-time postgraduate
study or research in Britain in 1988—89 came from overseas.
A number of British colleges of further education have entered into
arrangements with British universities to provide ‘bridging’ courses for
overseas students before they enter university.
Most overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold awards
from their own governments. Those following courses of higher or further
education pay fees which cover the full cost of their courses. Nationals of
other member countries of the European Community generally pay the
lower level of fees that applies to British students.
The Government continues, however, to make considerable provision for
students and trainees from overseas under its overseas aid programme and
other award and scholarship schemes. In 1989—90 more than 24,000
EDUCATION
201
Other
Schemes
English as a
Foreign
Language
Educational
Exchanges
The British
Council
overseas students were supported (including some studying overseas) at a
cost of some £127 million. Around three-quarters are from developing
countries, most of them from the Commonwealth, studying under the
Technical Co-operation and Training Programme, which is financed from
the aid programme. Under the Overseas Development Administration
Shared Scholarship Scheme, launched in 1986-87, 750 awards are available
over five years, mainly at postgraduate level, for students from the
developing countries of the Commonwealth, with costs being shared
between the Government and the educational institutions.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office Scholarships and Awards Scheme
(FCOSAS), which operates in some 140 countries, is designed to bring to
Britain present and future leaders, decision-makers and formers of opinion.
A notable feature of the FCOSAS is the increasing number of awards jointly
funded by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in partnership with the
private sector and academic institutions. The Department of Trade and
Industry also finances a trade-related scholarship scheme in partnership
with British industry. Outside the aid programme, the Overseas Research
Students Awards Scheme, funded by the Department of Education and
Science, provides assistance for overseas research students of high ability to
attend British universities.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to
students from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas).
Among the best known, and open to men and women in all walks of life, are
the British Council Scholarships, the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship Scheme, the Marshall
Scholarships, the Rhodes Scholarships, the Churchill Scholarships and the
Confederation of British Industry Scholarships. Most British universities
and colleges offer scholarships for which graduates of any nationality are
eligible.
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is
reflected in the growth of the number of private language schools in Britain.
Some 250 of the estimated 1,000 private schools are recognised by the
British Council. The Council has expanded its own teaching of English
overseas by opening centres and extending existing ones (53 in all by June
1990); it also runs a programme for teaching English related to specific jobs
and skills. Other British language schools enable people to learn English in
their own countries, while in Britain university language and linguistics
departments are an important resource. The Government’s aid programme
supports the teaching of English in many developing countries by financing
major projects in schools, universities and other institutions. Publications
and other material relating to English language teaching have increased in
number and are now a large component in many publishers’ lists, con¬
stituting a major export.
BBC English, the English teaching arm of the BBC’s World Service, offers
a worldwide facility for the individual learner at home.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a
major concern of the British Council, which plays an important part in the
management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for
work overseas, organises short overseas visits by British experts, and
encourages cultural exchange visits. It also runs schemes to foster academic
interchange between universities and higher education institutions in Britain
and other countries, and exchange schemes in other scientific, educational
and cultural areas. Co-operation between universities in Britain and
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
developing countries is promoted with funding from the Overseas
Development Administration. It is brought about through recruiting staff
for overseas universities, the secondment of staff from British universities,
interdepartmental faculty links, local staff development, short-term teaching
and advisory visits, and general consultancy services.
The Central The Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges acts as the
Bureau for national centre for information on all forms of educational visits and
Educational exchanges. It develops and administers exchange and interchange schemes,
Visits and provides information and advice on opportunities for study and other
Exchanges activities abroad, and awards grants and bursaries.
Among the schemes for professional exchange which the Bureau
administers are teacher exchange in Europe and the United States, short
courses for teachers; and study visits for teaching staff and administrative
staff and education specialists, as well as those in further and higher
education. Vocational training programmes include the Language Assistants
scheme and the Junior Language Assistants scheme, which provide teaching
experience and the chance to put language skills into practice. Opportunities
for young people include school and class links and the European
Community Young Worker Exchange scheme, which enables 18- to 28-year-
olds to gain work or professional experience in another Community country.
The Association of The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes contact and co-
Commonwealth operation between 343 member universities in 30 Commonwealth countries
Universities or regions. It assists student and staff mobility by administering various
award schemes including, for Britain, the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan and the Overseas Development Administration Shared
Scholarship Scheme, and by providing an academic appointments service. It
publishes information about Commonwealth universities, courses and
scholarships, and organises meetings in different parts of the world.
Other The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
Organisations direct dealings on education between Commonwealth countries. Ehe United
Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body
serving overseas students, and those concerned with student affairs.
The Youth Exchange Centre, managed by the British Council, provides
advice, information, training and grants to British youth groups involved in
international exchanges. The Centre is the national agency for the European
Community-sponsored exchange scheme, Youth for Europe.
The Youth Service
The youth service forms part of the education system and is concei ned with
promoting the personal development and social education of young people
by providing opportunities for them to participate in a broad range of leisure
time and extra-curricular activities. Young people take part in the youth
service on a voluntary basis. Extending the breadth of experiences open to
young people and giving them opportunities to participate in the running of
their organisations are seen as key elements in the provision.
The youth service is a partnership between central government, local
authorities and voluntary youth organisations. At local level the youth
service is provided by voluntary organisations and local education
authorities. Government education departments formulate broad policy ob¬
jectives and encourage their implementation through financial assistance
and advice. Recognising the need to achieve better planning, management
EDUCATION
203
Voluntary
Youth
Organisations
Youth Service
Bodies
and co-ordination of the youth service in England, in 1988 the Government
announced new arrangements for periodic consultations with the youth
service. These take the form of national conferences attended by represen¬
tatives of both the statutory and voluntary sectors of the youth service, at
which major issues of common concern are discussed. The first was held in
1989.
In Scotland the youth service forms a part of adult education, which is
integrated within community education. The Scottish Community
Education Council has the role of promoting community education. The
Youth Council for Northern Ireland, with executive and advisory powers,
was set up in 1989.
National voluntary youth organisations undertake the major share of youth
activities through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day expenses
by their own efforts. Many receive financial and other help from local
education authorities, which also make available facilities in many areas. The
voluntary organisations vary greatly in character and include the uniformed
and church organisations. Many local authorities and voluntary youth
organisations have responded to new needs in society by making provision,
for example, for the young unemployed, young people from the ethnic
minorities, young people in inner cities or rural areas and those in trouble or
especially vulnerable. Young Enterprise is a national organisation which
gives people aged 15 to 19 the chance to gain practical business experience
by helping them form and run their own companies. Other areas of concern
are homelessness and provision for handicapped young people.
Among the largest voluntary youth organisations are the Scout and Girl
Guides Associations (with about 560,000 and 710,000 members), and the
Young Men’s Christian Association (1 million), all of which have worldwide
affiliations, Youth Clubs UK (about 685,000), the National Association of
Boys’ Clubs (170,000), and clubs run by the churches. Organisations like the
Outward Bound Trust provide opportunities for adventurous outdoor
pursuits. The three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps, Army
Cadet Force and Air Training Corps), with a membership of some 75,000,
undertake activities related to the work of the armed forces.
Many authorities have youth committees on which official and voluntary
bodies are represented, and employ youth officers to co-ordinate youth work
and to arrange in-service training. There are also youth councils, which are
representative bodies of young people from local youth organisations.
At national level many voluntary organisations belong to the National
Council for Voluntary Youth Services, a representative and consultative
body which aims to develop the partnership between voluntary and statutory
bodies in England. Similar councils exist in Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland. The British Youth Council is a national forum for young people,
youth organisations and youth councils, including the youth wings of the
major political parties, and represents young people at an international level.
The youth service in England and Wales can draw on information, advice,
training and research services provided by the National Youth Bureau,
which is funded primarily by central government.
From April 1991 government funding of the five national youth service
bodies in England and Wales—the National Youth Bureau, the Council for
Education and Training in Youth and Community Work, the National
Council for Voluntary Youth Services, the National Association of Young
People’s Counselling and Advisory Services, and the British Youth
Council—will be channelled through a single national youth agency. This
204
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
will be responsible for working with both voluntary and local authority
sectors to improve the quality, range and effectiveness of their work.
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain universities
and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth and
community worker; several undergraduate part-time and postgraduate
courses are also available. In Scotland one-, two- and three-year courses are
provided at colleges of education and in Northern Ireland courses are run by
the University of Ulster.
Full-time youth workers are supported by some 500,000 part-time
workers, both qualified and unqualified, many of them unpaid. Short
courses and conferences are held on youth and community work. There are
also in-service courses for serving youth workers and officers. Initial and in-
service courses are validated by the Council for Education and Training in
Youth and Community Work. Youth counselling is supported by the
National Association of Young People’s Counselling and Advisory Services.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving
foundations and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The
Royal Jubilee Trusts were formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust
(set up in 1935 ) and The Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust (set up in 1978). King
George’s Jubilee Trust, which has distributed nearly £7 million since 1935,
supports work involving young people aged 8 to 25. The Queen’s Silver
Jubilee Trust, which has awarded over £11 million since 1978, supports
young people up to the age of 25 involved in voluntary community service
work. In addition, The Prince’s Trust, which was set up in 1976 to help
disadvantaged young people aged 14 to 25, has paid some £3 million to
individuals and small ad hoc groups.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme operates through local
authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms. It enables
young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to take part,
with voluntary help from adults, in a variety of challenging activities in four
areas: community service, expeditions, the development of personal inter¬
ests and social and practical skills, and physical recreation.
Thousands of young people voluntarily undertake community service
designed to help those in need, including elderly and disabled people, and
many others work on environmental projects. Organisations providing
opportunities for community service, such as Community Service
Volunteers, International Voluntary Service and the British Trust for
Conservation Volunteers, receive grants from the Government. Many
schools also organise community service work as part of the curriculum, and
voluntary work in the community is sponsored by a number of churches.
A new national scheme, ‘Young Volunteers in the Community , was
launched in April 1990. Operated jointly by The Prince’s Trust and the
Commission on Citizenship, the scheme is recruiting young people aged 16
to 24 to work on a variety of community projects for 12 to 18 weeks.
8 Planning, Urban
Regeneration and
Housing
Britain seeks to reconcile the conflicting demands for land from industry,
commerce, housing, transport, agriculture and recreation, and to protect
and enhance the environment by means of a comprehensive statutory system
of land-use planning and development control. Most development requires
‘planning permission’, and applications are dealt with in the light of
development plans (which set out land use strategies for each area on such
matters as housing and industry) and of any other material considerations.
However, many minor developments do not need a specific planning
application. The Government’s wish is to remove unnecessary planning
controls as part of its policy to promote private enterprise. A comprehensive
programme to revitalise the inner cities and other urban areas (such as
peripheral housing estates) includes a number of initiatives designed to
encourage enterprise, employment and educational opportunities, and to
improve the quality of housing.
Planning
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised
structure under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and
Scotland; and compulsory planning duties for local authorities. The
Department of the Environment brings together the major responsibilities in
England for land-use planning, housing and construction, countryside
policy and environmental protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish
Development Department have broadly equivalent responsibilities. The
Department of the Environment provides national and regional guidance on
planning matters, while strategic planning at the county level is the
responsibility of the county councils. District councils are responsible for
local plans and development control. In the metropolitan areas and London,
the borough and district councils are preparing new unitary development
plans for each administrative area. In Scotland planning functions are
undertaken by regional and district councils, whose responsibilities are
divided on a basis broadly similar to that in England and Wales. In the more
rural regions and the islands, all planning responsibilities are carried out by
the regional and islands councils respectively. In Northern Ireland the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for
planning matters through six divisional planning offices, which work closely
with the district councils.
The Government’s aim is for the maximum use to be made of urban land
for new development, having regard to the need to retain valuable amenity
space within the urban environment and the need to ensure that the
L
206
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Plans
Public
Participation
cumulative effects of development do not harm the character of established
residential areas.
The present development plan system in England and Wales involves
‘structure’, ‘local’ and unitary development plans. Structure plans are
prepared by county planning authorities and require ministerial approval.
They set out broad policies for the development and other use of land. Local
plans provide detailed guidance for development expected to start within
about ten years; they are normally prepared by district planning authorities,
although sometimes by county planning authorities, and must conform
generally to the approved structure plan. Local plans are adopted by the
planning authorities without being subject to ministerial approval, unless the
Secretary of State intervenes. Unitary development plans will set out the
strategic and detailed development control policies for each metropolitan
district or borough. All plans are kept under review and may be altered from
time to time. Planning authorities must take account of any strategic or re¬
gional guidance issued by the Secretary of State when formulating the plans.
In Scotland structure plans are prepared by regional or islands authorities,
and local plans by those districts with planning responsibilities, and by
general planning and islands authorities. Regional and islands authorities
may also produce a regional report outlining their priorities and policies.
Under Northern Ireland’s single-tier system, plans are prepared by the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
In a White Paper published in 1989, the Government announced its
intention to reform the planning system in the non-metropolitan areas of
England and Wales by introducing mandatory district-wide local plans and
streamlining procedures for adoption. The strategic role of the counties
would continue under the new system but their planning policies would not
be subject to the formal approval of the Secretary of State. They would be
required to ensure that their statements were consistent with any regional
guidance issued by the Secretary of State. The Government is considering
arrangements for legislation. Pending legislation, it is encouraging county
councils to review their structure plans, and also to form regional planning
conferences to identify the strategic planning issues and prepare advice.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity
to express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative
stages of the structure and local plans. Local planning authorities must
ensure publicity for proposed inclusions in the plans; representations may be
made about them to the authorities. There are also provisions for objecting
to prepared plans. In the case of structure plans the Secretary of State
normally holds an examination in public of matters on which he or she
requires more information in order to reach a decision. In the case of local
plans objectors have a right to be heard at a public local inquiry held by the
planning authorities. There are similar provisions for participation in the
preparation of unitary development plans.
Where specific proposals for development differ greatly from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other
schemes affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the
local planning authority, and applications seeking permission for certain
types of development—for example, those affecting conservation
areas—must also be advertised. In Scotland there is a system which requires
the applicant to notify the proprietors of land and buildings adjoining the
site of a proposed development at the same time as the application is
submitted to the local planning authority. The applicant has a right of
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
207
Major Schemes
New Towns
Architectural
Standards
appeal to the Secretary of State if planning permission is refused or is
granted subject to conditions.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in
the planning process and for the hearing of representations at public
inquiries. For planning applications which do not give rise to public inquiries
the applicant has a right of appeal to the independent Planning Appeals
Commission.
The Secretaries of State can direct that a planning application be referred to
them for decision. This power is usually exercised only in respect of
proposals of national or regional importance which give rise to substantial
controversy—for example, proposals for a major new power station. The
applicant and the local planning authority have the right to be heard by a
person appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally
held for this purpose. In the case of development schemes of exceptional
importance the departments concerned have set up procedures to help the
parties to resolve procedural matters beforehand and to streamline the
inquiry procedures. Where highway development is proposed, the
government minister concerned can hold such inquiries as he or she
considers appropriate; these generally relate to the compulsory acquisition
of land. In Northern Ireland, major planning applications are dealt with
under the Planning (NI) Order 1972, which allows for a public inquiry in
certain circumstances.
Regulations for implementing the European Community directive on
Environmental Assessment came into force in 1988 (1989 in Northern
Ireland). The regulations require that development consent shall not be
given for projects which are likely to have significant effects upon the
environment without first taking into consideration the environmental
statement for the project plus representations from those consulted,
including authorities with environmental responsibilities and the public. The
developer must provide the environmental statement, which should describe
the project and its likely significant effects and, where significant adverse
effects are identified, propose measures to avoid, reduce or remedy those
effects.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946—21 in England, two in Wales, five
in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland—have now largely achieved their
aims of dispersal of industry and population from congested cities and the
stimulation of regional economies. They have a total population of over
2 million; several have become regional centres for shopping and office
accommodation. The new town development corporations’ priorities now
are to maximise private investment in housing and employment, and to
achieve balanced communities able to generate their own growth.
With the completion of the new towns programme, the development
corporations which administered the new towns are being dissolved. The
remaining two corporations in England will be wound up by 1992 and
dissolution of the five Scottish development corporations will begin in 1991.
In Wales responsibility for Newtown rests with the Development Board for
Rural Wales, while the corporation responsible for Cwmbran was dissolved
in 1988.
High standards in new building are encouraged by the Government. The
Department of the Environment, in collaboration with the independent
Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) and the National House-
Building Council, sponsors the biennial Housing Design Awards Scheme for
208
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Urban
Programme
England and Northern Ireland, with categories for renovation as well as new
building. Scotland and Wales have similar award schemes. The Government
also encourages the use of architectural competitions, and has set an
example in the award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art
Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland advise government
departments, planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of
public amenity or artistic importance.
The RIBA, the principal professional body for architects, exercises control
over standards in architectural education and encourages high architectural
standards in the profession. The Royal Incorporation of Architects in
Scotland is allied to it, as is the Royal Society of Ulster Architects.
The Government advises local planning authorities not to impose their
architectural tastes on developers. The Government’s view is that only
exceptionally should local planning authorities control design details, if the
sensitive character of the area or the particular building justifies it, and that
the pursuit of the highest architectural standards should not be deflected by
debate about style.
Urban Regeneration
Revitalising the run-down inner areas of towns and cities is a government
priority. Much has been achieved already, but problems remain, including a
lack of private investment in local economies, high unemployment, physical
dereliction and decay. Inner city populations often have a high proportion of
the disadvantaged and the elderly.
The ‘Action for Cities’ initiative, a comprehensive package of measures for
urban revival, was launched in 1988. The economic recovery of inner city
areas is being encouraged by the promotion of enterprise and new business.
Job prospects are being improved, the environment is being enhanced and
inner city areas are being made safer and more attractive places in which to
live and work. The initiative involves government departments in a co¬
ordinated effort, the main contributing programmes being those of the
Department of the Environment, the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Department of Employment. However, other departments are also
making important contributions, and a major aspect is effective co-operation
between central and local government, private business and voluntary
organisations. The Government is planning to spend more than £4,000
million in the inner cities in 1990—91 (some 20 per cent more than in
1989—90), spread across a range of programmes.
Urban problems in Scotland and Northern Ireland are being tackled by
Partnerships in Scotland and Action Teams in Northern Ireland, as well as
by many other government programmes (see pp 209—12).
The Urban Programme was the first major public spending programme
directed solely at the inner cities. It is a special allocation to selected local
authorities in addition to their normal resources, concentrated on 57 target
areas where the problems are greatest and the levels of deprivation most
severe, in order to achieve a greater impact with available funds (see map,
pp 210-11). The local authorities concerned receive grant at 75 per cent
from central government in support of approved projects. The programme
provides grant to some 10,000 projects at any one time and is directed at
economic, social, environmental and housing problems. Priority is given to
capital projects which strengthen and revive the local economy and foster
enterprise, though projects which improve the physical and social en¬
vironment remain important.
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
209
City Action
Teams
Task Forces
Urban
Development
Corporations
City Grant
In 1989-90 the Urban Programme supported more than 500 new firms
and helped to create or preserve 45,000 jobs. It improved over 2,000
buildings and around 1,700 hectares (4,250 acres) of unsightly land. It also
supported environmental improvement schemes for over 78,000 council
homes and about 60,000 inner city training places. The Government has
initially allocated £258 million for spending on the Urban Programme in
1990—91, up £13 million on the previous year.
Eight ‘City Action Teams’ have been established to co-ordinate the range of
government programmes for tackling inner city problems. These teams
bring together the regional officials of the Department of Employment, its
Training Agency, the Department of the Environment and the Department
of Trade and Industry to ensure that their main programmes are working
together effectively. They act as a central contact point with government for
businesses and community organisations. They have small special budgets
for tackling local inner city problems which relate to unemployment,
enterprise generation and environmental improvement.
‘Task Forces’, first set up in 1986 to intensify and bring together the efforts
of government departments, local government, the private sector and the
local community to regenerate inner cities, are small, locally based teams
working in 16 inner city areas (see map, pp 210-11). Task Forces aim to help
local people by increasing their chances of gaining employment and by
building up local businesses. They also support schemes which improve the
environment or reduce crime where these are linked directly to the creation
of jobs. Since their inception they have committed some £49 million to over
1,700 projects. They are not permanent; an important part of their work is
to build up local organisations to which they can hand over as they withdraw.
Two new Task Forces were announced in February 1990, for Derby and the
Wirral.
Urban Development Corporations have been set up by the Government in
order to reverse large-scale urban decline. The first two were established in
London Docklands and Merseyside in 1981. By the end of March 1990 the
London Docklands Development Corporation had received over £760
million in government grant and secured private investment commitments
of about £7,000 million. It has reclaimed over 300 hectares (741 acres) of
derelict land for housing, commercial and recreational use. Over 13,000
homes have been completed and 30,000jobs have been attracted to the area.
The Merseyside Development Corporation has reclaimed 340 hectares (840
acres) of derelict land, and 270,000 sq m (2-9 million sq ft) of buildings have
been refurbished in its area.
Five new corporations were set up in 1987: Trafford Park (Greater
Manchester), Teesside, Tyne and Wear, Black Country (West Midlands) and
Cardiff Bay. Four more—in Bristol, Leeds, central Manchester and
Sheffield—were set up in 1988-89. Urban Development Corporations cover
about 16,000 hectares (about 40,000 acres), and public expenditure on the
programme will be £542 million in 1990-91.
City Grant was introduced in 1988 to simplify the grants available for
encouraging private sector developments in inner cities; it replaced the
Urban Development Grant and the Urban Regeneration Grant. It is paid
direct to the private sector for projects which contribute to the regeneration
of an urban area. By the end of April 1990, 127 schemes had been approved,
with £104 million of public money bringing in £505 million of private
Invergorden®
Fraserburgh^
Peterhead'
Hawick 9 j
Dumfries •
.Stranraer W
) Londonderry
Northern
Ireland ^
Belfast
NewcastleA# j
Gateshead® ®
Teesside^C
Workington
Yorkshire and
Humberside
East Midlands
West Midlands Derby *®A*A|\iottinghai
Black Country
r* *a'
® Corby has
©Wellingborough
loventry*
Walsall
tolverhai
Sandwell —
Birmingham *
lilford Haven
London
• Bristol*
North-west
Kent
Plymouth
Urban Policy Initiatives
0 20 40 60 80100 120 km
i l \ i i l i
i i i i i
20 40 60 80 miles
Target areas
Enterprise zones
Urban Development
Corporations
City Action Teams
Areas with task forces
Valleys Programme
towns
Boundaries of
economic planning
regions
★
Inverness
Scotland
Tayside
Aberdeen
(§) Arbroat
Dundee %
Perth®
Inset A
Tyneside
Tyne and Wear
— North Tyneside
— South Tyneside
 Sunderland
|j7— Hartlepool *
— Middlesbrough *
 Langbaurgh
> A Cleveland
'— Stockton-on-Tees
South West
nset A
Benarty
Glenrothes
Leven
Denny^
Falkirk* j~ •p0|mont
Kirkintilloch Grangemouth Edinburgh
• Broxburn 0 Musselburgh
Coatbridge Bathgate# 0 ^
Glasgow * •Airdrie • Livingston Dalkeith
Viewpark# Bellshill Whitburn
* ©Cleland
•Wishaw
Prestonpans
Tranent
nset C
Valleys Programme Boundary
—'“■'v'-' 5—> 
1 q . , '"V .—c ■ Ebbw Vale
Pontardawe ^ ■ 1
Aberdare# Merthyr Tydfil I
Hackney
Tower Hamlets *
London Docklands
Tonypandy Pontypool>
cJVIaesteg
Cardiff Bay^-
Hammersmith
and Fulham
K A
Kensington
and
Chelsea*
Wandsworth
Lambeth
Greenwich
Isle of Dogs
Lewisham *
Southwark *
Greater London Boundary
10
30
40 km
J
30
40 km
j
20 25 miles
15 20 25 miles
212
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Enterprise and
Simplified
Planning Zones
Land
Reclamation
and Use
investment. Under these schemes, some 15,700 jobs and 3,100 homes were
being provided and 188 hectares (470 acres) were being reclaimed.
Since 1981 the Government has set up 27 ‘enterprise zones’ (see map,
pp 210-11); each zone runs for a period of ten years from designation. The
aim of this experimental policy is to see how far industrial and commercial
activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain tax burdens and by
relaxing or speeding up the application of a number of administrative
controls. Benefits in the zones include exemption from the uniform business
rate (the local property tax payable by non-domestic property owners); 100
per cent allowances for corporation and income tax purposes for capital
expenditure on industrial and commercial buildings; a much simplified
planning system in which many forms of development are automatically
permitted; and a reduction in government requests for statistical
information. A recent study showed that, by December 1987, 97,600 jobs
were established in enterprise zones. The Government has decided not to
extend the scheme generally, although its view is that in exceptional
circumstances the creation of a new zone might be the best way of tackling a
particular local problem. The early zones are reaching the end of their life;
research has been commissioned to identify the circumstances in which the
benefits available in enterprise zones are most effective.
The Housing and Planning Act 1986 provided for the establishment of
‘simplified planning zones’, intended to stimulate regeneration by removing
the uncertainty from the planning system. They use a simplified planning
framework already in use in enterprise zones, under which advance plan¬
ning permission is given for specified types of development within a zone
without payment of a fee. A simplified planning zone scheme lasts for ten
years.
The 1988 Derelict Land Survey found that there was just under 40,500
hectares (100,000 acres) of derelict land in England, 11 per cent less than in
1982. Although much land had been reclaimed, substantial areas had
become derelict during this period. Derelict land is often concentrated in
places associated with nineteenth-century industrial development, but the
continuing restructuring of particular industries has added significantly to
this problem in certain areas.
In England government grants are available to local authorities and to
other public bodies, to the private sector and to nationalised industries for
the reclamation of such land in order to bring it into beneficial use or to
improve its appearance. In 1990—91 the funding available for derelict land
reclamation in England will be about £72 million, of which some £21 million
will be spent on derelict land reclamation in the inner cities. Between 1 April
1979 and 31 March 1989 some 13,000 hectares (over 32,000 acres) of
derelict land were reclaimed in England with the aid of some £523 million
of grant. The 1990—91 programme should allow an additional 1,265
hectares (some 3,125 acres) to be reclaimed. In September 1989 the
Government announced proposals to alter policy objectives so as to identify
sites for development and environmental improvement; to encourage more
local authorities to set up their own derelict land programmes; to give more
financial incentives to voluntary groups to carry out more environmental
restoration work; and to promote nature conservation and the creation of
wildlife habitats on suitably reclaimed derelict sites.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests
with the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim
land, employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
213
Registers of
Unused and
Under-used
Land
Education,
Training and
Employment
Other Measures
local authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In 1988 the pilot Scottish Vacant
Land Survey identified 7,400 hectares (18,280 acres) of derelict land and a
further 5,060 hectares (12,500 acres) of vacant urban land. Together with
surveys in subsequent years, it will provide a basis for programming the
treatment of derelict land and help to bring vacant urban land into use. In
Northern Ireland grants may be paid to landowners who restore or improve
derelict sites.
In Wales land use is also encouraged by the Land Authority for Wales, a
statutory body with powers to make land available for development in
circumstances where the private sector would find this difficult or im¬
possible.
In England the Government has instituted registers of unused and under¬
used land held by local authorities, nationalised industries and other public
bodies. The Secretary of State for the Environment has powers to direct a
public body to dispose of registered land. Directions in respect of 79 sites had
been issued by the end of March 1989; a total area of 33,000 hectares (about
82,400 acres) was still listed on the registers. Under the ‘public request to
order disposal’ scheme, the public is encouraged to request such directions.
Owners, who have the primary responsibility for managing their own land,
were asked in 1989 to draw up their own registers. These have been available
to the public since October 1989. Registers are also published for certain
areas of Wales.
The first of a network of 20 City Technology Colleges was opened near
Birmingham in 1988; seven are currently in operation. Another seven have
been approved by the Secretary of State for Education and Science to open
in September 1991. Intended to raise educational standards, the colleges are
funded jointly by the Government and industry.
A number of schools /industry ‘Compacts’ have been introduced in
deprived urban areas since August 1988. Groups of employers work with
schools to guarantee a job with training for all school-leavers aged 16 to 18
who meet agreed targets for motivation and achievement. By August 1990
there were 38 Compacts operational and another ten in development, with
almost 55,000 young people, more than 5,000 employers and over 300
schools involved. Compacts will operate in all inner city target areas by the
end of 1990.
Employment and training programmes, such as jobclubs to help the un¬
employed back into work, Youth Training for young people aged 16 and 17,
and Employment Training, aimed particularly at adults unemployed for
more than six months, are helping many people in the inner cities. In mid-
1990, there were 500 inner city jobclubs, one-third of young people from the
inner cities were participating in Youth Training and nearly 50 per cent of
unemployed inner city residents had joined Employment Training. A total
of 55,000 people were helped by jobclubs in 1988-89. Between March 1988
(when the Action for Cities initiative was launched) and February 1990,
unemployment in the inner cities fell by one-third and long-term un¬
employment by 40 per cent.
Higher than average crime rates, and the fear of crime, are particular
problems in the inner cities. Safer Cities projects bring together all sections
of the local community to tackle crime-related problems. The starting point
for a project is the preparation of a detailed local crime profile, which a
Home Office project team can then use to draw up an action plan. Examples
of help include improving street lighting and fitting good quality locks to
214
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
Wales
Scotland
houses on estates with a high burglary rate. A total of 16 Safer Cities projects
are under way, supporting 220 local crime prevention initiatives with the
help of grants worth £1-6 million. Four more projects will be established.
The Government encourages tourism as a force for the improvement of
inner city areas, and several major projects which create a cultural and
artistic focus for inner city regeneration have been undertaken: for example,
the Tate Gallery of the North at the Albert Dock in Liverpool and the Design
Museum in London’s Docklands. In 1990 the ‘Vision for Cities’ initiative was
launched to help businesses in the inner cities to focus on the investment
opportunities which tourism brings.
There has been major investment in road schemes of benefit to inner city
areas. One example, announced in February 1990, is the Bristol Spine Road,
which will cost £55 million. This will be funded jointly by the Department of
Transport and the Department of the Environment; however, developers
who would benefit would also be expected to contribute.
The Government’s priorities for inner city housing are to secure a wide
range of good quality housing available for rent or purchase, and to improve
conditions and opportunities for residents, particularly on local authority
estates (see p 220).
The Government commissions research aimed at improving policies for
regenerating inner cities and returning derelict land to productive use; 16
new research projects are being launched in 1990—91. The programme has
a budget of £725,000. Priority themes for research are to assess the impact
of urban policy measures upon the urban economy, environment and
community; to increase understanding of changing urban conditions; to
distil and disseminate examples of good practice in urban regeneration
projects; to find ways of strengthening the capacity and role of the private
and voluntary sectors; and to study emerging policy issues.
Spending on the Urban Programme in Wales is expected to be £37-2 million
in 1990-91, with priority being given to the ten most deprived urban areas.
Urban Investment Grant was introduced in April 1989 to simplify the grants
available to support private sector projects, replacing Urban Development
Grant and Urban Regeneration Grant.
The Programme for the Valleys, launched in 1988, is the most extensive
programme of economic and urban regeneration undertaken in Wales, and
covers an area of some 2,200 sq km (860 sq miles) in the south Wales valleys
(see map, p211). It involves increased levels of factory building, land
clearance and Urban Programme support, as well as action to stimulate
private enterprise; improve health care and educational services; support
private housing improvements; and strengthen tourism, the arts and
voluntary organisations.
The Cardiff Bay Development Corporation was set up in 1987 to bring
forward redevelopment in an area of south Cardiff which was once the
commercial centre of the city. By the end of March 1990 the Corporation
had received some £59 million in government grant. Government support
for the Corporation in 1990-91 will be almost £32 million; it will receive
some £100 million over three years. The Corporation’s regeneration strategy
includes proposals for the construction of a barrage across Cardiff harbour
mouth, which would create a large freshwater lake and 12 km (7 miles) of
waterside frontage. It is expected that over 30,000 new jobs will be created
and that over £1,200 million of private investment will be attracted.
The main principle behind the Government’s 1988 White Paper on ur¬
ban regeneration in Scotland is to encourage residents to take more
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
215
Northern
Ireland
Administration
responsibility for the improvement and the revitalisation of their own
communities. The focus of this process is the establishment of four
Partnerships in peripheral estates in Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow and
Paisley. Led by the Scottish Office and involving various public bodies, the
private sector and the local community, they aim to improve local housing;
to increase employment prospects by providing access to training and
education; and to tackle social and environmental problems on the estates.
Other similar estates and inner city areas continue to receive substantial
government support. The Government and its agencies will spend some
£450 million in urban Scotland in 1990-91, including £69 million (compared
with £44 million in 1988-89) on the Urban Programme in Scotland. The
Scottish Development Agency operates a Local Enterprise Grants for Urban
Projects scheme to encourage private sector investment in deprived areas.
Much run-down housing has been restored by community-based housing
associations and tenant ownership co-operatives. Scottish Homes (see p 219)
promotes the continued growth of such bodies alongside home ownership
initiatives.
In Belfast, a comprehensive development programme aims to revitalise the
commercial areas of the inner city. In 1990-91 regeneration programmes
have a combined allocation of over £28 million. Eight Action Teams have
been established to tackle the problems of particularly deprived areas of the
city. The ‘Making Belfast Work’ initiative, launched in 1988 to stimulate
greater economic activity and improve the quality of the environment in the
most disadvantaged areas, was extended in 1989 for a further three years,
with an additional allocation of £15 million for 1989-90 and £45 million for
the subsequent two years.
A £65 million development project for Londonderry was announced in
late 1989. This will include a large investment from United States de¬
velopers; an initiative launched in 1987 to foster investment links between
Londonderry and Boston, Massachusetts, was instrumental in obtaining this.
Housing
The pattern of housing tenure has changed considerably in recent years,
with a substantial increase in owner-occupation and a decline in the private
rented sector. Between the end of 1971 and 1989, the proportion of owner-
occupied dwellings in Great Britain rose from about 50 per cent to 65 per
cent. The promotion of home ownership and more choice in the rented
sector are central to government housing policy. New house construction is
undertaken by both public and private sectors, but the majority of dwellings
are now built by the private sector for sale to owner-occupiers. Housing
associations are becoming the main providers of additional housing in the
subsidised rented sector, while local authorities are being encouraged to see
their housing role as more of an enabling one, working with housing
associations and the private sector to increase the supply of low-cost housing
for rent without necessarily providing the housing themselves. In order to
stimulate the private rented sector, which has declined to less than 10 per
cent of the total stock, the Housing Act 1988 deregulated rents on new
private sector lettings.
The Secretary of State for the Environment in England and the Secretaries
of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are responsible for
formulating housing policy and supervising the housing programme.
Although the policies are broadly similar throughout Britain, provisions in
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
Public Sector
Housing
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland and Scotland differ somewhat from those in England and
Wales.
The construction or structural alteration of housing is subject to building
regulations laid down by the Government. Nearly all house construction in
the private sector has been regulated by an independent organisation, the
National House-Building Council. The Council sets standards and enforces
them by inspection and certification, and provides a ten-year guarantee
against major structural defects. In 1989 the Housing Standards Co Ltd
began operating a similar service.
The proportion of people owning their own homes has risen from 29 per
cent to 66 per cent in the last 40 years, and the number of owner-occupied
dwellings in Great Britain amounted to some 15 million at the end of 1989,
compared with 4 million in 1950. Most public sector tenants have the right to
buy the homes they occupy at discounts which vary according to the length
of their occupancy. Local authorities have been asked to encourage low-cost
home ownership in a variety of ways, for example, by selling land to builders
to construct homes for first-time buyers, or to individuals or groups to build
their own homes in partnership with private builders. Changes in mobility
have put pressure on rural housing in many areas. In 1989 the Department
of the Environment announced that, where local planning authorities in
England were satisfied that there was a need for low-cost housing in rural
areas, sites which would not normally be released for housing development
could exceptionally be released, provided arrangements were made to
reserve the housing for local needs. In Scotland, Scottish Homes is
developing a rural housing strategy. In Northern Ireland shared ownership
has been developed by the Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing
Association.
Most people buy their homes with a mortgage loan, with the property as
security. Building societies are the largest source of such loans, although
banks and other financial institutions also take a significant share of the
mortgage market, while some companies also make loans for house purchase
to their own employees.
The amount that lenders are prepared to advance to a would-be house
purchaser is generally calculated as a multiple of his or her annual income,
typically up to three times earnings, and the term of the loan is commonly 25
years. The two major forms of mortgage are ‘repayment’ and ‘endowment’
mortgages. In the former, the borrower repays principal and interest on the
sum outstanding. In the latter, he or she pays only interest to the lender but
also puts money into an endowment policy, which on maturity provides a
lump sum to repay the principal. Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief
on interest payments arising from their mortgage loans on up to £30,000 on
their main home only.
Most of the public housing in Great Britain is provided by 460 local housing
authorities. The authorities are: in England and Wales, apart from London,
the district councils; in London, the London borough councils and the
Common Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district and
islands councils. Public housing is also provided by the new town authorities,
Scottish Homes (which has a stock of some 75,000 houses) and the
Development Board for Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland Housing
Executive is responsible for the provision and management of public
housing in Northern Ireland. Public housing authorities own about 6 million
houses and flats; the Northern Ireland Housing Executive owns over
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
217
170,000 homes. A number of local authorities have transferred their stock to
housing associations, and others are considering doing so.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market, by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board (an independent statutory
body set up to make loans to local authorities) or from the capital receipts
from the sale of local authority houses and housing land. They receive
revenue subsidies to meet part of the difference between their costs,
including debt charges and maintenance, and the rents charged. The
Northern Ireland Housing Executive is similarly financed.
Sheltered housing (usually accommodation with an alarm system and
resident warden) is provided for those elderly people who need this degree
of support. However, increasing emphasis is being placed on schemes to
help elderly people to continue to live in their own homes and on schemes to
adapt existing housing to meet the needs of physically handicapped
people.
Local authorities have a statutory duty under the Housing Act 1985 to
ensure that accommodation is provided for people who are unintentionally
homeless and who have dependent children or who are vulnerable on such
grounds as age or disability. In November 1989 the conclusions of a review
of the homelessness legislation were announced. The legislation itself will
remain unchanged but local authorities will be given improved guidance on
how best to discharge their statutory duties towards homeless applicants.
The Department of the Environment is working on an amended code of
guidance which will aim for greater consistency between authorities in
implementing the legislation. The worst problems of homelessness are
concentrated in London and the South East. In order to make an immediate
impact on this problem, an additional £250 million has been made avail¬
able over two years. The primary aim is to move families out of bed-and-
breakfast accommodation by bringing empty local authority dwellings back
into use.
The Housing Act 1980 and subsequent legislation have established a
charter for public sector tenants in England and Wales, giving them
statutory rights which include security of tenure. With a few exceptions,
public sector tenants of at least two years’ standing are entitled to buy their
house or flat at a discount which depends on the length of occupation.
Similar provisions are made for Scotland and Northern Ireland under
separate legislation. In October 1989 Scottish Homes introduced its trial
Rents to Mortgages scheme, under which its tenants and those of the Scottish
New Town Development Corporations may buy their own homes with
payments more or less equivalent to previous rents. By the end of 1989, 1-6
million council, housing association and new town homes had been sold in
Great Britain and 40,000 Housing Executive homes had been sold in
Northern Ireland.
Under the Local Government and Housing Act 1989, which came into
force in April 1990, councils in England and Wales have had their Housing
Revenue Accounts (HRAs) ‘ring-fenced’; funds in the HRA must now be
kept separate and devoted to housing, while other funds cannot be used for
this purpose. This will ensure that the money paid in rents by local authority
tenants is used to run and improve the council stock. A new HRA subsidy has
replaced the old housing subsidy, the rent rebate subsidy and the support
given to housing through the rate support grant. It will total some £3,000
million a year to meet the excess of authorities’ notional outgoings over their
notional rent income.
The Housing Act 1988 and the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988 (see p 219)
218
Privately
Rented
Housing
Housing
Benefit
Housing
Associations
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
enable public sector tenants to change their landlord where they are not
satisfied with the service provided by their local authority.
The Government is committed to making it easier for people who live in
rented housing to move. Three existing mobility bodies have been merged to
form a single organisation, HOMES, to provide a more effective service. The
key aim is to provide mobility between the local authority and housing
association sectors, coupled with the efficient use of the national housing
stock.
There has been a steady decline in the number of rented dwellings available
from private landlords, from over 50 per cent of the housing stock in 1951 to
7 per cent in Great Britain in 1989. Many landlords are individuals owning a
small amount of property, but some rented housing is provided by larger
property companies.
The Government’s policy is to increase the availability of privately rented
accommodation and it is encouraging a greater variety of agencies to let such
accommodation. This is being implemented through the Housing Act 1988
for England and Wales and the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988, which provide
for the deregulation of new private sector lettings and, for council tenants,
the right to choose a new landlord.
The Housing Acts created two forms of tenancy: the assured tenancy,
which gives the tenant long-term security in return for a freely negotiated
market rent; and the assured shorthold tenancy (short assured tenancy in
Scotland), which is for a fixed term, at a rent negotiated between landlord
and tenant. Existing lettings were unaffected by this; they continue on the
old basis. The Acts strengthen the law concerning harassment of tenants,
which is a criminal offence, and provide for improved compensation for
tenants driven out by harassment or illegally evicted. Tenants and most
other residential occupiers may not be evicted without a court order. In
Northern Ireland only certain pre-1956 properties subject to rent restriction
come under statutory control. Rent levels are linked to those of the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive, and both landlords and tenants may apply to a
rent assessment committee for rent determination in cases where the current
rent is considered to be inappropriate. Rent increases are permitted only for
properties which meet a prescribed standard. The only assured tenancies in
Northern Ireland are those on properties made available under a Business
Expansion Scheme; lettings under the shorthold concept are available.
Government support is being focused on tenants rather than on property,
through the housing benefit system. Depending on their personal circum¬
stances, occupiers may qualify for housing benefit to help them pay their
rent.
Housing associations, which are non-profit-making, are now the main
providers of additional low-cost housing for rent and for sale to those on low
incomes and in the greatest housing need. The housing association sector is
expanding rapidly; associations now own and manage over 500,000 homes
and 46,700 hostel bed-spaces in England alone. Many associations specialise
in providing accommodation to meet the special needs of the elderly, the
disabled and the mentally disordered.
People in housing need with insufficient income to obtain a mortgage for
outright purchase may be able to participate in a scheme in which a housing
association buys the home and sells a share in it to them, allowing them to
rent the remainder and to purchase it later if they wish. Housing associations
can also purchase older properties to improve for sale. These activities are
eligible for government grants.
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
219
In Great Britain housing schemes carried out by associations qualify for
Housing Association Grant if the association concerned is one of about 2,800
registered with the Housing Corporation (in England), Scottish Homes or
Housing for Wales. These three organisations are statutory bodies which
supervise and pay grant to housing associations in their respective parts of
Great Britain. Broadly similar assistance is available to associations in
Northern Ireland. Housing for Wales and Scottish Homes were set up in
1989 to carry out the functions formerly undertaken in Wales and Scotland
by the Housing Corporation, which now operates in England only. Scottish
Homes incorporated both the Housing Corporation in Scotland and the
Scottish Special Housing Association. It has a wide range of general
functions and powers, both providing financial assistance to housing
associations and directly owning and managing housing.
The Housing Act 1988 and the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988 established a
new framework for the financing of housing associations. The grant system
was changed to facilitate the maximum use of private sector finance and
thereby increase the number of homes that associations can provide for a
given level of government grant. The grant rates are still set, however, so
that the associations can continue their traditional role of providing housing
for people with lower incomes.
The Government plans to increase the resources distributed to housing
associations through the Housing Corporation over the next three years,
from £938 million in 1989-90 to £1,736 million in 1992-93. The
Government also aims to increase the amount of private finance being used
by housing associations, allowing more homes to be built with the available
public resources than would otherwise be the case. Approved 1990-91
expenditure for Scottish Homes totals £357 million, of which £208 million
will go to housing associations.
In England tenants’ rights are protected under the Tenants’ Guarantee,
which is enforced by the statutory bodies and covers matters such as tenancy
terms, principles for determining rent levels and the allocation of tenancies.
Under the guarantee tenants receive contractual rights in addition to their
basic statutory rights, and associations are required to set and maintain rents
at levels within the reach of people in lower paid employment. In Scotland,
similar non-statutory guidance, in the form of a model tenancy agreement, is
being proposed jointly by Scottish Homes and the Scottish Federation of
Housing Associations.
In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment used to be
major features of housing policy, but there has been a trend in recent years
towards the retention of existing communities, accompanied by the
modernisation and conversion of sub-standard homes. Housing conditions
have improved considerably, but problems remain in some areas where
there are concentrations of dwellings lacking basic amenities or requiring
substantial repairs; and there are still some pockets of unfit housing for
which demolition is the best solution. The emphasis now is on area renewal,
with an integrated approach to renewal and renovation.
In Scotland some groups of tenants are joining together to form
community-based housing associations and tenant ownership co-operatives.
Scottish Homes has been given a major role in tackling housing-related
urban dereliction, in co-operation with local communities, the private sector,
local authorities and other statutory agencies. It intends to use experience
learned in urban settings in formulating the improvement element of its
rural strategy.
220
Estate Action
Programme
Priority Estates
Project
Housing Action
Trusts
Home
Improvement
Grants
Housing Renewal
Areas
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government’s Estate Action Programme helps local authorities in
England and Wales to find new ways of tackling the problems of run-down
council estates. Central to the solutions being developed with local
authorities are local housing management along the lines advocated by the
Priority Estates Project (see below); joint ventures with private developers for
refurbishing neglected and formerly difficult-to-let properties; new ways of
running council estates such as estate management boards or tenant
management co-operatives; and linking local employment and business
enterprise initiatives with improving housing conditions on estates. Estate
Action provides local authorities with additional resources to pay for the
physical improvements which form part of an agreed package of measures.
Each scheme is designed to meet the needs of the individual estate. During
1989-90, approval was given to 160 new schemes and continuing support
was given to 213 schemes, involving expenditure of £90 million. Resources
available for 1990-91 amount to £180 million.
The Priority Estates Project (PEP) promotes locally based housing
management, under which control of landlords’ services is devolved to a
local team with maximum involvement and consultation of residents. There
are 11 projects on estates in England and Wales, and many more local
authorities are now applying local management to their own estates.
The Housing Act 1988 provides for the establishment in England and Wales
of Housing Action Trusts to focus resources on some of the most run-down
areas of predominantly local authority housing. Tenants vote on whether a
Housing Action Trust should be set up for their area. If the majority of
tenants who vote support the proposal, the trust takes over responsibility for
local authority housing in designated areas in order to renovate it, improve
the environment, provide community facilities and stimulate local
enterprise. When it has completed its work, the trust passes the housing on
to other owners and managers, such as housing associations or tenants’ co¬
operatives, or back to the local housing authority. All new landlords must be
approved by the Housing Corporation.
About 1-6 million home improvement grants were paid in respect of
privately owned dwellings in Great Britain between 1980 and 1988. Under
the Local Government and Housing Act 1989, a single system of renovation
grants was introduced in England and Wales in July 1990 to help private
owners and some tenants with the costs of essential repair and improvement
work. A mandatory grant enables dwellings to be brought up to a new and
more effective fitness standard, with discretionary grant available for a wider
range of works. Grants of up to 100 per cent may be available, subject to a
test of the occupants’ resources. Grants are also available in certain
circumstances for the provision of facilities for the disabled and for the
repair of houses in multiple occupation and of the common parts of blocks of
flats. Minor works assistance is also available to help people in receipt of
income-related benefits with small-scale jobs. In Scotland, Scottish Homes
has the power to provide improvement and repair grants to complement the
role of local authorities in private house renewal.
‘Housing renewal areas’ were introduced for England and Wales in the Local
Government and Housing Act 1989 with effect from April 1990. Renewal
areas are intended to provide a sharper focus to area action, covering both
renovation and selective redevelopment and taking account of a wider range
of issues than just housing. Authorities are free to declare renewal areas
PLANNING, URBAN REGENERATION AND HOUSING
221
without the specific consent of the Secretaries of State for the Environment
and for Wales, provided they fulfil certain criteria. Authorities have
additional powers to acquire land in renewal areas and to carry out
improvement works for which additional government support is available.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for the improvement
of areas in which at least half the houses fail to meet a statutory tolerable
standard. Since 1975, 1,780 housing action areas have been declared.
Outside such areas in Scotland local authorities have powers to apply
improvement orders to houses below the statutory tolerable standard or
lacking certain basic amenities. Government financial aid is also given
towards the costs incurred by local authorities in improving the environment
of predominantly residential areas.
Northern Ireland has a large number of houses which are either unfit or
in serious disrepair. Since 1977, 52 housing action areas have been declared,
involving a continuous programme of rehabilitation, ‘enveloping’ (renova¬
tion of the external fabric of whole terraces that have deteriorated beyond
routine repair) and associated environmental improvement schemes. In addi¬
tion, the Northern Ireland Housing Executive undertakes a programme of
improvement of its own stock.
9 Environmental
Protection
For more than a century Britain has been evolving policies to protect the
environment against pollution from industry and other sources. Legislation
to control air and water pollution; to conserve wildlife, landscape, historic
monuments and buildings; and to plan land use was introduced at an early
stage. It has been revised regularly to meet changing circumstances.
Recently, with increasing scientific understanding of the global implications
of pollution caused by modern development, the Government has been
considering how its own policies and actions can be further guided by the
principle of ‘sustainable development’, called for in the report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development in 1987.
Britain supports international co-operation on matters of environmental
protection. The Government is making considerable investment in en¬
vironmental research to gain a proper understanding of the science of
environmental issues before taking action. Britain is active in the scientific
assessment of climate change for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, which was set up jointly by the United Nations Environment
Programme and the World Meteorological Organisation.
Increasingly, much of Britain’s law on pollution control is being developed
in co-operation with other member states of the European Community and
organisations such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and the United Nations and its agencies. The laws protecting
the environment are being further strengthened by the Environmental
Protection Bill, which would provide added safeguards for the natural
environment. The Government published a White Paper on the environ¬
ment in September 1990. The paper, entitled This Common Inheritance, points
the way towards Britain’s future policy on the environment.
The Department of the Environment is responsible for countryside policy
and environmental protection in England; the Welsh Office, the Scottish
Development Department and the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland have broadly equivalent responsibilities. There is also a
strong conservation movement in Britain. A wide range of voluntary
organisations are actively involved in environmental conservation and
protection.
Conservation
Historic
Buildings,
Ancient
Monuments and
Conservation
Areas
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historical interest are compiled
by the Secretary of State for the Environment and the Secretaries of State for
Scotland and Wales. Some 435,000 buildings are listed in England, some
36,000 in Scotland and 13,000 in Wales. It is against the law to demolish,
extend or alter the character of any listed building without special consent
from the local planning authority or the appropriate Secretary of State.
224
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the local plan¬
ning authority to protect buildings not yet listed. Ancient monuments are
similarly protected through a system of scheduling. There are 13,000
scheduled ancient monuments in England, about 5,000 in Scotland and over
2,600 in Wales.
Maintaining royal parks (which are open to the public) and palaces is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for the Environment and Scotland.
English Heritage (the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for
England) is charged with protecting and conserving England’s architectural
and archaeological heritage. It manages some 400 ancient monuments
on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Environment and gives grants for
the repair of ancient monuments, historic buildings and buildings in
conservation areas in England. In Scotland and Wales similar functions are
performed by Historic Buildings and Monuments, Scotland, which cares for
over 330 monuments; and by Cadw: Welsh Historic Monuments, which
manages 125, with advice from an ancient monuments board and a historic
buildings council for each country. Local authorities can make grants and
loans for any building of architectural or historic interest.
The National Heritage Memorial Fund provides assistance towards the
cost of acquiring, maintaining or preserving land, buildings, works of art and
other items of outstanding interest which are also of importance to the
national heritage. In 1989-90 the Fund assisted in the preservation of 69
heritage items.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection about
6,300 ‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest in
England; there are 362 in Wales and some 540 in Scotland. Grants and loans
are available from the appropriate historic buildings and monuments body
for works which make a significant contribution towards the preservation or
improvement of such an area.
The Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland has 165 his¬
toric monuments in its care, and some 1,000 monuments are scheduled for
protection. It is also responsible for designating conservation areas; there are
about 7,500 listed buildings and 26 conservation areas. It may also provide
grants and loans to help with the repair and maintenance of listed buildings
and to preserve or enhance conservation areas. It is advised by a Historic
Buildings Council and a Historic Monuments Council.
The Government also supports the work of the voluntary sector in the
protection of Britain’s heritage. The Department of the Environment made
grants totalling £341,000 to 16 such organisations in 1989-90. Among the
voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of buildings
are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, the Ancient Monu¬
ments Society; the Georgian Group; the Architectural Heritage Society of
Scotland; the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; the Victorian Society;
and the Council for British Archaeology. An independent charity, the
National Trust (for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty) owns and
protects about 300 properties open to the public, in addition to nearly
228,000 hectares (564,000 acres) of land. Scotland has its own National
Trust.
The Civic Trust, with associate trusts in Wales and north-east England,
makes annual awards for development and restoration work which enhances
its surroundings. It undertakes urban regeneration projects and acts as an
‘umbrella’ organisation for 1,000 local amenity societies. The Scottish Civic
Trust fulfils a parallel role in Scotland. The Architectural Heritage Fund
provides short-term loan capital to help preservation trusts preserve and
rehabilitate old buildings.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
225
Tree
Preservation
and Planting
Green Belts
The Coast
Countryside
Commission and
Countryside
Commission for
Scotland
Local planning authorities have powers to protect trees and woodlands in the
interests of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. It is in general an
offence to fell, damage or destroy a protected tree and the courts can impose
substantial fines. Where protected trees are felled in contravention of an order
or are removed because they are dying, dead or dangerous, a replacement tree
is required.
The Government encourages a wide range of amenity and commercial tree
planting through a system of grants. In October 1987 an estimated 15 million
trees in the south and east of England were destroyed by hurricane-force winds.
To help replace amenity trees the Government has allocated over £15 million in
the period to 1992-93, most of which is being distributed through Task Force
Trees, a special unit of the Countryside Commission. Further losses, estimated
at 4 million trees, were caused by storms early in 1990, and a new package of
aid for replacement planting was announced in March 1990.
‘Green Belts’ are areas where it is intended that land should be left open and
free from inappropriate building development, and where people can seek
recreation. They have been established around some major cities, including
London, Merseyside, Greater Manchester and the West Midlands. They are
intended to restrict the sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent neighbouring
towns merging, to preserve the special character of historic towns and to assist
in urban regeneration. Some 1-5 million hectares (3-8 million acres) are
designated as Green Belt in England, equivalent to 12 per cent of the land area.
The Government attaches great importance to the protection of Green Belts
and expects local planning authorities to do likewise when considering
applications for planning permission.
Local planning authorities along the coastline are responsible for planning land
use at the coast; they also attempt to safeguard and enhance the coast’s natural
attractions and preserve areas of scientific interest. The protection of the
coastline against erosion is administered centrally by the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office.
Certain stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty in England
and Wales are treated as heritage coast; jointly with local authorities, the
Countryside Commission has defined 41 coasts, protecting 1,400 km (870
miles).
The National Trust, with its Enterprise Neptune campaign, raises funds for
the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £13 million has been raised so far and the Trust
now protects 826 km (514 miles) of coastline in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and is working to acquire a further 630 km (390 miles) considered at
risk. The National Trust for Scotland owns large parts of the Scottish coastline
and protects others through conservation agreements.
Exceptionally, economic arguments may outweigh other interests. Coastal
planning guidelines drawn up by the Scottish Development Department aim to
ensure that oil-related activities and other major developments are sited to
make the best use of existing labour and infrastructure and to minimise the
effect on remote and unspoilt coastlines. Provision has also been made for
funds to be set aside for restoration of sites once there is no further need of
them.
Countryside Commissions (for England and Wales, and for Scotland) are
responsible for conserving and enhancing the natural beauty and amenity of
the countryside. They encourage the provision and improvement of facilities
for open-air recreation. These arrangements would be altered by the Environ¬
mental Protection Bill (see p 230). Activities include the provision by local
226
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
authorities (sometimes in association with other bodies) and private
individuals of country parks and picnic sites often within easy reach of towns,
the provision or improvement of recreational paths and the encouragement
of amenity tree-planting schemes. The Countryside Commission recognises
235 country parks and 267 picnic sites in England and Wales. In Scotland 35
country parks are recognised and a large number of local authority and
private sector schemes for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities
have been approved for grant aid. The Commissions undertake research
projects and experimental schemes, working in consultation with local
authorities and bodies such as the Nature Conservancy Council (see p 227)
and the Sports Councils. The Commissions give financial assistance to
public, private and voluntary bodies, and individuals carrying out
countryside recreation and amenity projects and landscape conservation
projects. Total funding for the Commissions in 1990-91 is over £25 million
for England and Wales and over £6 million for Scotland.
National Parks,
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
and National
Scenic Areas
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the Secretaries of State for the Environment
and for Wales, national parks and ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’
(AONBs) and to define heritage coasts in conjunction with local authorities.
It can also make proposals for the creation of long-distance footpaths and
bridleways.
Ten National Parks cover 13,600 sq km (5,250 sq miles) of England and
Wales, 9 per cent of total land area. Their first aim is to provide protection
for the outstanding countryside they contain; their second aim is to provide
opportunities for access and outdoor recreation. The parks are ‘national’ in
the sense that they are of value to the nation as a whole. However, they are
not nationally owned and most of the land remains in private hands. Special
national park authorities have been set up, funded by central and local
government. These act as the development control authority for their areas,
negotiate public access and land management agreements, encourage
farmers to manage their land in the traditional way, plant trees, set up
information centres, look after footpaths and employ rangers. In 1989, a
further special authority was set up to look after the Norfolk and Suffolk
Broads, even though technically this area does not have national park
status.
Some 38 AONBs have been designated, covering around 19,300 sq km
(7,450 sq miles) of England and Wales, equivalent to 13 per cent of total land
area. They comprise parts of the countryside which lack extensive areas of
open country suitable for recreation and hence national park status, but have
an important landscape quality. There are no special administrative
arrangements for AONBs, but local authorities are encouraged to give them
attention in their planning and countryside conservation work.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Nature Conservation and the
Countryside advises the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland on the preservation of amenities and the designation of areas of
outstanding natural beauty. Nine such areas have been designated, covering
282,000 hectares (698,000 acres), and seven areas are being managed as
country parks and one as a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are three
regional parks and 40 ‘national scenic areas’, covering more than 1 million
hectares (2-5 million acres), or 13 per cent of the country, where certain
kinds of development are subject to consultation with the Countryside
Commission for Scotland, and in the event of a disagreement, with the
Secretary of State for Scotland. More than 98 per cent of the land in Scotland
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
227
Public Rights
of Way and
Open Country
Nature
Conservation
is designated countryside within which the Commission may provide grants
for a wide range of countryside projects.
There are 11 forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 244,000
hectares (603,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission.
There are nine in Northern Ireland, where they are administered by the
Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture.
Many voluntary organisations are concerned to preserve the amenities of
the countryside. These include the Councils for the Protection of Rural
England and of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural
Scotland and the Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are responsible for keeping public
rights of way signposted and free from obstruction. Public paths are
maintained by local authorities, which also supervise landowners’ duties to
repair stiles and gates. In Scotland, planning authorities are responsible for
asserting and protecting rights of way. Local authorities in Great Britain can
create paths, close paths no longer needed for public use and divert paths to
meet the needs of either the public or landowners. In England and Wales
there are some 225,000 km (140,000 miles) of rights of way. There are ten
approved national trails in England and Wales, covering some 2,800 km
(1,740 miles), and three approved long-distance routes in Scotland, covering
some 580 km (360 miles).
There is no automatic right of public access to open country , although
many landowners allow it more or less freely. Local planning authorities can
secure access by means of agreements with landowners. If agreements
cannot be reached, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public
access. Similar powers cover Scotland and Northern Ireland; in Northern
Ireland the primary responsibility lies with district councils.
Common land, much of which is open to the public, totals an estimated
600,000 hectares (1-5 million acres) in England and Wales (there is no
common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland). This land is usually privately
owned, but people other than the owner may have various rights over it, for
example, as pasture land. Commons are protected by law and cannot be built
on or enclosed without consent of the Secretaries of State for the
Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Nature Conservancy Council (NCC). It has the functions of establishing,
maintaining and managing nature reserves; advising the Government,
providing general information and advice, giving grants and supporting
research. Under the Environmental Protection Bill, the NCC would be split
into three bodies, one each for England, Wales and Scotland. From 1 April
1991 the Welsh body, to be known as the Countryside Council for Wales,
would be formed by merging the functions of the NCC and Countryside
Commission in Wales. The Scottish successor body would merge with the
Countryside Commission for Scotland from April 1992 to form a new
agency, to be known as Scottish Natural Heritage. There would be a joint
committee comprising representatives from the three bodies and from
Northern Ireland, together with eminent scientists, to advise ministers on
matters of national and international importance to nature conservation.
There are 234 national nature reserves covering some 166,000 hectares
(410,000 acres). The first statutory marine reserve, the island of Lundy, off
the Devon coast, was designated in 1986 on the advice of the NCC, and more
are proposed. Some 5,000 sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) have been
notified for their plants, animals or geological or physiographical features.
228
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Forestry Commission has 344 SSSIs on its land—covering 70,000
hectares (173,000 acres)—on which nature conservation is a primary
objective. Local authorities have declared about 150 local nature reserves.
County nature conservation trusts and the Royal Society for the Protection
of Birds play an important part in protecting wildlife, having established
between them some 1,800 reserves. The county trusts are affiliated to a
parent organisation, the Royal Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds is the largest voluntary wildlife conser¬
vation body in Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Nature Conservation and the
Countryside advises the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland on nature conservation matters, including the establishment and
management of land and marine nature reserves and the declaration of
areas of special scientific interest. Some 45 national nature reserves have
been established and 24 areas of special scientific interest declared.
Wildlife in Britain is protected largely by the Wildlife and Countryside Act
1981. This extended the list of protected species, restricted the introduction
into the countryside of animals not normally found in the wild, and afforded
greater protection for SSSIs and other important habitats. The Act also
makes provision for reviews of the list of protected species to be conducted
by the NCC every five years and submitted to the Secretary of State for the
Environment. The first review, submitted in 1986, led to 69 species of animal
and 31 species of plant being added to the list. In Northern Ireland two
Orders, which came into force in 1985, have brought legislation into line
with the rest of Britain on species and habitat protection.
Britain plays a full part in international action to conserve wildlife.
Conservation measures promoted by the Government have included a ban
(in conjunction with other European Community countries) on the import of
whale products and harp and hooded seal pup skins, and stricter controls for
the protection of wild birds. In conjunction with the other countries of the
North Sea Conference (see p 232), Britain agreed in March 1990 to take
action to protect and conserve dolphins and porpoises. In view of the serious
decline in the African elephant population, the Government supported the
transfer of the African elephant to Appendix I of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which
resulted in a ban on commercial trade in ivory. The Government, however,
exempted Hong Kong from the ban for six months to allow traders properly
to dispose of existing legally acquired stocks and to enable ivory carvers to
find alternative employment. This exemption expired in July 1990.
Environmental The Government assists local voluntary organisations to promote projects
Improvement such as creating parks, footpaths and other areas of greenery in cities,
Schemes conserving the industrial heritage and the natural environment, and
recycling waste. The Department of the Environment makes grants through
the Urban Programme and the Special Grants Programme to support
projects with either direct or indirect environmental gains. Spending from
the former on such projects exceeded £3 million in 1989—90; grants from the
latter totalled almost £11 million. In addition to advising on the
Government’s programme of Environmentally Sensitive Areas, a voluntary
scheme under which farmers are offered payments for agreeing to farm
along environmentally beneficial lines, the Countryside Commission, acting
on behalf of the Department of the Environment, provides incentives for
farmers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food set-aside scheme,
under which farmers are compensated for agreeing to take land out of
production. The Scottish Development Department made £208,000
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
229
World
Heritage
Sites
Administration
available in 1989-90 to environmental organisations under its Special Grants
(Environmental) Programme. The Secretary of State for Scotland has set up
the Central Scotland Woodlands Company, which aims to improve the
environment in the Scottish central belt through careful tree planting.
The Groundwork Foundation, a partnership of public bodies, the private
sector, voluntary organisations and individuals, aims to tackle environmental
problems arising from dereliction and vandalism and to increase public
awareness of the opportunities to change and improve local environments.
Britain is fully represented in the World Heritage List, which was established
under the World Heritage Convention to identify and secure lasting
protection for those parts of the world heritage of outstanding universal
value. So far 13 sites in Britain have been listed: Canterbury Cathedral,
together with St Augustine’s Abbey and St Martin’s Church; Durham
Cathedral and Castle; Studley Royal Gardens and Fountains Abbey, both in
North Yorkshire; Ironbridge Gorge, with its iron bridge and museum of
industrial archaeology, in Shropshire; the prehistoric stone circles of
Stonehenge and Avebury in Wiltshire; Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire; the
City of Bath; Hadrian’s Wall; the Tower of London and the Palace of
Westminster with Westminster Abbey and St Margaret’s in London; the
islands of St Kilda in Scotland, with their historical and archaeological
records of life in a primitive community; the castles and town walls of King
Edward I in Gwynedd in Wales; and the Giant’s Causeway and Causeway
Coast, formed of columnar basalt, a lava which has cooled into hexagonal
pillars, in Northern Ireland.
Control of Pollution
I he Control of Pollution Act 1974 is being supplemented by the
Environmental Protection Bill. The 1974 Act, which applies to Great Britain,
sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local authorities, including
control over waste, air pollution and noise. It also contains important
provisions on the release of information to the public on environmental
conditions. It introduced a new system for the comprehensive planning of
waste disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is carried out to
satisfactory standards. Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland. These
provisions are being developed and tightened by the Environmental
Protection Bill, which would introduce important new powers for the control
of pollution.
Executive responsibility for pollution control is divided between local
authorities and central government agencies. Local authorities are
responsible for matters such as collection and disposal of domestic wastes;
control of air pollution from domestic and many industrial premises; and
noise abatement measures. Under the Water Act 1989 a new body, the
National Rivers Authority (NRA), has taken over responsibility for the
control of water pollution in England and Wales; in Scotland, the river
purification authorities have statutory responsibility for water pollution
control. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Pollution has an important role in the
control of air pollution from some industrial processes, and of radioactive
and hazardous waste. Under the Environmental Protection Bill, this would
be expanded through the mechanism of ‘integrated pollution control’ (see
p 230).
An independent standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
advises the Government on national and international matters concerning
230 BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the pollution of the environment, on the adequacy of research and on the
future possibilities of danger to the environment. So far it has produced 13
reports.
Central government makes policy, exercises general budgetary control,
promotes legislation and advises pollution control authorities on policy
implementation. The Secretary of State for the Environment has general
responsibility for co-ordinating the work of the Government on
environmental protection and is assisted by a Central Directorate of
Environmental Protection within the Department. In Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland the respective Secretaries of State are responsible for
pollution control co-ordination within their countries. They are assisted by
the Scottish Development Department, the Environment and Local
Government Division of the Welsh Office and the Environmental Protection
Division of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
respectively.
Pollution Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) was formed in 1987 by the
Inspectorates amalgamation of the former Industrial Air Pollution Inspectorate of the
Health and Safety Executive, the Radiochemical Inspectorate and the
Hazardous Waste Inspectorate, together with a new Water Pollution
Inspectorate, into a single unified inspectorate for England and Wales.
Under the Environmental Protection Bill, a system of ‘integrated pollution
control’ (IPC) would be set up under the supervision of HMIP for the control
of certain categories of industrial pollution. The most harmful processes
would be specified for IPC, requiring consent from the Inspectorate. Less
harmful air pollution would be controlled under a system of local authority
air pollution control. In granting a consent for discharges under IPC, the
Inspectorate would require the use of the best available techniques not
entailing excessive cost to prevent or minimise polluting emissions and to
ensure that all substances released were made harmless.
Her Majesty’s Industrial Pollution Inspectorate is the Scottish equivalent
of HMIP, and would administer IPC jointly with the river purification
authorities. In Northern Ireland broadly similar controls are exercised by the
Environmental Protection Division of the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland, and the implications of introducing a system of IPC
are being considered.
The Land Under the Control of Pollution Act 1974, waste disposal authorities are
responsible for regulating the disposal of controlled wastes. The Act requires
them to draw up and revise periodically a waste disposal plan. It also
establishes a licensing system for waste disposal sites, treatment plants and
storage facilities receiving controlled wastes. It provides for a more intensive
control system for certain especially hazardous or difficult wastes. HMIP and
the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate for Scotland advise local authorities on
how to improve their control of waste management and on how to work
towards environmentally acceptable standards for dealing with hazardous
wastes.
Under the Environmental Protection Bill, several new measures would
strengthen existing curbs on waste disposal. Responsibility for waste would
rest with the person who produces it and everyone who handles it through to
final disposal or reclamation. Only fit and proper persons would be licensed
to run disposal sites, and operators would have to care for their sites after
closure until all risks of gas or pollution were eliminated. Local authorities’
waste disposal operations would be set up as competitive ‘arm’s length’
companies so as to separate them from the authorities other job of policing
Architecture
The white walls and grey slate
domes of the new Courts ofjustice,
Truro, in south-west England,
blend into the surrounding
residential areas. The foyer, with
its dramatic horizontal mouldings
and angular pillars, makes
maximum use of natural lighting.
Derelict land at Bute
East Dock, Cardiff,
was cleared for the
site of South
Glamorgan County
Hall, completed in
1988. Two shallow
lagoons with
fountains provide a
focal point at the
dock edge.
Parks and Gardens
Protecting the Environment
The Pennine way is a popular
route for walkers, but the
thousands of visitors have caused
severe footpath erosion round
the High Force waterfall,
threatening surrounding vegetation.
Conservation workers are
strengthening the path by laying
a sheet of‘geotextile’ fabric
between two layers of crushed rock.
A complex space instrument known
as ISAMS, developed and built by
British Aerospace, Oxford and
Reading Universities and the
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
will be launched in 1991.
By scanning the atmosphere it will
be able to provide important data
on climatic change and the
depletion of the ozone layer.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
231
standards. Waste regulation authorities would be made both more locally
accountable and more closely supervised by HMIP. In Scotland, the
responsibility for collection, disposal and regulation will remain with the
district and islands councils, whose waste management function will be
examined by the Scottish Hazardous Waste Inspectorate. The Government
would also take powers to control international shipments of waste.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or
to dump rubbish except in designated places. The maximum penalty for
this, currently set at £400, would be increased under the Environmental
Protection Bill to £1,000. The Bill would also introduce new powers for the
issue of litter abatement orders and new duties on local authorities to keep
their public land as free of litter as practicable.
To help counteract the problem of litter, financial support is given to
the Tidy Britain Group (£3 million in 1989—90), which provides a
comprehensive litter abatement programme in collaboration with local
authorities. The Group secures sponsorship from industry to undertake
litter abatement promotions and programmes such as its recently an¬
nounced Neighbourhood Litter Watch scheme; 1990 was designated as
Tidy Britain Year.
Recycling and The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste
Materials materials wherever this is practicable; its target is for half of all recyclable
Reclamation household waste to be re-used by 2000. Local authorities reclaim about
20,000 tonnes of waste paper and about 30,000 tonnes of metals each year.
There are over 4,000 ‘bottle banks’ in Britain, where the public can deposit
used glass containers for recycling. There are also similar ‘can banks’ and
‘paper banks’ to collect these materials for recycling. Voluntary organisations
also arrange collections of waste material. Under the Environmental
Protection Bill, local authorities would have a duty to make plans for the
recycling of waste.
Water Pollution There has been a general improvement in water quality in Britain since the
1950s. A comprehensive survey in 1985 classified 90 per cent of river length
in England and Wales as of good or fair quality, that is, capable of
supporting game or coarse fish populations, suitable for drinking water
abstraction and of moderate to high amenity value. Surveys of river quality
in Scotland and Northern Ireland in 1985 showed that 99 per cent of
Scotland’s rivers were unpolluted or of fairly good quality, and that 96 per
cent were of good or fair quality in Northern Ireland. These standards
compare favourably with those in other European Community countries,
where a study has shown that on average only 75 per cent of rivers are of a
comparable standard.
Over the past 30 years, progress has been made in cleaning up the major
estuaries of the east coast of England and Scotland—the Thames, Humber,
Tees, Tyne and Forth—which had become heavily polluted through
industrial and sewage discharges. The appearance and amenity value of
these estuaries have been improved and they now support varied
populations of fish and other wildlife. A 25-year scheme supported by the
Government and the European Community aims to reduce river pollution
and improve water quality throughout the Mersey river basin and estuary.
Other major schemes in progress include programmes to improve water
quality in the Clyde in Scotland and the Lagan in Northern Ireland.
Among the main causes of poor river quality are discharges from
substandard sewage treatment works and pollution from agriculture. The
water and sewerage companies have capital expenditure programmes
232
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Marine
Environment
designed to bring substandard sewage treatment works into compliance with
their discharge consents by 1992. A number of measures are being
introduced to combat farm pollution of rivers and streams.
There are comprehensive controls over effluent discharges to rivers,
estuaries, coastal waters and underground waters. Information about
discharge consents granted and effluent and water quality is publicly
available on registers maintained by the NRA, by the river purification
authorities in Scotland and by the Environmental Protection Division of the
Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. More than 95 per
cent of the population in Britain live in properties connected to a sewer, and
sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths of the population.
Under the Water Act 1989, the utility functions of water supply, sewerage
and sewage treatment in England and Wales were separated from
responsibility for protecting the water environment, which was transferred
to the NRA. The Environmental Protection Bill would introduce the system
of IPG for the most harmful discharges (see p 230).
In Scotland, where the system of public ownership of water supplies
continues, the Government is implementing an adapted form of IPG. In
Northern Ireland water pollution control is the responsibility of the
Environmental Protection Division of the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland.
The Government is committed to the implementation of a number of
European Community directives for the protection and improvement of
water quality, for example, on the quality of surface water for abstraction for
drinking water, the quality needed to support freshwater fisheries and the
quality of water for bathing areas (see p 233).
Britain is a leading participant in the series of North Sea Conferences. This
international forum of the countries bordering the North Sea provides the
prime focus for the development of Britain’s policies on the marine
environment. The Third North Sea Conference met in March 1990 in The
Hague, and the measures agreed will be applied by Britain to all its coastal
waters, not just the North Sea.
Prevention of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and
implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The Merchant
Shipping (Prevention of Oil Pollution) Regulations 1983 and 1988 and the
Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1986 require ships to be fitted with specific
pollution control equipment. They make it an offence for ships of any
nationality to discharge oil, oily mixtures or ships’ garbage into British
territorial waters. It is also an offence for British-registered ships to make
similar discharges anywhere into the sea, except in accordance with the
regulations. Enforcement of these regulations is undertaken by the
Department of Transport. Powers to control dumping at sea would be
further strengthened by the Environmental Protection Bill.
Offshore oil operators must ensure that oil does not escape into the sea
and are required to have contingency plans for dealing with oil spilled
accidentally. Discharges containing oil are controlled under the Prevention
of Oil Pollution Act 1971. It was agreed at the Third North Sea Conference
progressively to eliminate discharges of oil-based drilling cuttings from
offshore platforms.
The Department of Transport’s Marine Pollution Control Unit is
responsible for dealing with pollution at sea when oil (or other dangerous
substances) from a shipping casualty threatens major coastal pollution or is
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
233
Air Pollution
likely to harm important fisheries or concentrations of sea birds. The Unit
maintains a national contingency plan and dispersant spraying, cargo
transfer, mechanical recovery and beach-cleaning resources. It also has two
remote sensing aircraft capable of detecting possible illegal discharges and of
quantifying oil pollution.
The Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 tightened the controls
over dumping at sea. Under the Act a licence has to be obtained for the
permanent deposit of any substance or article into the sea and tidal waters
below the high water mark. Dumping at sea is permitted where no harm to
the marine environment can be shown and where there are no practicable
alternatives on land. Nevertheless, a timetable for ending the dumping of
industrial waste at sea was announced by the Government in March 1990.
The Government’s intention is that no industrial waste should be dumped at
sea beyond 1993. Britain has already stopped the dumping at sea of more
than half the industrial wastes which were licensed in 1987. No more waste
will be licensed for incineration at sea after the end of 1990.
Progress in reducing the amount of other toxic substances released into
the sea was reported in the Action Plan submitted to the North Sea
Conference. The Government’s target is a reduction of the order of 50 per
cent by 1995, and of 70 per cent in the most dangerous substances such as
cadmium, mercury, dioxins and lead. Substantial reductions have already
been achieved. For example, the discharge of mercury into Britain’s coastal
waters fell by 26 per cent between 1985 and 1988, and the discharge of
cadmium fell by 18 per cent.
The Government has announced investment of around £1,500 million to
provide increased sewage treatment, while a £ 1,400-million programme
is intended to improve the quality of Britain’s bathing waters. The
Government has announced that marine dumping of sewage sludge will be
terminated completely by the end of 1998.
In the 1989 tests of bathing water quality, it was found that 76 per cent of
identified bathing waters (304 out of 401) in England and Wales met the
mandatory coliform bacteria standards of the European Community
Bathing Water directive. This compared with 66 per cent of the then
identified beaches in 1988 and 55 per cent in 1987. In Scotland, 16 of the 23
bathing waters—70 per cent—met the coliform standard in 1989, compared
with 52 per cent in 1988. In Northern Ireland all 16 of the identified bathing
waters met the directive. The Government expects over 95 per cent of
bathing waters to meet the directive’s standards by the mid-1990s and to
achieve full compliance within ten years.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control areas’ within
which the emission of smoke from chimneys is an offence. About two-thirds
of the premises in conurbations are covered by smoke control orders — over
6,000 are in force. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject
to the control of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts and the Public
Health Acts. The emission of dark smoke from any trade or industrial
premises or from the chimney of any building is in general prohibited, and
new furnaces must be capable as far as is practicable of smokeless operation.
Under the Environmental Protection Bill, local authorities would receive
streamlined powers to abate statutory nuisances (which include smoke, dust
and smells). Atmospheric discharges from the most polluting processes
would be subject to the IPG regime. Less harmful discharges would come
under the local authority air pollution control regime. Similar legislation and
controls to the present ones apply in Northern Ireland.
Sulphur Dioxide
and Nitrogen
Oxide Emissions
and Acid Rain
Vehicle
Emissions
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner
air and a better environment in the last 30 years or so. Total emissions of
smoke in the air have fallen by over 85 per cent since 1960. The domestic
smoke control programme has been particularly important in achieving this
result. London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of the 1950s
and in central London winter sunshine has increased by about 50 per cent
since 1958. Similar improvement has been achieved in other cities, including
Glasgow and Sheffield.
In 1989 the Government announced the establishment of an air pollution
monitoring system to make information available on levels of air pollution in
urban areas. A daily summary will be published whenever the World Health
Organisation guidelines for carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur
dioxide are breached.
National sulphur dioxide emissions have fallen by about 40 per cent since
1970. In 1988 agreement was reached on the European Community
directive on the control of emissions from large combustion plants. Britain
accepted a phased programme of reductions in sulphur dioxide emissions
from existing large combustion plants of 20 per cent of 1980 levels by 1993,
40 per cent by 1998 and 60 per cent by 2003, and agreed to reduce nitrogen
oxide emissions by 15 per cent by 1993 and 30 per cent by 1998. The
Government is now implementing this directive. Flue gas desulphurisation
equipment is being fitted to Drax power station in North Yorkshire. In 1988
Britain signed the Nitrogen Oxide Protocol to the United Nations/Economic
Commission for Europe Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution, making a commitment to reduce overall nitrogen oxide emissions
to their 1987 levels by 1994.
The damaging effect of acid depositions from combustion processes on
rivers, lakes and soils has been shown by scientific research. Britain is
spending £10 million a year on an extensive research programme into the
causes and effects of acid rain, and the likely results of possible abatement
technologies. It is also participating in international research programmes
and monitoring schemes. A five-year surface water acidification research
programme, run under the aegis of the Royal Society and the Norwegian
and Swedish academies of science, was concluded in 1990. It yielded valuable
information on the links between sulphur emissions and acidification.
Following the decreases in emissions of sulphur dioxide over the past 20
years, research has found the first signs of a decrease in acidification in some
lochs in south-west Scotland.
There are around 24 million vehicles on Britain’s roads, contributing
substantially to Britain’s total emissions of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen. Since 1970 a series of increasingly
stringent regulations on petrol, and later diesel, cars and light vans has been
implemented by the Government to bring carbon monoxide emissions from
each new car down by 50 per cent and hydrocarbon and nitrogen oxide
emissions by over 30 per cent. The European Community has agreed strict
new standards for these vehicles, which will reduce all emissions from new
cars by a further 80 per cent and in effect require new petrol-engined cars to
be fitted with fully-controlled catalytic converters. The Community is
committed to looking into possible controls on carbon dioxide emissions
from cars. Britain is also pressing the Community to introduce by the mid-
1990s emission standards for heavy goods vehicles as close as possible to the
United States 1994 limits—the strictest being implemented anywhere in the
world.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
235
Chlorofluoro-
carbons and the
Ozone Layer
Climate Change
The amount of lead in the air in Britain has halved since the permitted
lead content in petrol was reduced in 1986 from 0-4 to 0T5 grammes a litre.
Britain had previously taken a leading role in negotiating a European
Community directive which required unleaded petrol to be available
throughout the Community by October 1989. Over 95 per cent of petrol
stations in Britain now stock the new fuel. From 1 October 1990 new cars in
Britain will have to be able to run on unleaded petrol. A substantial tax
differential has been created in favour of unleaded fuel, and demand for it
has risen rapidly. By April 1990 unleaded petrol accounted for over 32 per
cent of petrol sales in England.
The Government is committed to the elimination as soon as practicable of
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)—synthetic gases widely used in aerosols, in the
manufacture of foams, as solvents and in refrigeration—that damage the
ozone layer. The British Antarctic Survey first published observations of
unusual depletions in the ozone layer in 1985, and in the same year the
Department of the Environment and the Meteorological Office set up the
Stratospheric Ozone Review Group to review understanding of stratospheric
ozone and to recommend areas for further study. Since then much scientific
evidence has been gathered which clearly implicates CFCs in ozone
depletions. The Government is involved in research into ways of reducing
the use of CFCs, for example, in 1989 inviting proposals for research into
new technology aimed at reducing CFC emissions and promoting their cost-
effective recovery from waste goods such as refrigerators and foam.
Britain is closely involved in international measures to prevent further
damage to the ozone layer of the atmosphere by CFCs. In 1987 Britain
signed the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna Convention on the Protection of
the Ozone Layer, which restricted use and production of CFCs. Britain
hosted an international conference on the ozone layer in London in March
1989 (together with the United Nations Environment Programme), and also
the second meeting of the parties to the Montreal Protocol, which took place
in June 1990. This latter meeting agreed to phase out CFCs by the year
2000, and set intermediate targets of a 50 per cent reduction by 1995 and an
85 per cent reduction by 1997. It was further agreed that an additional
meeting should be held in 1992 with the objective of accelerating the
reduction schedule. Controls were agreed on other ozone-depleting
substances, including halons, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform.
The Government also announced in June 1990 that Britain would
contribute at least $9 million to help developing countries tackle the threat of
ozone depletion; this sum will be increased to $15 million if other countries
such as India and the People’s Republic of China join the Protocol.
CFCs and other gases, such as carbon dioxide, contribute to the ‘greenhouse
effect’. A growing concentration of these gases is expected to lead to a
gradual increase in global average temperatures, which could lead to a rise in
sea levels as a result of thermal expansion of sea water and melting of land
ice. Britain led the First working group of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), which carried out an assessment of the available
scientific evidence on climate change and published its report in August
1990. Britain is contributing £750,000 to the work of the IPCC.
The Government is giving priority to the improvement of understanding
of the science of climate change. The research councils allocated some £29
million in 1989-90 towards research into all aspects of global climate change.
In April 1990 the Department of the Environment and the Meteorological
236
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Noise
Office opened the Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research,
building on the climate modelling programme of the Meteorological Office.
It will develop and refine mathematical models of the climate to reduce
uncertainties in predictions of global climate change and to provide
predictions of timescales and of regional changes. The cost of the combined
programme will be about £10 million in 1990—91.
British measures to combat global warming include reductions in CFG
emissions (see p 235), building regulations to promote the energy efficiency
of new houses and the non-fossil fuel obligation in the Electricity Act 1989,
which requires that a large proportion of Britain’s electricity be generated in
ways that will not promote global warming. The White Paper reaffirmed
Britain’s willingness to return carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by
2005, provided other countries take similar action.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern
Ireland) requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance
and gives them the power to serve a noise abatement notice on a person
responsible for it. It also enables them to designate ‘noise abatement zones’
within which registered levels of noise from certain premises may not be
increased without their permission. The Act contains specific provisions to
control noise from construction and demolition sites and the use of
loudspeakers in the streets. It also contains provisions enabling individuals to
take action through the courts against noise amounting to a nuisance. The
present noise abatement procedures are being used as the model on which
the streamlined procedures in the Environmental Protection Bill for the
abatement of other statutory nuisances would be based. In 1989 the
Government announced a review of noise legislation to be completed in
1990. Government spending on environmental noise research is expected to
be about £600,000 in 1990-91.
Transport is a major source of noise pollution, and control measures are
aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements limiting the noise
that aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and at protecting people from its
effects. The Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 set out
the permissible noise levels for various classes of new vehicle. More stringent
limits are being introduced for new vehicles between October 1988 and April
1991.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in
Scotland, compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by
physical factors, including noise from new or improved public works such as
roads and airports. Regulations under the Acts also enable highway
authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of homes subject to
specified levels of increased noise caused by new or improved roads. Noise
insulation may also be provided where construction work for new roads may
seriously affect nearby homes.
Noise emission levels of almost all aircraft on the United Kingdom
Register are regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the
International Civil Aviation Organisation. Since 1986 all subsonic jets on the
United Kingdom Register have had to comply with these standards, and this
requirement was extended to overseas-registered aircraft in 1988. Various
operational restrictions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance
further at Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted, where the Secretary of State for
Transport has assumed responsibility for noise abatement. These measures
include restrictions on the type and number of aircraft operating at night,
the routing of departing aircraft on noise preferential routes, and quiet take¬
off and landing procedures. The population affected by aircraft noise at
Radioactivity
Radioactive
Waste
Disposal
Genetically
Modified
Organisms
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 237
Heathrow fell from nearly 1-5 million in 1978 to less than 340,000 in 1988,
even though the number of air transport movements increased by about a
quarter.
Radiation from industrial and other processes represents only a small
fraction of that to which the population is exposed; most is naturally
occurring. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because
of possible effects on health. Under the Radioactive Substances Act 1960
most users of radioactive materials other than those subject to licence under
the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 must be registered by the appropriate
department, and authorisation is also required for the disposal of radioactive
waste. The Health and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear Installations
Inspectorate, is the authority responsible for the granting of nuclear site
licences for commercial nuclear installations. No installation may be con¬
structed or operated without a licence granted by the Executive.
The National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB), established under
the Radiological Protection Act 1970, provides an authoritative point of
reference on radiological protection. Following the accident at the
Chernobyl nuclear power station in the Soviet Union in 1986, the
Government has set up a national radiation monitoring network (RIMNET).
Ultimately, more than 80 stations throughout Britain will continuously
monitor radiation in order to improve emergency arrangements in the event
of a nuclear accident overseas. In 1987 the Government announced
measures to deal with the problem of naturally occurring radon gas in
houses, including a free survey by the NRPB for householders living in
radon-affected areas. In 1990 it accepted the NRPB’s advice, made following
further scientific research into the danger to health posed by radon, that the
level above which action should be taken to reduce exposure to radon in
homes should be reduced from 400 becquerels to 200 becquerels per cubic
metre.
Radioactive wastes vary widely in nature and level of activity, and the
practices followed reflect this. Some wastes are dispersed safely in the
environment. UK Nirex Ltd is responsible for developing and operating a
disposal facility for solid wastes with a low or intermediate level of activity
and is seeking to identify a suitable location for a deep dual-purpose facility.
The Department of the Environment is also sponsoring research, in
collaboration with other countries, into disposal of high-level wastes, but
these will first be stored in vitrified form for at least 50 years. The
Department’s 1990-91 budget for research into radioactive substances totals
£10 million.
Under the Environmental Protection Bill, there would be stronger controls
over genetically-modified organisms (GMOs). Anyone who intends to
import, acquire, keep or release GMOs would first have to carry out an
environmental risk assessment. The Secretary of State for the Environment
would have powers to prevent the import, acquisition, keeping or release of
GMOs where this would involve a significant risk of damage to the
environment, and inspectors would have the power to destroy or render
harmless organisms which were likely to cause damage to the environment.
A unified system of administrative control for GMOs would be developed in
parallel with these provisions; this would involve the Department of the
Environment, the Health and Safety Executive and other interested
departments.
238
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Environmental
Research
Research into environmental protection is co-ordinated by the Department
of the Environment. It has been estimated that total spending on research
into global issues approaches £150 million a year, while £16 million is spent
on renewable energy research. Government spending on research into
marine protection is about £50 million, with a large additional effort by
industry. The Department of the Environment expects to spend £37 million
in 1990-91 on research into subjects including climate change, toxic
chemicals, GMOs, waste disposal, and water quality and health. Other
departments have substantial programmes, notably the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Energy and other
official bodies such as the NRA, the NCC and the Meteorological Office.
Basic and strategic environmental research is sponsored by the
Department of Education and Science through the research councils for
agriculture and food, medicine, economic and social sciences, science and
engineering, and the natural environment. A key participant is the Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC), which had a budget of about £120
million for 1989-90. It was established in 1965 to undertake and support
research in the environmental sciences and to support specialised
postgraduate training. The Council is responsible for the British Geological
Survey, the British Antarctic Survey and 12 other research bodies. Its
programmes encompass the marine, earth, terrestrial, freshwater, polar and
atmospheric sciences. The NERC stresses international collaborative work
on global environmental issues such as climate change (see p 235). It is,
for example, helping to develop global atmospheric climate models,
strengthening atmospheric research in the Arctic and participating in the
World Ocean Circulation Experiment, which aims to assess the role of the
ocean in modifying the earth’s climate. Other work includes the North Sea
Project, involving the development of a numerical model of water quality for
the North Sea.
10 Religion
Everyone in Britain has the right to religious freedom (in teaching, worship
and observance) without interference from the community or the State.
Churches and religious societies may own property, run schools, and
promote their beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious bar to the
holding of public office, although ministers of the Church of England and
the Church of Scotland cannot become Members of Parliament.
Britain has a long tradition of religious tolerance, and the past 30 years
have seen the acceptance of a wide variety of religious beliefs and traditions
brought in by large numbers of immigrants of different nationalities. There
are now large and growing communities of Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs, and
arrangements are made at places of work to allow the members of non-
Christian religions to follow their religious observances.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters in Britain was achieved
gradually from the seventeenth century onwards. The laws discriminating
against minority religious groups were gradually administered less harshly
and then finally repealed. Heresy ceased to be a legal offence with the
passing of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act 1677, and the Toleration Act
1688 granted freedom of worship to Protestant minority groups. In 1828 the
repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts gave nonconformists full political
rights, making it possible for them to be appointed to public office. Roman
Catholics gained political rights under the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829,
and the Jewish Relief Act 1858 enabled Jews to become Members of
Parliament. In addition, the religious tests imposed on prospective students
and academic staff of the universities of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham
were successively abolished by Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871. Similar
restrictions on the staff of Scottish universities were formally removed in
1932.
There are two established churches in Britain, that is, churches legally
recognised as official churches of the State: in England the (Anglican)
Church of England, and in Scotland the (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland.
Clergy of the established churches work in services run by the State, such as
the armed forces, national hospitals and prisons, and are paid a salary for
such services by the State. Clergy of other religious groups are also
appointed. Voluntary schools provided by religious denominations may be
wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
The churches’ involvement in broader social issues and the practical help
they give to groups of many kinds—from young people to the bereaved and
homeless—were highlighted in the Church of England report Faith in the
City: A Call for Action by Church and Nation, published in 1985. This made
recommendations for improving conditions in the inner cities and other
socially deprived areas and led to the establishment in 1988 of the Church of
England’s Church Urban Fund, which aims to raise money for the Church’s
work in inner city and other priority areas. By May 1990 it had raised more
than £15 million and given grants to more than 220 inner city projects. A
second report, Living Faith in the City, was published in January 1990.
240
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Church of
England
There is no standard information about the number of members of
religious groups since questions are not normally asked about religious
beliefs in censuses or for other official purposes. Each church adopts its own
way of counting its members, and membership figures are therefore
approximate.
There has been a fall in recent years in both the number of full-time
ministers and the number of adults recorded as members of the larger
Christian churches. At the same time there has been significant growth in a
range of independent and Pentecostal churches, and in new religious
movements. However, the churches today share a desire to work together
and the ecumenical movement is well supported.
Religious education in publicly maintained schools is already required by
law in England, Wales and Scotland, and under the Education Reform Act
1988 forms part of the basic curriculum for all pupils in England and Wales.
The Act requires due recognition to be given to the place of Christianity in
teaching at county schools, but the subject also covers other faiths. Schools
also have to provide a daily act of collective worship. The Education
(Scotland) Act 1980 imposes similar requirements in Scotland. Members of
non-Christian religions may have a separate assembly if there are enough of
them to justify it. Where schools have pupils of different religious faiths, a
multi-faith assembly may be held. Parents may withdraw their children from
both religious education and collective worship if they wish.
The Broadcasting Bill, which is before Parliament, would allow Christian
and other religious groups to compete for licences to have their own radio
stations. They would also be able to seek licences for cable and satellite
television channels. The Bill would also require those running television
stations on the new Channel 3 service (which is to replace the Independent
Television network) to show religious programmes at peak times.
The Church of England, founded by St Augustine in ad 597, became the
established church of the land in the Reformation in the sixteenth century.
Its form of worship was set out in the Book of Common Prayer, dating from
1549. The Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of mutual
obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain duties it
must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the Church, and
promise to uphold it. Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are
appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister, and all
clergy swear their allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its own
worship. The two archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their
seniority as diocesan bishops) sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church
(together with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland
and the Roman Catholic Church) are not allowed to sit in the House
of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses
(including the Diocese of Europe), and York, which has 14 dioceses. The
Archbishop of Canterbury is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of
York ‘Primate of England’. The dioceses are divided into 13,250 parishes. In
1987 it was estimated that, in the two provinces (excluding the Diocese of
Europe), some 230,000 people were baptised into the Church; of these
187,000 were under one year old (29 per cent of live births). In the same year
there were 65,850 confirmations. Attendances at services on a normal
Sunday are around 1-2 million. Many people who rarely, if ever, attend
services (amounting to perhaps half the population), still regard themselves
as belonging to the Church of England.
RELIGION
241
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual
authority and legislative and administrative powers; bishops, clergy and lay
members are involved in decisions. Lay members are involved in church
government in the parishes as churchwardens and through parochial church
councils. The Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with
such matters as missionary work, inter-church relations, social questions, and
recruitment and training for the ministry (including theological colleges).
It also covers church work in Britain and overseas, the care of church
buildings, church schools (which are maintained from public funds), colleges
of education, and centres for training women in pastoral work. At present,
only men may join the priesthood, but in 1987 the General Synod voted to
proceed with legislation to enable women to become priests; final decisions
on the matter, however, are not expected to be taken for some years. The
Deacons (Ordination of Women) Measure 1986 has made it possible for
women to become deacons.
Church finance is administered locally, with contributions to a central
fund running central services, including capital spending on theological
colleges and grants for training candidates for ordination. The State makes
no direct contribution to church expenses. The Church’s investment income
is mainly managed by the Church Commissioners, the body largely res¬
ponsible for clergy incomes and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 28 autonomous provinces in Britain
and overseas and three regional councils overseas with a local membership of
about 70 million. In the British Isles there are four provinces: the Church of
England (established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church
in Scotland, and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for consultation between
all Anglican bishops. The last Conference was held in Canterbury in 1988.
Presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Conference has no
executive authority, but enjoys great prestige. Its findings on doctrine,
discipline, relations with other churches, and attitudes to political and social
questions are widely studied. The Anglican Consultative Council (an
assembly of laypeople and clergy as well as of bishops) meets every two or
three years and is intended to allow consultations within the Anglican
Communion and to serve as a means of joint action. The Council met in
Wales in 1990.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government, that is,
government by elders, all (including ministers) of equal rank. It became the
national church following the Scottish Reformation and legislation of the
Scottish Parliament, consolidated in the Treaty of Union 1707 and the
Church of Scotland Act 1921, the latter confirming its complete freedom in
all spiritual matters. It appoints its own office bearers and its decisions on
questions of doctrine, worship, government and discipline are not subject to
any civil authority.
Both men and women may join the ministry and each of 1,360 churches is
governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and the
elected elders of the Church. Above the Kirk Session is the Court of the
Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly,
consisting of elected ministers and elders. This meets annually under the
presidency of an elected moderator, who serves for one year. The Sovereign
is represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner.
The adult communicant membership of the Church of Scotland is over
800,000.
242
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Free
Churches
The Roman
Catholic
Church
The term ‘Free Churches’ is often used to describe those Protestant churches
in Britain which, unlike the Church of England and the Church of Scotland,
are not established as official churches of the State. In the course of history
they have developed their own forms of belief, church order and worship.
All the major Free Churches—Methodist, Baptist, United Reformed and
Salvation Army—allow both men and women to become ministers.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with just over
430,000 adult full members and a community of more than 1-3 million,
originated in the eighteenth century following the evangelical revival under
John Wesley. The present church is based on a 1932 union of most of the
separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Church in Ireland has over
14,000 members in Northern Ireland.
The Baptists are mainly organised in groups of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain (formed in 1812), with a
membership of about 165,000. There are also separate Baptist Unions for
Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and other Baptist Churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 124,000 members, was formed
in 1972, when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest
Protestant minority in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged. This was the first union of two different churches in Britain since
the Reformation in the sixteenth century.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland:
the Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales; and a number
of independent Scottish Presbyterian churches.
Other Protestant Churches include the Unitarians, Free Christians, and
the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in number. The two main bodies
operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the Elim Pentecostal
Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin. There is also a
growing number of black-led churches.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 18,000 adult
members in Britain and 450 places of worship, came into being in the middle
of the seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. Silent
worship is central to its life as a religious organisation.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 90
other countries. Within Britain there are 65,000 members and nearly 1,000
centres of worship. The Salvation Army is well known for its Christian
evangelism and practical care. This is expressed through the work of some
130 social service centres, ranging from hostels for the homeless to homes
for those in need, and through its prison chaplaincy service.
A recent development in Christian worship has been the house church
movement, which began in the early 1970s and now has an estimated
membership of 120,000. (Attendance is greater than membership.) Mem¬
bers hold services and prayer meetings in private houses, and take turns to
act as chairman. Flouse churches receive money from their members to
enable them to support their leaders and carry out missionary and social
work.
There are also a number of other religious organisations in Britain which
were founded in the United States in the last century. These include the
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints (the
Mormon Church), the Christian Scientists and the Spiritualists.
The formal structure of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales,
which had ceased to exist after the Reformation in the sixteenth century, was
restored in 1850. The Scottish Church’s formal structure ceased to exist
in the early seventeenth century and was restored in 1878. However,
RELIGION
243
Jewry
The Muslim
Community
throughout this period Catholicism never disappeared entirely. There are
now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each under an
archbishop; 30 dioceses, each under a bishop (22 in England and Wales,
eight in Scotland); and over 3,000 parishes. In Northern Ireland there are
six dioceses, some with territory partly in the Irish Republic. About one
British citizen in ten normally claims to be a Roman Catholic. Only men may
become priests. In 1982 Pope John Paul II paid a pastoral visit to Britain, the
first by a reigning pope.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education
of its children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in
the Catholic faith. A number of Catholic schools are staffed by members of
religious orders (to the extent of one teacher in 21). These orders also
undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and running homes
for old people. The majority of Catholic schools are maintained out of public
funds and new schools may be established with government grants.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman Conquest in the latter
half of the eleventh century, but the present community in Britain dates
from 1656, having been founded by those of Spanish and Portuguese origin
(known as Sephardim). Later and more numerous settlers came from
Germany and Eastern Europe; they are known as Ashkenazim. The present
community, numbering about 350,000, is the second largest in Europe.
The community is divided into two main groups. Some 75 per cent of the
majority Ashkenazi Jews are Orthodox and most acknowledge the authority
of the Chief Rabbi. The Sephardi Orthodox element follow their own
spiritual head (the Haham). The Reform movement, which was founded in
1840, and the Liberal and Progressive movement, which followed in 1901,
account for most of the remaining 25 per cent.
Jewish congregations in Britain number about 300. About one in three
Jewish children attend Jewish schools (some of them supported by public
funds). There are a number of charitable and welfare agencies caring for
elderly and handicapped people.
The officially recognised representative body is the Board of Deputies of
British Jews.
The most recent estimates suggest that Britain’s Muslim population is
around one million. The largest number originate from Pakistan and
Bangladesh, while sizeable groups have come from India, Cyprus, the Arab
world, Malaysia and parts of Africa. There is also a growing community of
British-born Muslims, mainly the children of immigrant parents, but in¬
cluding an increasing number of converts to Islam. There are some 300
mosques and numerous prayer centres throughout Britain. Mosques are not
only places of worship; they are also cultural and social centres offering
instruction in the Muslim way of life and facilities for social and welfare
activities. The first was established at Woking in Surrey in 1890, and they
now range from converted houses in the inner areas of many industrial
towns to the Central Mosque in London and its associated Islamic Cultural
Centre, which is one of the most important Muslim institutions in the
Western world. The Central Mosque has the largest congregation in Britain,
and during festivals it may number over 60,000. There are also import¬
ant mosques and cultural centres in Liverpool, Manchester, Leicester,
Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Many of the mosques belong to various Muslim organisations and both the
Sunni and the Shia traditions within Islam are represented among the
244
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Religious
Communities
New Religious
Movements
Co-operation
among the
Churches
Muslim community in Britain. Members of some of the major Sufi traditions
have also developed branches in British cities.
Christian communities of foreign origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran
and Reformed Churches of various European countries, together with the
Armenian Church, have established their own centres of worship,
particularly in London.
There is a large Sikh community in Britain, comprising approximately
500,000, the members of which originate mainly from India. The largest
groups of Sikhs are in Greater London, Manchester, Birmingham, Not¬
tingham and Wolverhampton. Sikh temples or gurdwaras cater for the
religious, educational, social, and cultural needs of their community. The
oldest central gurdwara in London was established in 1908 and the largest
one is in Southall, Middlesex. There are over 170 gurdwaras in Britain.
The Hindu community in Britain comprises around 300,000 members
and also originates largely from India. The largest groups of Hindus are to
be found in Leicester, north and north-west London, Birmingham and
Bradford. The first Hindu temple or mandir was opened in Leicester in
1969; there are now over 150 mandirs in Britain.
In Britain there are also about 130 Buddhist groups and some 55 centres,
with at least 13 monasteries and a number of temples. All the main schools of
Buddhism are represented. The Buddhist Society, with its headquarters in
London, publicises the principles of Buddhism and encourages their study
and practice; it does not belong to any particular school of Buddhism.
A large number of new religious movements or cults, largely established
since the second world war (1939^15) and often with overseas origins, are
active in Britain. In response to public concern about the activities of some
of these cults the Government has since 1987 provided funding for the
Information Network Focus on Religious Movements (INFORM), which is
also supported by the main churches. The aims of INFORM are to conduct
research into new religious movements and to provide objective information
about them.
A new organisation, the Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland, was
established in September 1990. This replaced the former British Council of
Churches and took over its role as the main overall body for the Christian
churches in Britain. The Council co-ordinates the work of the churches
grouped in separate national ecumenical bodies for England, Scotland,
Wales, and Ireland. For the first time, the new Council includes the Roman
Catholic and many black-led churches as full members.
The Free Church Federal Council includes most of the Free Churches of
England and Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free
Churches and is a channel for communication with central and local
government. It also has black-led churches as full members.
Inter-church discussions about the issues involved in the search for unity
now take place through international as well as national bodies. The Roman
Catholic and Orthodox Churches are represented on some of these as well as
the Anglican and some of the Free Churches.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches are also members of the World
Council of Churches. This links together some 300 churches in over 100
countries for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council
of Christians and Jews works for better understanding among members of
the two religions and deals with problems in the social field.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be
made by two or more churches for sharing church buildings.
11 National Economy
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
From 1981 the British economy has grown at an annual average rate of over
3 per cent. Investment, export volume, the number of jobs and productivity
have all risen substantially. However, after falling sharply in the early 1980s,
the rate of inflation has risen since early 1988. The figure for 1989 was just
under 8 per cent; by August 1990 it was 10-6 per cent at an annual rate.
Unemployment amounted to about 1-7 million in August 1990, having
exceeded 3 million in 1985 and 1986.
The current account of the balance of payments has been in deficit since
1986, following six successive years of surplus.
Britain has an open economy, in which international trade is a vital part of
economic performance. In 1989 exports of goods and services accounted for
about one-quarter of its gross domestic product (GDP)—a comparatively
high share among the major economies. The proportion has increased over
the last two decades, from about 20 per cent in the early 1960s. Similar rises
have occurred in most other developed countries, reflecting the growing
importance of international trade in an increasingly interdependent world
economy.
The economy is primarily—and increasingly—based on private enterprise,
and government policy is aimed at encouraging and expanding the private
sector, which accounts for about three-quarters of GDP and over two-thirds
of total employment.
While manufacturing, the traditional engine of economic growth in
Britain, continues to play a vital role, recent decades have generally seen a
faster growth in the services sector (although manufacturing has grown
faster since 1987), in response to rising living standards. An adjustment to
the relative size of the manufacturing sector has also resulted from the
growth of North Sea oil output. Services account for three-fifths of GDP and
for two-thirds of employment, compared with about half of both GDP and
employment in 1950. Manufacturing accounts for about a quarter of each
compared with over a third in 1950.
Around 2 per cent of Britain’s workforce is engaged in agriculture—a
lower proportion than in any other major industrialised country. However,
because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce nearly two-
thirds of its own food.
With the exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental Shelf
under the North Sea, the country is self-sufficient in energy in net terms and
expects to remain so for some years. Together, the extraction of oil and gas
accounted for some 2 per cent of GDP in 1989. Coal—traditionally the most
important source of energy—still meets over a third of Britain’s energy
needs.
One of the largest exporters of visible goods, Britain accounts for about 5
per cent of the world total. It is among the major exporters of aerospace
products, electrical equipment, most types of machinery, chemicals and oil.
246
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic
Growth
Inflation and
Competitiveness
Industrial
Production
It is also one of the world’s largest importers of agricultural products, raw
materials and semi-manufactures.
In about half the years since the end of the second world war in 1945, a
deficit on Britain’s visible trade has been offset by a surplus on transactions
in invisibles. The significant contribution made by invisibles to the current
account is partly a reflection of Britain’s position as a major financial centre.
However, the surplus on invisibles declined sharply in 1989, mainly because
of a fall in net investment income and an increase in net transfers to
European Community institutions The banks, insurance underwriters and
brokers, and other financial institutions of the City of London provide
worldwide financial services, and the City contains one of the most
comprehensive and advanced capital markets in the world.
Values for some of the main economic indicators in selected years since
1979 are shown in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1: Economic Indicators
1979 1984 1989
Gross domestic product
(average estimate)3
Exports3
Imports3
Consumers’ expenditure3
Gross domestic fixed capital
formation3
Percentage increase in retail
prices index
Workforce in employment (000s)
Percentage of workforce unemployed
330,600 343,945 411,076
88,924 96,786 118,570
83,814 96,655 137,859
195,664 210,472 271,707
56,450 58,034 81,048
13-4 5-0 7-8
25,393 24,235 26,329
4-9 11-6 6-3
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition', Economic Trend.': Annual Supplement, 1990 Edition-, Employment
Gazette.
a£ million at 1985 market prices.
The marked rise in living standards in recent years has been accompanied by
the emergence of new industries and the renewal and improvement of much
of the country’s infrastructure. Growth was relatively steady until the early
1970s although low in comparison with the performance in most other
industrialised countries. It averaged 2 to 3 per cent annually in the years
leading up to 1973, but then fell to a still lower level—about 1 per cent a year
from then until the recession of the early 1980s. Since then, however, the
average rate of growth has been over 3 per cent a year. Since 1980 Britain
has had the highest average rate of growth of the major European
Community countries apart from Spain.
From the late 1960s until about 1980 Britain had generally high annual rates
of inflation. Huge rises in the price of oil in 1973-74 and 1979, and
substantial increases in the money supply and public spending were followed
by upsurges in inflation; retail prices rose by 24 per cent in 1975 and by 18
per cent in 1980. Earnings also grew rapidly; in 1980 the rate of increase was
21 per cent. Inflation started to fall in the early 1980s but picked up towards
the end of the 1980s; the annual rate was 10-6 per cent by August 1990. In
the year to July 1990 earnings rose at an underlying rate of some 10 per cent.
In the decade to 1973 output of the manufacturing industries grew at a
faster rate than the economy as a whole. After the oil price rises of 1973-74,
NATIONAL ECONOMY
247
Investment
Employment
and
Productivity
however, and with increasing competition from overseas—from both
developed and newly industrialising countries—manufacturing output fell
sharply; in 1975 it was 8 per cent lower than two years previously. It then
increased from this trough but, following another oil price rise and
stagnation in the world economy, fell back by over 14 per cent between 1979
and 1981. It has since grown steadily to pass its 1973—74 peak. Manu¬
facturing output grew especially sharply between 1986 and 1988—by 13 per
cent. The rate of increase slowed in 1989 to a little under 5 per cent.
By 1985 output of the production industries as a whole (manufacturing,
energy and water) had risen above its earlier peak of 1979; by 1989 it was
over 11 percent higher than in 1979. In 1986 energy output was about twice
the level of ten years earlier but, with oil output having passed its peak level
of the mid-1980s, then fell by 14 per cent by 1989.
Fixed investment grew by just over 5 per cent a year during the 1960s but
changed comparatively little between 1970 and 1983. Since 1983 it has
increased by about 7 per cent a year on average. Sharply rising company
profits have been a contributory factor. Over the decade 1979—89 there was
an increase in the private sector’s share of fixed investment from 71 per cent
to 86 per cent (due in part to privatisation). Over the same period there was a
rise in the share of investment undertaken by the services sector and a fall in
that carried out by manufacturing. An improvement in the quality of
investment has contributed to the rise in the net real rate of return on capital
employed in non-North Sea industrial and commercial companies. In 1988
this was some 10 per cent, the highest since the late 1960s.
Britain’s workforce in employment amounts to over 27 million, having
increased by 3-6 million in the seven years to March 1990. Over half the jobs
created over the period were full-time. Since June 1979 self-employment has
risen by over 70 per cent to reach 3-3 million. The number of women seeking
work has also risen. As the workforce has expanded, unemployment has not
fallen as quickly as employment has risen. As in other industrialised
countries, there has been concern about the level of unemployment.
However, with the economy growing rapidly, unemployment fell by 1-6
million between July 1986 and August 1990, when it amounted to some 1-7
million, equal to 5-8 per cent of the workforce. The figure is well below the
average for the European Community. Since April 1990, with the rate of
economic activity slowing, unemployment has been rising.
The shedding of surplus labour in the early 1980s and renewed growth
have led to gains in productivity. Between 1980 and 1989 output per head
rose by 23 per cent in the economy as a whole and by 57 per cent in
manufacturing alone.
As a result of demographic changes, the population of working age will
grow more slowly during the 1990s than in recent years, with a fall in the
number of young people. The increase in Great Britain between 1988 and
2001 is projected at 0-6 million, compared with a rise of 2-4 million in the
previous 13 years. Accordingly, there will be a need for increased flexibility
among those in work and for employers to tap new sources of recruitment.
The Government has launched a new training framework, involving a
greater role for employers; over 80 local, employer-led Training and
Enterprise Councils are being created in England and Wales, as are similar
bodies in Scotland.
Overseas Sector Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In
general, imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods
248
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
were greater than visible exports, around 80 per cent of which were
manufactured goods. This deficit on visible trade was wholly or partly offset
by a surplus on invisibles, which cover earnings from services, together with
interest, profits and dividends, and transfers.
In the years 1980 to 1982 Britain ran surpluses on visible trade. Since
then, however, imports—especially of manufactures—have tended to rise
more sharply than exports (although the trend was reversed in 1989) and the
deficit on visible trade has reappeared. After a long period of deterioration
in the balance of trade in manufactures there was a deficit in 1983, which has
continued in subsequent years. Substantial net earnings on invisible
transactions, however, kept the current account in surplus up to 1985.
Membership of the European Community (throughout which a single
market is to be established by the end of 1992) has had a major impact on
Britain’s pattern of trade, increasing the proportion with other member
countries. Between 1972 and 1989 the proportion of Britain’s exports of
goods going to other members of the Community rose from 34 to 50 per
cent. Imports followed a similar trend. Trade with Japan and with the newly
industrialised countries, including Singapore, Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia,
has risen substantially.
The invisibles account has had to adapt to new conditions, in particular
the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and the growth in world markets of
insurance, banking, tourism, construction, consultancy and other services. In
1989 exports of services were valued at around one-third of exports of goods.
The substantial cumulative surplus on current account in the first half of
the 1980s contributed to a corresponding increase in Britain’s net external
assets. These are estimated to have risen from £12,000 million at the end of
1979 to some £113,000 million at the end of 1989—third in size to those of
Japan and the Federal Republic of Germany. These assets enable recent
current account deficits to be readily financed. Following the abolition
of exchange controls, investment outflows increased sharply. Portfolio
investment has been high since the mid-1980s, partly a reflection of
investment by banks as they moved into lending in readily marketable forms
(such as floating rate notes) and away from traditional loans. In 1987 there
was net portfolio disinvestment by British residents but by 1988 net portfolio
investment had been resumed and it grew substantially in 1989. Net direct
investment is at a consistently high level.
Oil The development of North Sea oil and gas production has had a significant
effect on the economy; in 1989 Britain was the world’s eighth largest oil
producer. The benefits to the balance of payments began to appear in the
second half of the 1970s and in 1980 Britain had its first surplus on oil trade.
In 1974 oil accounted for some 4 per cent of Britain’s visible exports and 19
per cent of visible imports. In 1989 the proportions were 6 per cent and 4
per cent respectively (the export proportion having been as high as 21 per
cent in the mid-1980s). The oil surplus reached its peak in 1985, at £8,100
million. With the fall in oil prices (see p 246) the surplus has fallen and
amounted to some £1,500 million in 1989. Exports, mainly to other
European Community countries, are equivalent to about half of domestic
production. They are partly offset in balance-of-payments terms by imports
of other grades of crude oil from the Middle East and elsewhere.
North Sea oil helped to alleviate the fall in real national income which
Britain, along with other industrialised countries, suffered following the oil
price rises of the 1970s. It has helped to ease the task of controlling public
sector borrowing, contributing to the Government’s counter-inflation
strategy. Even as production—which reached a peak in the mid-1980s—runs
NATIONAL ECONOMY
249
ECONOMIC
STRATEGY
Monetary
Policy
The Exchange
Rate
down, the stock of external assets that has been built up, largely during the
period of oil surpluses, provides a steady flow of income.
British governments traditionally sought to influence the rate of growth and
the level of employment by macroeconomic policy measures (for example,
by variations in government expenditure, taxes or controls on consumer
credit). Increases in wages and prices have had an adverse effect on
competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This has been
associated with increases in unemployment. At various times governments
attempted to control pay rises and (less frequently) price rises by voluntary or
statutory controls, but such policies were largely unsuccessful.
The Government’s economic objectives may be summarised as the
establishment of conditions that stimulate enterprise and encourage the
creation of wealth. Macroeconomic (monetary and fiscal) policies are
directed mainly at bringing down the rate of inflation and ultimately
achieving price stability. They are set in the context of a medium-term
financial strategy, which is reviewed each year in the Budget. Microeconomic
policies are aimed at improving the working of markets by encouraging
enterprise, efficiency and flexibility, and so improving the supply side
performance of the economy (see p 250). Together these policies are aimed
at improving the division of the increase in money GDP between output
growth and inflation, and helping to createjobs.
The central aim of monetary policy, which the Government sees as lying at
the heart of macroeconomic policy, is the creation of conditions that will
exert steady downward pressure on the rate of growth of money GDP, so
bringing down the rate of inflation. Interest rates are the essential
instrument of monetary policy and they are set so as to bring such conditions
about. Narrow money as measured by MO1 has had a stable relationship with
money GDP over a number of years and has proved a reliable indicator of
monetary conditions. A target range of 1 to 5 per cent has been set for MO
growth in 1990-91. Changes in broad money, or liquidity, have become
increasingly difficult to interpret; far-reaching changes in financial practices
have meant that there is no simple relationship between the growth in broad
money and in money GDP. Consequently, no explicit target range is set for
broad money, though the assessment of monetary conditions continues to
take broad money into account.
The exchange rate plays a central role both in domestic monetary decisions
and in international policy co-operation. The Government regards the
exchange rate as an important indicator of monetary conditions and as part
of the transmission mechanism through which monetary policy affects
inflation.The Government does not allow increases in domestic costs to be
accommodated either by monetary expansion or by exchange rate de¬
preciation. The major industrialised countries share an interest in estab¬
lishing more stable exchange rates.
Britain is a member of the European Monetary System, including the
exchange rate mechanism (ERM). Under the ERM the central exchange rate
for the pound is 2-95 Deutsche Marks, with a permitted fluctuation of 6 per
cent in either direction.
'MO is notes and coin in circulation with the public and banks' holdings of cash and their operational
balances at the Bank of England.
250
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fiscal Policy
Supply Side
Policies
Economic
Management
Monetary policy has been complemented by a firm fiscal policy whose aim
has been a progressive reduction in public borrowing as a proportion of GDP
by seeking to limit the share of GDP taken up by public expenditure. General
government expenditure, excluding privatisation proceeds (which count as
negative expenditure), fell as a proportion of GDP from nearly 47 per cent in
1982-83 to 39 per cent in 1989-90. In the early years of the financial
strategy the public sector borrowing requirement amounted to around 5 per
cent of GDP, but by 1989-90 this had been turned into a public sector debt
repayment of some 1-25 per cent of GDP—a third successive annual surplus.
The Government’s aim is to maintain a balanced budget in the medium
term.
While designing macroeconomic policy with the intent of reducing inflation,
the Government has sought to improve the supply response, and thus the
efficiency, of the economy through microeconomic policies. Action has been
taken to expose more of the economy to market forces. Direct controls (for
example, on pay, prices, foreign exchange, dividend payments and
commercial credit) have been abolished and competition in domestic
markets strengthened. In addition, labour market reforms have been in¬
troduced, measures taken to encourage saving and share ownership, and a
substantial amount of activity transferred from the public to the private
sector by privatisation and contracting work out. Finally, efforts have been
made to improve value for money in the public sector, largely by transferring
many of the executive functions of government to new executive agencies,
and regulatory burdens on business reduced.
In the labour market the Government has sought to improve work in¬
centives by reducing personal income tax rates and raising tax thresholds. It
has also, through the tax system, encouraged the extension of share
ownership among employees. A scheme of income tax relief has been
introduced to encourage the spread of profit-related pay. The Government
has also taken steps to achieve a better-balanced legal framework for
industrial relations and has expanded training opportunities. Obstacles to
the mobility of labour have been reduced. For example, the rights of those
leaving occupational pension schemes early have been improved and new
arrangements for personal pensions introduced, both of which will reduce
the pension disadvantage of changing jobs. The Government has enacted
legislation to limit the scope of wages councils. It has stressed the link
between pay and jobs and has repeatedly pointed out that wages must rise
more slowly if adverse effects on employment are to be avoided.
To improve the working of capital markets, the Government has abolished
controls on foreign exchange transactions, dividends, hire purchase and
bank lending. Competition among financial institutions is being encouraged
within a new statutory framework of investor protection. The Government
has also taken steps to reduce the distorting effects of the tax system on
investment and savings decisions by, among other things, reforming
corporation tax (the burden of which has been eased) and the system of
capital allowances. Planning restrictions on industrial investment have been
eased, while government support to industry has become more selective and,
where appropriate, more closely related to job creation. Particular efforts
have been made to improve the flow of investment funds to small firms, to
assist innovation in industry and to attract industry to the inner cities.
HM Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade and
NATIONAL ECONOMY
251
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Industry, Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport, and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Other bodies are concerned with specific aspects of economic policy.
These include the Bank of England (the central bank), the National
Economic Development Council (in which the Government meets rep¬
resentatives of management, trade unions and other interests), the Office of
Fair Trading and the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy,
and on the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its
purposes and keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by
means of informal and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial,
labour and other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines of
economic policy rests with the Cabinet.
The value of all goods and services produced in the economy is measured by
GDP. This can be expressed either in terms of market prices (the prices
people pay for the goods and services they buy) or at factor cost (the cost of
the goods and services before adding taxes and subtracting subsidies). It can
also be expressed in current prices or in constant prices (that is, removing the
effects of inflation in order to measure the underlying growth in the
economy). In 1989 GDP at current factor cost totalled £439,000 million.
Gross domestic product is conventionally estimated in three different ways
as the sum total of expenditure, income or output. Each method yields the
same total in principle, but in practice there are slight differences. The
output measure is usually considered the most reliable measure of short¬
term movements. In 1989 the index of the average estimate of GDP at
constant factor cost was 115-7 (1985 = 100), compared with 92-6 in 1979, an
increase of some 25 per cent.
Table 11.2 gives figures for the average estimate of GDP, at both current
market prices and current factor cost, and also shows how two other main
aggregates used in the national accounts, gross national product and
national income, are derived.
Table 11.2: Gross Domestic Product, Gross National Product and National
Income
£ million
1979
1989
Total final expenditure 252,857 654,849
less imports of goods and services —54,346 —142,527
Gross domestic product at market prices3 198,262 513,242
plus net property income from abroad 1,205 4,582
Gross national product at market prices3 199,467 517,824
less factor cost adjustment (taxes less subsidies) -25,027 -74,468
Gross domestic product at factor cost3 173,235 438,774
Net property income from abroad 1,205 4,582
Gross national product at factor cost3 174,440 443,356
less capital consumption —22,827 —56,186
National income (net national product
at factor cost)3 151,613 387,170
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition.
"Average estimate.
252
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Personal
Incomes and
Expenditure
Table 11.3 shows the categories of total final expenditure in 1989.
Consumers’ expenditure accounted for just over 50 per cent of total final
expenditure, and exports and goods for nearly 19 per cent.
Table 11.3: Total Final Expenditure in 1989 at Market Prices
£ million per cent
Consumers’ expenditure
General government final consumption
Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Value of physical increase in stocks and work in
progress
Total domestic expenditure
Exports of goods and services
Total final expenditure
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition.
Personal disposable income (that is, personal incomes after deduc-
tions—mainly taxation and social security contributions) rose rapidly and
fairly steadily from £136,000 million in 1979 to £352,000 million in 1989,
5-3 per cent higher in real terms than in 1988. Consumers’ expenditure
amounted to 74'4 per cent of pre-tax personal income m 1989, compared
with 70-4 per cent in 1979.
Table 11.4 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in 1989.
Housing, food, alcoholic drink, clothing and footwear, and fuel and power
together accounted for 42 per cent of the total. Consumers expenditure
increased by 3-9 per cent in real terms between 1988 and 1989. The changes
in the pattern between 1979 and 1989 in Britain were paralleled in other
industrialised countries, with declining proportions spent on food, tobacco,
clothing and footwear, and fuel and power. Over the longer term, as
incomes rise, people tend to spend increasing proportions on services.
328.453 50-2
99,426 15-2
100,472 15-3
3,102 0-5
531.453 81-2
123,396 18-8
654,849 1000
Table 11.4: Consumers’ Expenditure in 1979 and 1989
1979
1989
per cent per cent £ million
Food (household expenditure)
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Clothing and footwear
Housing
Fuel and power
Household goods and services
Transport and communications
Recreation, entertainment and education
Other goods and services
Other items3
17-5
7-2
3- 5
7-6
131
4- 4
7-5
16-7
9-2
12-4
0-9
11-9
60
2- 5
5- 9
151
3- 5
6- 6
17-4
91
17-8
4- 2
39,181
19,818
8,196
19,511
49,618
11,335
21,529
57,066
29,781
58,470
13,948
Total
1000
1000
328,453
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition. . . , ,
Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies plus national accoun
statistical adjustment minus expenditure by foreign tourists in Britain.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
253
Sources of Income
Current
Government
Expenditure
Gross Domestic
Product by
Industry
Saving as a percentage of personal disposable income has varied over the
last decade and in 1989 was 6-7 per cent, down from 131 per cent in 1980.
The recent reduction in the saving ratio partly reflects an adjustment to
declining rates of inflation: during periods of rapidly rising prices people
need to increase their rate of saving to maintain the real value of assets fixed
in money terms. The 1990 Budget contained a number of measures
designed to encourage saving over the long term.
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 64 per cent in 1989; average gross weekly earnings in April
1989 in Great Britain were £264 for full-time male workers and £178 for full¬
time female workers. The three other main sources of personal income were
self-employment (12 per cent), income from rent, dividends and interest
(10 per cent) and current grants from general government (13 per cent).
Final consumption by central government and local authorities amounted to
£99,000 million in 1989; it rose by 11 per cent in real terms over the period
1979 to 1989. The main cause of this was the growth over the period in the
social services, health, and law and order.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
National Insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest
and subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to
finance about half of their current expenditure.
Table 11.5 shows GDP by industry in 1979 and 1989. Over a period of time
agriculture and manufacturing have come to account for smaller pro¬
portions of national income, while services have grown relatively; services
now account for 64 per cent of GDP.
Table 11.5: Gross Domestic Product by Industry^
1979
1989
£ million percent £ million percent
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 3,690 2 1 6,561 1-5
Energy and water supply 13,864 8 1 22,619 5-2
Manufacturing 48,835 28-4 97,380 22-2
Construction 10,637 6-2 30,274 6-9
Distribution, hotels and
catering; repairs 22,855 13-3 62,133 14-2
Transport and communications 13,210 7-7 30,074 6-9
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing 20,001 11-6 86,628 19-8
Ownership of dwellings 10,306 6 0 25,482 5-8
Public administration, defence
and social security 11,439 6-7 29,571 6-8
Education and health services 14,146 8-2 42,547 9-7
Other services 9,227 5-4 29,715 6-8
Total 178,210 103-8
Adjustment for financial services —6,494 —3-8
462,984
-25,242
105-8
-5-8
Gross domestic product at
factor cost (income-based) 171,716
100-0 437,742
100-0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition.
“Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
12 Framework of
Industry and
Commerce
OUTPUT,
EMPLOYMENT
AND
PRODUCTIVITY
Introduction
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain since the
mid-1970s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas industries and
their related products and services; the rapid development of electronic and
microelectronic technologies and their application to a wide range of other
sectors; a steady increase in the share of output and employment accounted
for by private sector enterprises as privatisation has progressed; and a
continuous rise in the service industries’ share of total employment.
Industrial output has risen steadily since the recession of 1980-81, which, as
in other market economies, was largely brought about by a rise in world oil
prices.
This chapter outlines some of the general features of industrial and
commercial performance and organisation, and goes on to describe
government policies and legislation, the functioning of markets and research
and innovation.
Performance
In early 1990 total output was some 30 per cent higher than at its trough in
1981. It was only during 1985, however, that output in the production
industries regained the level of mid-1979, which had been the high point of a
period of growth since 1976. A marked increase in productivity has been a
major feature of recovery. Gains in productivity since the early 1980s,
Table 12.1: Gross Domestic Productaby Industry in 1989
Standard Industrial Classification
Revised 1985
%of
°/
/O
£ million total'’ Employment^'
0 Agriculture, forestry and fishing
1 Energy and water supply
2—4 Manufacturing
5 Construction
6—9 Services
Adjustment for financial services
Gross domestic product at factor cost
(income-based)
6,561
22,619
97,380
30,274
306,150
-25,242
1-5
5- 2
22-5
6- 9
69-9
-5-8
437,742 1000
1-3
21
231
4-7
68-9
1000
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition and Employment Gazette.
'Before depreciation but after providing for stock appreciation.
The difference between the totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
256
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Investment
however, have meant that this increased output was produced with fewer
workers. Consequently, employment, though increasing, is still lower than in
1981. Table 12.1 shows gross domestic product (GDP) by sector and the
percentage of total GDP and of total employment in each sector in 1989.
Output per head in Britain has in the past been lower than in some other
major industrialised countries but it rose sharply from 1981. In recent years
the growth has been among the highest in the major industrialised nations,
although the rate of increase slowed by the late 1980s. The index of output
per head for the economy as a whole was 107 1 (1985=100) in 1989. The
productivity of the manufacturing sector improved more rapidly than in
other major industrialised countries and in 1989 the index stood at 120 0.
The metals manufacturing sector achieved sustained gains in productivity
during the 1980s against a background of declining employment, such that
output per head was 69 per cent greater in 1989 than in 1985. Employment
in most sectors of the economy rose between 1988 and 1989. Table 12.2
shows output and employment indices for these years.
Table 12.2: Output and Employment (Indices: 1985 = 100)
Output
Employment'
Index
1988
Index
1989
Index
1988
Index
1989
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 96-6 97-9
Production industries 109*7 110*2
of which: Energy and water supply 99*3 89-8
Manufacturing 114-3 119*2
Construction 120*7 125*7
Services 115*4 119*3
of which: Distribution, repairs, hotels
and catering 119-4 122-5
Transport and
communications 119-6 125-7
Financial and
business services 134-0 144-0
Other services 114-0 119-0
Whole economy 108*1 113*1
91*6
95*9
79-6
97-4
102*4
107*9
103-3
99-8
119-9
107-1
104*0
87*2
95*8
82-5
97-6
104*2
111*3
107- 2
102-4
129-6
108- 9
106*2
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition and Employment Gazelle.
Excluding self-employment.
Investment in the manufacturing, construction, distribution, transport,
communications, and financial services industries and in ‘other services’
grew by 6-9 per cent in real terms in 1989. Investment in major sectors of the
economy in 1989 (at 1985 prices) is shown in Table 12.3. The figures for
manufacturing industry do not include expenditure on leased assets since
these are attributed to the service industries on the basis of ownership.
Manufacturing industry is, however, a major user of leased assets. The
practice of leasing grew from the early 1970s, but the trend was distorted in
the mid-1980s following changes in the tax treatment of capital investment.
Leasing rose sharply in 1985 but then declined, recovering to stand at 27-5
per cent more than its 1985 level in 1988.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE 257
Table 12.3: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation (Investment) by Sector
£ million Index
1989 1989
(at 1985 prices) (1985= 100)
Agriculture, forestry and Fishing 1,067 108-2
Oil and gas extraction 2,100 74-5
Other energy and water supply 4,310 109-8
Manufacturing 10,787 123-4
Construction and services 44,552 153-3
Dwellings 14,042 118-5
Transfer costs of land and buildings 2,590 87-1
National accounts statistical adjustment 1,600 —
Whole economy 81,048 134-3
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1990 Edition.
Profitability The quality of investment undertaken has shown a marked improvement in
recent years, contributing to a net real rate of return on capital employed by
all non-North Sea industrial and commercial companies of some 10 per cent
in 1988 (the most recent year for which data are available)—the highest since
1969.
Inward Britain is recognised as an attractive location for inward direct investment.
Investment This reflects its membership of the European Community and proximity to
other European markets, stable labour relations and comparatively low rates
of corporate and personal taxation. Direct investment from overseas is
encouraged, overseas-owned firms generally being offered the same facilities
and incentives as British-owned ones.
The Invest in Britain Bureau of the Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI) provides foreign companies with advice and assistance on all aspects of
locating and relocating businesses in Britain, and on expanding existing
facilities. It reported 283 new inward investment projects in 1989. The
promotion of England as a location for inward investment projects is
handled by the English unit of the DTI. Similar advice and assistance is also
available in Scotland through Locate in Scotland; in Wales through Welsh
Development International, the investment arm of the Welsh Development
Agency; and in Northern Ireland through the Industrial Development
Board, Northern Ireland.
At the end of 1989 total United States investment in Britain was valued at
$58,800 million, representing 41 per cent of United States investment in the
European Community. Britain has for many years been the leading country
for United States manufacturing investment in Europe. Since 1951 Britain
has attracted around 38 per cent of Japanese investment in what is now the
European Community. The value of Japanese investment in Britain is
$10,554 million.
Organisation and Ownership
The forms of industrial and commercial organisation and the patterns of
ownership and control are varied. The main categories of organisation are:
unincorporated businesses (sole traders and partnerships), of which there
are more than 1 million; incorporated companies; and public sector
enterprises, which are owned by the Government (see pp 258-9). Incorp-
258
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nationalised
Industries
oration means that companies are entered on an official register of com¬
panies (see p 274). At the end of 1989 there were over 1-2 million companies
on the register, although about 14 per cent of these were in liquidation or in
the process of removal. About 11,000 of these companies were public limited
companies. Although not numerous, co-operative enterprises increased in
number from about 900 in 1979 to about 1,500 in 1989.
In some sectors a small number of large companies and their subsidiaries
are responsible for a large proportion of total production, notably in the
vehicle, aerospace and transport equipment industries. However, it is rare
for only a few shareholders to have a controlling interest, since shares in
these companies are usually distributed among many holders or held by
insurance companies or pension funds representing a cross-section of the
community.
Private enterprises generate about three-quarters of total domestic
income. They account for the greater part of activity in the agricultural,
manufacturing, construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous
service sectors. Public ownership has become less significant with priva¬
tisation (see p 263). The private sector accounted for 79 per cent of total
domestic expenditure in 1989, general government for 20 per cent and
public corporations for 1 per cent.
About 230 British-registered company groups and independent com¬
panies reporting during 1988 each had an annual turnover of more than
£500 million. The annual turnover of British Petroleum (BP) makes it the
sixth largest company in the world and the second largest in Europe. The
British element of Royal Dutch/Shell is the third largest in Europe by
turnover and five other British firms are among the top 25 European
companies.
The electricity supply industry in Great Britain is being privatised, which will
leave as the major nationalised industries British Coal, British Rail, the Post
Office and London Transport. In total the industries account for less than
4 per cent of GDP and employ about 2-5 per cent of all those in employment.
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not civil
servants. However, the boards are responsible to ministers, who appoint the
chairmen and members. Ministers are responsible for agreeing with the
industries their general strategies and have the power to give general
directions as to how the industry should be run, but are not involved in
day-to-day management. The Government’s policy is to encourage the
nationalised industries to behave as far as possible as commercial enterprises.
This is carried out through the financial framework, set by the Government,
within which the industries are expected to operate. The main elements of
the framework are: clear government objectives for the industries; regular
corporate plans and performance reviews; agreed principles relating to
investment appraisal and pricing; financial targets and performance aims;
external financing limits; and systematic monitoring.
To ensure that nationalised industry investment earns an adequate
economic return, there is a ‘required rate of return’ which investment
programmes are expected to achieve. The current rate is 8 per cent in real
terms before tax. Financial targets are set for individual nationalised
industries to give them a framework similar to those of private sector
companies, which need to earn profits. 4 he financial target is usually
supported by a series of performance aims, covering costs and, where
appropriate, standards of service. Performance aims are considered
particularly important for industries with some monopoly power, where
financial targets would not automatically impose pressures for operating
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
259
Industrial
Associations
Industrial
Financing
efficiency. External financing limits, which control the amount of finance
(grants and borrowing) that a nationalised industry can raise in any financial
year, are an important operating control. They are set in the light of a
nationalised industry’s financial target and its expected performance and
investment requirements. The proportion of investment financed from
internally generated funds has risen in recent years.
External scrutiny of nationalised industry efficiency is conducted by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see p 270), which carries out a
number of investigations each year at the instigation of ministers. Where
appropriate, investigations may also be undertaken by management
consultants. Nationalised industry matters are also considered by
parliamentary committees such as the Treasury and Civil Service Committee
and the Public Accounts Committee.
There are several types of voluntary association representing private
enterprises and covering, with varying degrees of completeness, most of
British industry. The central body representing British business and in¬
dustry is the Confederation of British Industry (CBI). The CBI directly
represents about 250,000 parent and subsidiary companies, as well as the
members of some 150 trade associations and employers’ organisations and
the majority of public sector enterprises. For its members, the CBI provides a
lobby, a forum and a service. It represents their views nationally to the
Government and the public as well as internationally. CBI representatives sit
on such bodies as the National Economic Development Council and the
Health and Safety Commission. The CBI provides a forum where members
can exchange views and experiences and discuss ways of tackling common
problems. It offers information and advice on subjects which members may
be unable to cover themselves, in particular, on overseas markets, health and
safety, company law, environmental issues and employment affairs.
The decentralised body representing business and industry is the
Association of British Chambers of commerce, which represents over 75,000
businesses in 97 chambers. Chambers of commerce provide a forum for
business, representing their views and interests to the Government both at
national and local levels. Chambers promote local economic development,
for example, through regeneration projects, tourism, inward investment
promotion and business services, including overseas trade missions,
exhibitions and training conferences.
Trade associations consist of companies producing or selling a particular
product or group of products. They exist to provide common services,
regulate trading practices and represent their members to government
departments. Employers’ organisations are usually concerned with the
negotiation of wages and conditions of work in a particular industrial sector,
although sometimes one institution may combine this function with that of
a trade association. At the end of 1989 there were 281 employers’
organisations.
Other voluntary associations include industrial development associations
for particular regions or areas and the Scottish Council (Development and
Industry) in Scotland.
Over half of companies’ funds for investment and other purposes are
internally generated. Banks provide the chief external source of finance, but
companies increasingly turned to equity finance from the mid-1980s. The
main forms of short-term finance available in the private sector are bank
overdrafts, trade credit and factoring (making cash available to a company in
exchange for debts owing to it). Types of medium- and long-term finance
Management
Development
and Industrial
Training
Government
Management
Initiatives
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
include bank loans, the mortgaging of property and the issue of shares and
other securities to the public through The International Stock Exchange.
The leasing of equipment may also be regarded as a form of finance. Other
sources of finance for industry include the Government, the European
Community and specialist financial institutions.
The 1980s were particularly notable for the growth of schemes involving
venture capital (equity funds made available by financial institutions in
support of innovative or other new and growing business ventures).
Investment by the 124 full members of the British Venture Capital
Association, the umbrella organisation for all significant sources of venture
capital in Britain, reached £1,650 million in 1989, representing an 18 per
cent increase compared with funds invested in 1988. The industry has
invested some £5,000 million since 1984 and currently commands an
investment pool of more than £6,000 million. There has also been a rise in
the number of ‘buy-outs’, in which the staff or management of a company
raise the finance to purchase it, and ‘buy-ins’, in which the staff or
management of one firm purchase another. In the period from 1979 to 1989
there were nearly 3,000, with a total value of more than £20,300 million.
Management education is provided by many polytechnics and colleges of
higher and further education. Some regional management centres have
been established in England and Wales by associations of these colleges, and
there are several similar organisations in Scotland. Universities make an
important contribution, especially through the full-time postgraduate
programmes at business schools such as those of London, Manchester,
Durham, Warwick and Strathclyde universities. Training courses for
managers are offered by several independent colleges, including the
Management College (Henley-on-Thames), Ashridge College (Berk-
hamsted) and the Cranfield School of Management (Bedford). Open and
distance learning opportunities are becoming more widely available. The
British Institute of Management, which aims to encourage excellence in
management, has a particular interest in management training. There are a
number of other professional bodies concerned with standards and training
in specialised branches of management.
The Open University, which provides degree courses using distance
learning techniques, notably television broadcasts, has set up the Open
University Business School, which offers part-time courses leading to a
diploma in management, of which more than 200 have been awarded. The
School has been used by over 3,000 companies and organisations since it
opened in 1983. Managers continue to work while studying, which is of
particular use to those small companies which cannot afford to release staff
on a full-time basis.
The Management Charter Initiative, an employer-led initiative to promote
management development, was launched in 1987. Over 500 member
organisations now subscribe to a code of best practice and support the
Initiative’s aims of developing a competence-based structure of management
qualifications and providing a forum for all those involved in management
development.
The DTI is working with other government departments and with industry
to improve management education and development and to spread
awareness about best management practices. It strongly supports the
Management Charter Initiative (see above). The consultancy support
offered by the DTI to businesses with fewer than 500 employees is designed
to help businesses improve their management performance. Another
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
261
Engineering
Council
The Enterprise
Initiative
programme, ‘Managing into the 90s’, is designed to encourage managers to
evaluate the role of design and quality, manufacturing management, and
purchasing and supply, within an overall business strategy leading to
improved competitiveness.
The DTI has also encouraged the growth of links between industry and
higher education in recent years, primarily through collaborative research.
One of the most successful ways has been the Teaching Company Scheme,
under which young graduates undertake key projects in companies under
the joint supervision of academic and company staff.
The Engineering Council was established under Royal Charter in 1981. Its
objectives are to promote the science and practice of engineering and to
advance education in engineering. The Council maintains a register of
300,000 chartered engineers, incorporated engineers and engineering
technicians. In co-operation with the various professional institutions and
other organisations concerned with training in engineering, it has set
standards for education, training and experience, and accredited courses by
which people qualify for registration. The Council is advised by some 300
industrial affiliates, which are employers of engineers, on industrial
requirements for engineers and technicians.
Government Policies and Legislation
The DTI has the main responsibility for the Government’s relations with
industry and commerce. Specific responsibilities include technology and
research, overseas trade and export promotion, competition policy and
consumer affairs, company legislation and the Patent Office. Through the
Invest in Britain Bureau, it provides advice and assistance to foreign
companies on locating in Britain.
Other departments whose responsibilities have a bearing on industrial and
commercial activity include HM Treasury, the Department of Employment,
the Departments of Energy, Transport and the Environment, and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. The Scottish, Welsh and
Northern Ireland Offices are responsible for the range of industrial policies
in their areas.
The results of a review of policies and organisation of the DTI were
published in 1988. They confirmed the Government’s belief that economic
decisions are best taken by those competing in the market place, and that the
responsibility of government is to create the right climate for markets to
work better, and to encourage enterprise.
The Enterprise Initiative, announced at the same time, brings together a
wide range of the services that the DTI provides for industry and commerce.
Central to the Enterprise Initiative are the six consultancy initiatives, which
encourage small and medium-sized businesses to use outside consultancy
services as a regular part of their management strategy. These offer
consultancy support in design, marketing, manufacturing systems, quality,
business planning, and financial and information systems. In Scotland and
Wales these initiatives are operated by the respective Development Agencies.
Assistance is available to businesses with fewer than 500 employees. In the
Assisted Areas (see p 266) and Urban Programme Areas, two-thirds of the
costs of a project are met; elsewhere the rate is 50 per cent. Some £66 million
is being provided in 1990-91 to support the consultancy initiatives.
The emphasis of the Department’s work has therefore been increasingly
on the promotion of open markets through competition policy, privatisation,
262
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Single European
Market
Small Firms
deregulation and international trade negotiations. Positive attitudes to
enterprise are being encouraged through improved links between business
and education. Smaller firms, in particular, are being helped to gain access to
the specialised skills and information essential to successful enterprise in a
competitive market. There is special emphasis on promoting enterprise in
the less prosperous regions.
These changes, designed to meet the needs of an expanding economy, are
being reflected in the pattern of DTI spending and in that of its
organisation. Within a smaller total, expenditure on innovation has in¬
creased substantially. There has been a shift from near-market support for
individual companies towards collaborative research. In April 1990 the DTI
was reorganised to bring business into more direct contact with officials
dealing with particular policies. Expertise on such subjects as the single
European market, technology, international trade policy, the environment,
deregulation and standards is now concentrated in divisions and branches
which have responsibility for a single, related set of activities. Where the DTI
has specific responsibilities and most contact with a particular market
sector—for example, aerospace, shipbuilding, vehicles and steel—task forces
deal directly with businesses. A Market Intelligence Unit carries out assess¬
ments of sectors’ performance and maintains a basic core of information
about individual markets on behalf of the rest of the Department.
The Government is firmly committed to the objective of completing the
single European market by the target date of the end of 1992. This will
provide major benefits for business and consumers and improve European
competitiveness in world markets. The DTI’s ‘Europe—Open for Business’
campaign is designed to bring home to business the importance of 1992 and
the need to prepare for the single market.
The contribution of small businesses to the British economy is now well
established. Small firms bring competition and innovation, and are an
important source of new jobs and products. They employ 36 per cent of the
private sector workforce and are producing 21 per cent of British turnover.
The Government’s policies of achieving steady growth and of setting lower
levels of public expenditure and personal taxation have helped to create
conditions in which people are willing to invest and start businesses. New
businesses were set up at a net rate of almost 1,700 a week in 1989, compared
with just over 300 a week in 1980. The stock of businesses, most of which are
small, increased by 29 percent in the 1980s.
The Government recognises that creating a suitable economic en¬
vironment is not enough by itself. It therefore runs a number of schemes
which provide either direct assistance or advice and guidance on a wide
range of business problems affecting small firms. In addition to DTI
schemes such as the consultancy initiatives, the Department of Employment
(in England) runs schemes aimed at small firms; there are corresponding
schemes in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. These include the Small
Firms Service, which provides information, advice and counselling to
prospective and established small businesses, and the Loan Guarantee
Scheme, under which the Government guarantees repayment of 70 per cent
of medium-term loans made by financial institutions (rising to 85 per cent of
loans in inner city Task Force areas).
The Business Expansion Scheme improves the flow of equity finance to
small firms by offering tax incentives to individuals who invest in qualifying
unquoted companies, and the Enterprise Allowance Scheme enables un¬
employed people to claim an allowance while establishing a new business. In
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
263
Deregulation
Privatisation
Government
Finance
Taxation
addition, the Government has introduced a range of tax concessions as well
as training for people setting up their own businesses, and has encouraged
the development of new advisory services and of new sources of venture
capital within the private sector.
The Government seeks to create a framework in which enterprise can
flourish by removing barriers to market entry and constraints on business
growth. It therefore wishes to minimise the requirements imposed on
businesses by central (and local) government which divert resources from
mainstream commercial activities.
All proposed requirements, whether of British or European Community
origin, are examined for their impact on business. The costs to business are
taken into account in deciding whether and how they should be imposed.
Existing controls are also reviewed to identify any which may be unnecessary
or outdated. One important mechanism is the annual rolling programme of
deregulation reviews to which departments contribute. The deregulation
initiative is co-ordinated by the DTTs Deregulation Unit, working with
regulatory departments’ own units. Other government departments with
regulatory responsibilities have their own deregulation units.
The Government believes that the best way to improve the performance of
the nationalised industries in the long term is to expose them to market
forces, through privatisation and the promotion of competition.
Privatisation has also provided a major opportunity for the Government to
pursue its policy of widening share ownership, encouraging both employees
and the general public to take a direct stake in British industry. Employees in
privatised companies are normally given a preferential right to buy shares in
the new companies. Between 1979 and 1989 the Government privatised 29
major businesses (including the flotation of the ten water and sewerage
companies of England and Wales following enabling legislation in 1989),
with net proceeds of some £24,500 million. This has led to a substantial
increase in the proportion of the adult population who are shareholders to
24 per cent in 1990, compared with 7 per cent in 1979.
Major businesses which have been privatised include British Gas, British
Telecom, British Steel, British Aerospace, Cable and Wireless, British
Airways, Royal Ordnance, the Rover Group, Britoil, Rolls-Royce, BAA
(formerly the British Airports Authority) and most of British Shipbuilders.
Many other state enterprises have also been sold and about 800,000 jobs
have been transferred to the private sector. The electricity supply industry in
Great Britain will be privatised by mid-1991. To stimulate efficiency, the
Government has relaxed the statutory monopolies of a number of
nationalised industries.
In 1989-90 the DTI spent £1,373 million on regional and all other forms of
industrial support. Following the 1988 review of policy (see p 261), it is
expected that marked changes in support will occur in the next few years.
Spending on consultancy services by small and medium-sized businesses will
increase, with a shift away from automatic and near-market support for
individual companies towards consultancy services, technology transfer and
collaborative research. Combined with the initiatives on business and
education, management development and the encouragement of enterprise
in less prosperous areas of Britain, these changes imply an increase in
spending over that planned before the policy review.
The rates of corporate taxation have been progressively reduced. In the case
of business plant and machinery there is an annual allowance against profits
Training
Business and
Education
DESIGN,
QUALITY,
STANDARDS
AND AWARDS
Design
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for tax purposes of 25 per cent (on a reducing balance basis), beginning in
the year in which expenditure occurs. There is an allowance for investment
in industrial building of 4 per cent a year. Special arrangements exist for
short-life (often high-technology) assets. There are 100 per cent allowances
for capital expenditure on scientific research, and, in designated Enterprise
Zones, for expenditure on construction.
A well-trained workforce is essential for economic growth, and recent
technological advances have created a need for an even greater quantity,
range and quality of technical and vocational training, both for young
people and for adults. The main responsibility for training rests with em¬
ployers and individuals. The Business & Technician Education Council
(BTEC), a privately funded body, deals with the education and training of
technicians and their equivalents in the professions and commerce. It
designs syllabuses and validates courses offered at colleges of further
education and elsewhere in England and Wales; its Scottish counterpart is
the Scottish Vocational Education Council.
The first Training and Enterprise Councils have been set up. The
Government envisages a network of about 80 such councils in England and
Wales. They will seek to evaluate local labour markets with the help
of managers and directors of businesses, aiming to create training
opportunities suited to local needs. In Scotland, a network of 22 local
enterprise companies with a range of functions is being established to work
with Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise (see p 268).
Employment Training, a programme operating since September 1988,
combines a number of other programmes. It is administered by the Training
Agency within the Department of Employment. Another programme is
Youth Training, which offers a course of planned work experience
integrated with off-the-job training for 16- and 17-year-old school-leavers.
The Government encourages employers and others to give adult training a
high priority and to secure an adequate supply of people with up-to-date
skills.
The pilot network of City Technology Colleges, which was announced by the
Department of Education and Science in 1986, provides a broadly based
secondary education with a strong technological content, and involves
employers in the management of the colleges. A similar initiative is planned
in Scotland.
The Enterprise and Education Initiative has three main aims: that every
young person should have two or more weeks of work experience before
leaving school; that each year 10 per cent of teachers should have the
opportunity to gain some experience in businesses; and that every trainee
teacher should have the opportunity to gain an appreciation of the needs of
employers and of the importance of links between schools and employers.
Good design is seen as an important factor for improving commercial
success. The DTI encourages industry and commerce to pay more attention
to good design and to integrate it with other management functions. It
organises conferences to underline the importance of design and has
encouraged design education at all levels, including business education.
The DTEs main agent for design promotion is the Design Council. The
Council has responsibility for the design element of the ‘Managing into the
90s’ programme. It also offers advice and assistance on design matters
through its offices in London, Cardiff, Wolverhampton, Manchester, Belfast
and Glasgow. Its activities include giving advice on design problems; the
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
265
Quality and
Standards
Measurement
Standards
organising of conferences and seminars; providing help for design educa¬
tion; training courses; and the production of a range of publications and
videos. The DTI’s consultancy initiative on design, operated by the Design
Council, offers firms employing up to 500 people 5 to 15 days of subsidised
consultancy. The Council provides annual awards for consumer and contract
goods, engineering products and components, computer software, medical
equipment, and motor vehicles and accessories. The Chartered Society of
Designers is the professional body representing the interests of designers
and the Design Business Association is the trade association for design
consultants.
An important aim of government policy is to enhance the quality of British
goods and services by encouraging an integrated approach by industry and
commerce to quality at all stages of design, production, marketing and
delivery to customers.
Through its support for consultancy projects the Government is helping
small and medium-sized firms to learn about and apply quality-management
techniques based on a national standard which meets international
requirements. To increase customer confidence, companies are being
encouraged to obtain certification to this standard. This National
Accreditation Council for Certification Bodies was set up to assess and
officially approve the competence and performance of organisations
undertaking such certification. Companies certified by accredited bodies are
permitted to use the national quality mark.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), a voluntary body, is responsible
for setting national standards. It works with industry and government to
produce standards which are of the required quality, relevant to the needs of
the market, internationally respected, and suitable for public purchasing and
regulatory purposes. With government support, the BSI has become
increasingly involved in European and international standards-making; the
common standards will contribute to the aim of creating a single internal
market in the European Community by 1992. About 30 per cent of the
10,535 British Standards are now identical with international standards.
Resource, a joint venture between the BSI and the Government, has been
launched to promote collaboration with overseas countries in standards,
quality assurance, metrology and testing.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL) provides most of the measurement
standards and associated calibration facilities necessary to ensure that
measurements in Britain are made on a common basis and to the required
accuracy. It maintains links with other national standards laboratories to
ensure international compatibility in standards and measurement essential
for overseas trade and technological co-operation. The NPL’s National
Measurement Accreditation Service (NAMAS) provides a focal point for the
voluntary accreditation of calibration and testing facilities in Britain. It forms
a link between the national standards maintained by the NPL and accredited
measurement laboratories. NAMAS-accredited laboratories offer calibration
of scientific instruments and provide official certificates in many areas,
primarily the physical, chemical and engineering fields. Related NPL
functions are research in scientific and technological areas of national
importance, such as engineering materials and information technology.
Standards associated with analytical measurement are the responsibility of
the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (LGC). International agreement
is based on the provision of appropriate standards and the utilisation of
approved methods of analysis. These standards and approved methods also
Industrial
Awards
REGIONAL
INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
form the basis for NAM AS accreditation of laboratories carrying out
analytical measurement. In addition, the LGC undertakes research on the
development of special materials and chemical sensors, and provides an
analytical and advisory service for revenue protection, human and animal
health, the environment and consumer safety.
The National Weights and Measures Laboratory is responsible for
administering the Weights and Measures Act 1985, which is largely con¬
cerned with standards and measuring equipment for use in trade. The
Government has accepted most of the recommendations of the committee
appointed to review the metrological control of weighing and measuring
equipment for commercial use, including the introduction of a self¬
verification scheme. Similar arrangements are likely to feature in new
European Community directives on measuring instruments, which will
replace national legislation by 1992, ensuring free circulation of approved
equipment within the Community.
Recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred annually by
the Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology. The Queen’s Awards are
granted on the recommendation of the Prime Minister’s Advisory Com¬
mittee, which includes senior representatives from industry, commerce, the
trade unions and government departments. All firms incorporated in Britain
are eligible to apply, regardless of size and their products or services. Other
awards include the Export Awards for Smaller Manufacturers (for firms
employing fewer than 200 people) and the MacRobert Award, the major
award for engineering in Britain made by the Fellowship of Engineering for
successful technological innovation.
Regional industrial policy operates within a general economic framework
designed to encourage enterprise and economic growth in all areas of
Britain. In some areas, however, specific additional help is needed, which is
provided under the Regional Initiative. Help is focused on the Assisted
Areas—Development Areas and Intermediate Areas (see map).
The principal instruments are regional selective assistance, available
throughout the Assisted Areas for investment projects undertaken by firms
provided they meet certain criteria; and Regional Enterprise Grants,
available in Development Areas to support investment and innovation in
firms with fewer than 25 employees. The English Industrial Estates
Corporation provides industrial and commercial premises in certain parts of
the Assisted Areas in England where private sector provision is deficient.
Regional industrial policy is the D I I s responsibility, with similar policies
administered in Scotland by the Scottish Office and in Wales by the Welsh
Office.
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982, offers a wide range of
incentives for manufacturing and service industry projects which create jobs.
Such projects may be eligible for interest relief grants, favourable rental
terms for factories, and grants to assist with setting-up costs and research and
development costs. The Board can also provide equity and loan capital for
new and expanding businesses, assist the development of new high-
technology products and processes, and promote joint ventures with
overseas companies. The incentives available to manufacturing industry in¬
clude training grants, exemption from rates (local property taxes)
for manufacturing premises, 30 per cent grants for approved energy
conservation projects, grants to attract and retain good management, and an
advisory service on quality and production methods. A similar range of
268
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
European
Community
Regional Policy
and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
incentives and advisory services is available to small businesses from the
Local Enterprise Development Unit.
The Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial de¬
velopment in their respective countries. They encourage investment by
overseas companies and provide equity and loan capital for industrial
projects, which they are expected to do with a maximum of private sector
participation. They provide government factories, and have powers to assist
small firms, promote new technology and undertake land reclamation and
urban renewal. Under the Enterprise and New Towns (Scotland) Act 1990
two new bodies will be created from April 1991: Scottish Enterprise and
Highlands and Islands Enterprise. These bodies will incorporate the
functions of the Scottish Development Agency and the Highlands and
Islands Development Board with those of the Training Agency in Scotland.
The new agencies will co-ordinate major policy and programme initiatives,
and will supervise the economic and training functions of the new network
of local enterprise companies throughout Scotland.
The Rural Development Commission is responsible for advising the
Government on issues affecting rural England and for promoting its
economic and social development. It provides small factories and workshops
which are built and managed by English Estates, and administers a grant
scheme for the conversion of redundant buildings to industrial or
commercial premises. The Commission provides technical, management
and financial advice, training facilities and loans to small businesses from
local offices. The Commission also supports voluntary bodies in rural areas
to encourage community activity and self-help, and provides finance for
small-scale rural housing and transport schemes. The Commission’s
resources are concentrated in the areas of greatest need, which are des¬
ignated Rural Development Areas.
In Scotland and Wales similar services are provided, generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural
areas. In Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides
loans and grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries
and services, makes available training grants and advice, and builds factories.
The Development Board for Rural Wales (usually referred to as ‘Mid-Wales
Development’) provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small
businesses. It has a general responsibility to promote the economic and social
well-being of mid-Wales and a particular responsibility for the new town of
Newtown, Powys.
The European Community seeks to increase the degree of economic
cohesion and to ensure a more balanced distribution of economic activities
within the Community. The principal responsibility for helping less pros¬
perous areas remains with national authorities, but the Community may
complement schemes through aid from a number of sources.
The European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) was established in
1975. Its purpose is to contribute to the correction of the main regional
imbalances within the Community by participating in the development and
structural adjustment of regions whose development is lagging behind and
by assisting areas seriously affected by industrial decline. Between 1975 and
1989, £3,650 million was allocated to Britain, mainly for the Assisted Areas
(see p 268) and Northern Ireland.
Following the reform of the European Community Structural Funds in
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
269
European
Investment Bank
European Coal
and Steel
Community
COMPETITION
POLICY
1988, the ERDF, the European Social Fund and the Guidance Section of the
European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund had their total
funding allocation doubled for the period 1987—93, effective from 1989.
The total budget for the three funds in 1993 will be £10,300 million at 1988
prices.
The emphasis of the ERDF is on ‘Objective 1’ regions, mostly in southern
Europe, but including Northern Ireland. Up to 80 per cent of the ERDF may
go to these regions. In 1989 the Commission announced that the allocation
for Northern Ireland was to be £550 million at 1989 prices over the period
1989—93. In 1989 the European Commission confirmed its ‘Objective 2’
(Industrial Areas) list, which included most British and some other areas
which gained some eligibility for the first time. Britain’s allocation is £1,100
million between 1989 and 1991.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up
by the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community
subscribing to its capital. The Bank’s aims are to help to stimulate de¬
velopment in less-favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to
help to create new activities and to offset structural difficulties affecting
certain sectors. The EIB also serves projects of common interest to several
member states or the Community as a whole. It has lent nearly £8,000
million since 1973 for projects in Britain, mostly for public works, infra¬
structure works, and manufacturing projects in the Assisted Areas.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) provides loans and grants
to encourage rational distribution of production and a high level of
productivity in the coal and steel industries while safeguarding employment
and avoiding unfair competition. Areas eligible for aid are coal industry
projects, conversion schemes, construction of housing for workers, allow¬
ances for redeployed workers, and research, including research of a social
or medical nature.
Functioning and Regulation of Markets
While preferring to let markets operate with as little regulatory machinery as
possible, the Government recognises that action may be needed to ensure
that markets remain open and fair. Therefore the stimulation of competition
and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti-competitive are
important features of government policy. Responsibilities are exercised by
the DTI; by the Office of Fair Trading, a government agency headed by a
Director General; and by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Related policies concern consumer and investor protection, the conduct of
companies and their officers, insolvency, and the openness of markets for
foreign trade and investment. This section concentrates on policies covering
domestic markets.
Within the public sector the Government has taken a number of steps to
increase the exposure of trading organisations to competition, notably
through privatisation (see p 263). Within the DTI the work of the Enterprise
and Deregulation Unit is specifically concerned with reducing regulations
which inhibit competition, innovation or consumer choice (see p 263). The
competition policy division is primarily responsible for competition issues.
Competition policy is supported by machinery for scrutinising and
regulating monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive
trade practices, and by powers to regulate any structural changes or anti-
270
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Monopolies and
Mergers
competitive practice found to operate against the public interest. The Fair
Trading Act 1973 deals with monopolies and mergers; the Restrictive Trade
Practices Act 1976 deals with restrictive agreements; the Resale Prices Act
1976 deals with resale price maintenance; the Competition Act 1980 deals
with anti-competitive practices; and provisions contained in the Financial
Services Act 1986 deal with competition policy considerations relevant to the
financial services sector. In 1989 the Government published a White Paper
on restrictive trade practices (see p 272).
The Government is taking steps to increase competition in professional
services by tackling unjustifiable restrictive practices, including restrictions
on fee scales and on advertising. The opticians’ monopoly on the dispensing
of spectacles and the solicitors’ monopoly on conveyancing have been ended.
Certain professional groups (for example, accountants, solicitors, veterinary
surgeons, stockbrokers, doctors, dentists and surveyors) have eased the
restrictions on advertising by their members. Building societies are now
allowed to offer a greater range of services, thus bringing more competition
into financial services and estate agency. The Courts and Legal Services Bill
provides for ending the separation of professional practice between
barristers and solicitors with the intention of increasing competition.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of
Fair Trading can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission, an independent body. Its members are drawn from a
variety of backgrounds, including lawyers, economists, industrialists and
trade unionists. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at
least a quarter of a particular kind of product or service is supplied by a
single person or a group of connected companies or by two or more people
acting in a way which prevents, restricts, or distorts competition. The market
definition of a monopoly can relate to all of Britain or part of it. If the
Commission finds that a monopoly situation has effects which operate
against the public interest, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has
powers to take action by order to remedy or prevent the harm which the
Commission considers may exist. Alternatively the Director General may be
asked to negotiate undertakings to remedy the adverse effects identified by
the Commission.
The Government believes that the market is, in most cases, the best judge
of the advantages and disadvantages of mergers. Accordingly, its policy
provides for the great majority of mergers which do not pose a threat to
competition to be decided by the market. However, it recognises the need to
intervene where mergers could lead to a significant reduction in competition
or otherwise raise matters of public concern; this is provided for by the Fair
Trading Act 1973.
Such a merger is defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control and, as a result, the newly
created enterprise supplies at least 25 per cent of any product or services, or
an existing 25 per cent market share is increased, or the total value of gross
assets to be taken over would exceed £30 million. A merger situation or
proposed merger situation may be referred to the Commission by the
Secretary of State after he has considered advice from the Director General.
If the Commission finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected
to operate against the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it or
impose conditions on it either by asking the Director General to obtain
suitable undertakings from the companies involved to remedy the adverse
effects identified, or by making a statutory order. If the merger has already
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
271
Financial Services
European
Community
taken place, the Secretary of State can take similar action to undo it. The Fair
Trading Act 1973 contains special provisions for newspaper mergers.
The conclusions of the Government’s review of mergers policy, published
in 1988, reaffirmed that merger reference decisions would continue to be
made primarily, though not exclusively, on competition grounds. In
evaluating the competitive situation, account would be taken of the extent of
competition in the domestic market from overseas sources and of the
competitive position of British firms in overseas markets.
The Companies Act 1989 (see p 274) introduced a number of changes
aimed at improving merger control procedures: a voluntary procedure for
pre-notification of proposed mergers which would, for the majority of cases,
permit a prompt clearance; provision for the acceptance of statutory
undertakings by the parties concerned so as to obviate the need for a full
investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission in certain cases;
and the temporary prohibition on dealing in one another’s shares by the
parties to a merger referred to the Commission.
The Competition Act 1980 gives the Secretary of State powers to refer to
the Commission any questions concerning the efficiency and costs of the
service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly situation by, certain
bodies in the public sector. The results of inquiries are reported to
Parliament.
The Financial Services Act 1986 offers greater protection to investors by
establishing a new regulatory framework for the industry. The Act was
modified by the provisions of the Companies Act 1989, which empower
the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) to set out general principles
governing the conduct of investment business.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986, the Director General of Fair
Trading is required to consider the implications for competition of rules,
regulations, guidance and other arrangements and practices of the
regulatory bodies, investment exchanges and clearing houses. The Director
General is also required to report to the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry where a significant or potentially significant effect on competition
has been identified. If the Secretary of State agrees with this view and does
not consider that the provisions are necessary for the protection of investors,
the Secretary of State may refuse or revoke recognition of the organisation
or require it to make alterations to its provisions.
The objective of the European Community’s competition policy is to ensure
that there is free and fair competition in trade between member states and
that state barriers to trade which the Treaty of Rome seeks to dismantle are
not replaced by private barriers which fragment the common market. The
competition rules are set out in articles of the Treaty of Rome which are
directly applicable to member states and in regulations made under the
articles. In most areas of economic activity their enforcement is primarily the
responsibility of the European Commission, which has powers to investigate
and terminate alleged infringements and to impose fines.
The Treaty prohibits agreements or concerted practices which may affect
trade between member states and have as their object, or effect, the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the common
market. Agreements meeting specified criteria may be exempted from this
prohibition and, subject to particular conditions and safeguards, certain
categories of agreement are exempted completely. The latter include certain
agreements in exclusive distribution and exclusive purchasing, franchising,
272
Anti¬
competitive
Practices
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
patent licensing, ‘know-how’ licensing, co-operative research and de¬
velopment, specialisation, motor vehicle distribution and servicing, and air
services within the European Community. The Treaty also prohibits any
abuse of a dominant position within the common market or a substantial
part of it to the extent that it affects trade between member states.
In 1989 a regulation for the control of mergers at European level was
agreed by the European Community and came into force in September
1990. This provides for the European Commission to control mergers
having a Community dimension defined in terms of aggregate turnover,
turnover of the undertakings within the Community and turnover within
different member states. Qualifying mergers must be notified and will be
prohibited if the European Commission determines that they create or
strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition
would be significantly impeded.
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General of Fair Trading can
investigate any business practice (whether in the public or private sectors)
which may restrict, distort or prevent competition in the production, supply
or acquisition of goods or services in Britain. If the Director General
concludes that a practice is anti-competitive, an undertaking may be sought
from the business responsible for the practice or, in default of such an
undertaking, the matter may be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission to establish whether it operates against the public interest. On
an adverse finding by the Commission, the Secretary of State has powers to
take remedial action.
Restrictive Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, certain kinds of commercial
Trade Practices agreements that contain restrictions have to be notified to the Direc¬
tor General of Fair Trading for registration. Broadly, an agreement is
registrable if it is between two or more people who are involved in the
production or supply of goods or the supply of services in Britain and who
accept some limitation on their freedom to make their own decisions about
matters such as prices or conditions of sale. Failure to register an agreement
within the required period means that the restrictions are void and
unenforceable and the parties may be liable to legal proceedings.
Once an agreement has been registered, the Director General is under a
general duty to refer it to the Restrictive Practices Court, and the Court must
declare the restrictions contrary to the public interest unless the parties can
satisfy the Court by reference to criteria laid down in the Act that this is not
the case. Restrictions declared contrary to the public interest are void, and
the Court can order the parties not to give effect to them or make any similar
agreement. In practice, however, the great majority of agreements never
reach the Court because, for example, the parties elect to give up the
restrictions rather than go to court, or the Secretary of State accepts the
Director General’s advice that the restrictions are not significant enough to
warrant reference to the Court.
In 1989 the Government published a White Paper which set out proposals
to amend the existing legislation. These would prohibit agreements which
had the effect of preventing, restricting or distorting competition unless an
exemption had been granted because they had offsetting economic benefits.
The present requirement to register agreements would be abolished. The
Director General’s powers of investigation would be strengthened. Financial
penalties for violation of the prohibition would be proposed by a new
tribunal and the scope for private actions extended. Few of the existing
exemptions from the Restrictive Trade Practices Act—for example, those for
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
273
Consumer
Protection
Consumer
Advice and
Information
many professional services—would automatically be carried over into the
new legislation.
The Government believes that consumers are best protected by open and
competitive markets offering the widest range of choice in goods and
services, backed by adequate information. In addition to laws designed to
benefit customers by encouraging effective competition, there are laws
designed to ensure that consumers are adequately protected.
The Director General of Fair Trading has a number of duties and powers
under existing legislation (including the Fair Trading Act 1973) which
provide machinery for the continuous review of consumer affairs. It also
allows for action to deal with trading practices which unfairly affect
consumers’ interests, for action against persistent offenders under existing
law, and for the negotiation of self-regulatory codes of practice to raise
trading standards. The Director General is responsible for the operation of
legislation which regulates consumer credit and hire business and estate
agency work. The Director General also has responsibilities under legislation
controlling misleading advertisements.
The Food Safety Act 1990 revises and streamlines the large body of food
law in Great Britain. It contains new measures to enhance food safety and
protect the consumer, including tougher penalties and better enforcement
powers. The Medicines Act 1968 provides for the control of medicinal
products and certain other substances and articles through a system of
licences and certificates. A range of legislation governs the sale and supply of
goods and services, among which are the Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the
Trade Descriptions Act 1968. The marking and accuracy of quantities are
regulated by the Weights and Measures Act 1985. The Consumer Credit Act
1974 provides comprehensive protection for consumers who enter into
credit or hire transactions. The Consumer Protection Act 1987 implements a
harmonised European Community regime of civil law covering product
liability and establishes a general criminal offence of supplying unsafe
consumer goods.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of
important activities, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s
economic interests, promotion of consumer education and strengthen¬
ing the representation of consumers. The views of British consumer
organisations are represented in Europe by the Consumers in the European
Community Group (UK).
Advice and information on consumer matters is provided to the general
public at local level by Citizens Advice Bureaux and the trading standards or
consumer protection departments of local authorities, and in some areas by
specialist Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and the
associated councils for Scotland and Wales), which receives government
finance, ensures that the consumer’s view is made known to those in
government, industry and elsewhere whose decisions affect the consumer’s
interest. In Northern Ireland the General Consumer Council for Northern
Ireland has wide-ranging responsibilities in consumer protection and
consumer affairs in general.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and other nationalised industries
and the privatised gas industry investigate questions of concern to the
consumer, while some trade associations in industry and commerce have
established codes of practice. In addition, several private organisations work
to further consumer interests. The largest is the Consumers’ Association,
274
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Company Law
funded by the subscriptions of its membership of over one million. The
Association conducts an extensive programme of comparative testing of
goods and investigation of services; its views and test reports are published in
its monthly magazines and other publications. The Association also provides
a legal advice service for an additional subscription. Local consumer groups,
many belonging to a national federation, also promote consumers’ interests
and provide information and advice.
The formation and conduct of companies are mainly regulated by the
Companies Acts 1985 and 1989. ‘Incorporation’ involves registering with the
Registrar of Companies in Cardiff, Edinburgh or Belfast, depending on
whether a company’s registered office is in England or Wales, Scotland or
Northern Ireland. The Acts also deal with capital structure, the rights and
duties of directors and members, and the preparation and filing of accounts.
Most corporate businesses are ‘limited liability’ companies. Each company is
a legal entity distinct from its members, who are not as such liable for its
debts. The liability of members of a limited company is limited to
contributing an amount related to their shareholding. In unincorporated
businesses, such as sole proprietorships or partnerships, by contrast,
individuals are personally liable for any business debts (except where a
member of a partnership is a limited liability company).
Companies may be either public or private. A company must satisfy three
conditions before it can be a public limited company (pic): it must be limited
by shares and have a share capital; it must state in its memorandum of
association that it is to be a public limited company; and it must meet
specified minimum capital requirements. All other registered companies are,
by definition, private companies and, as such, prohibited from offering their
shares to the public.
The Companies Act 1989 builds on the Companies Act 1985, itself a
consolidation of the Companies Acts 1948—83. The Companies Acts are
designed to meet the need for proper regulation in the business en¬
vironment, securing open markets to meet the needs of enterprise and
creating greater safeguards for those wishing to invest in companies or do
business with them. They implement European Community directives
dealing with company and group accounts and their auditing. They also
permit the implementation of changes in policy aimed at reducing
unnecessary burdens on business, strengthen existing rules for the disclosure
of interest in shares, and refine and strengthen powers to investigate
companies.
There are, in addition, the Business Names Act 1985, which regulates the
names under which people may carry on business in Great Britain; and the
Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985, which restates the law on
insider dealing. Powers to appoint inspectors to investigate possible insider
dealing were introduced in the Financial Services Act 1986.
The Insolvency Act 1985 affects both corporate and individual insolvency
proceedings. It introduced for England, Wales and Scotland a licensing
procedure to ensure the professional competence, integrity and in¬
dependence of people who act as trustees of bankrupt individuals, or as
liquidators, receivers or administrators of insolvent companies. Substantially
changing the Companies Act 1985, the Act amended and supplemented the
legislation relating to the winding-up of limited companies and the
appointment of receivers in England, Wales and Scotland. Subsequently
these parts were consolidated with the Insolvency Act 1985 into the
Insolvency Act 1986 and the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986.
To improve the investigation and prosecution of fraud, a Serious Fraud
Industrial and
Intellectual
Property
Research Policy
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE 275
Office has been set up to collaborate with police work on fraud cases;
restrictions on the use of documentary evidence in court cases have been
relaxed; and court procedures have been streamlined.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions, new industrial designs and trade marks. These
matters are administered by the Patent Office, which includes the Design
Registry and the Trade Marks Registry. The Patent Office is a division of the
DTI. Protection is also available under the European Patent Convention and
the Patent Co-operation Treaty, and benefits may be claimed in other
countries by virtue of the International Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property.
The Government is concerned to encourage innovation by providing a
more adequate legal and administrative system for the protection of the
ownership of ideas by means of patents, registered designs, trade marks and
copyright. Measures taken in recent years include a sharp increase in
penalties for making and trading in pirate sound and film recordings
(including video); the extension of copyright protection to owners of
computer software; the widening of the law on trade marks to embrace
services; and the introduction of powers for customs authorities to prevent
the entry of counterfeit goods. Further fundamental changes were
introduced in the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. It included
provisions to combat the unauthorised reproduction of copyright material,
introduce a new form of protection for designs, establish a framework of civil
law for the protection of performers, and make the arrangements for
litigation regarding patents cheaper and simpler.
In September 1990 the Government published a White Paper which
proposed changes designed to modernise and simplify existing trade marks
law, and to make trade mark registration and protection easier.
Research and Innovation
Britain was a pioneer in both computing and telecommunications and
remains among the leading nations in the production of micro- and mini¬
computers as well as in the provision of computing services and systems.
British firms are also in the forefront of technical innovation in the
aerospace industry, especially in the application of electronics. In the
pharmaceuticals sector, the three best-selling drugs in the world in 1987
were discovered and produced in British laboratories. In medical technology
British companies and hospitals have been among the leaders in applying
techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging and laser surgery.
Biotechnology has gained a new impetus from research achievements in
genetic engineering and cell fusion. The DTI and other government bodies
are encouraging the exploitation of new developments. A Biotechnology
Unit at the Laboratory of the Government Chemist is the focus for
government co-operation with industry.
Priorities in science and technology policy are decided by ministers
collectively under the leadership of the Prime Minister. Ministers are assisted
by the Advisory Council on Science and Technology (ACOST), which was
set up in 1987 and maintains a secretariat in the Cabinet Office. In general,
the Government’s view is that research and development with obvious
commercial application should be the responsibility of industry. The
Government funds basic and strategic research to provide the foundations
for future exploitation. It favours a selective approach to funding based
276
Research and
Development
Expenditure
Research and
Technology
Initiative
Collaborative
Research
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
primarily on the scientific quality of research, but it is for industry to identify
important areas and decide what should be exploited.
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1988 was £6,861
million, of which £1,133 million came from government sources, £830
million from overseas and £4,898 million from other sources (mostly from
private sector companies themselves). The main areas of expenditure were
electronics (£2,064 million), chemicals (£1,574 million), aerospace (£814
million), motor vehicles (£468 million) and mechanical engineering (£301
million).
Following the DTI’s review of its policies in 1988, it has concentrated
on encouraging collaborative research projects, both in Britain and
internationally, and on assisting the transfer of technology, especially
between the academic world and industry. In consequence it has ended most
of its schemes of support to single companies, although it is continuing to
provide encouragement for small high-technology companies through
the Small Firms Merit Award for Research and Technology (SMART)
competition, and for very small companies in the Development Areas (see
map, p 267). The policy is focused on situations in which research is
necessary before commercial applications can be developed or in which the
benefits of research are likely to be widespread.
In order to maximise the strengths of industries and researchers, the DTI
encourages British companies to participate in technological collaboration
with other firms and research communities. There are four main ways in
which collaborative research is encouraged and supported:
1. The LINK programme encourages companies to undertake joint
research with higher education institutions and research councils. The
research is pre-competitive but industrially relevant.
2. Eureka is a scheme to encourage European co-operation in the
development and production of high-technology products with global
sales potential, and has the support of 19 European governments and the
European Commission. British companies and research institutions are
full participants in 81 of the 297 projects announced and have expressed
an interest in others.
3. National collaborative research programmes promote longer-term
industrially led projects between British companies in advanced
technologies. The role of the DTI is to help establish the collaborative
links both among firms and between firms and the research community at
the pre-competitive stage. The DTI is currently running collaborative
programmes in advanced robotics, computer-aided engineering, gallium
arsenide (a semi-conductor material with the potential to provide very fast
microelectronic operations), and high temperature superconductivity
(electrical conduction with zero resistance).
4. General industrial collaborative projects have a variety of roles. Support is
given to research and technology organisations serving the research and
development needs of industries in which small and medium-sized firms
often predominate. Some projects encourage the adoption of technology
originating in the science base, particularly in the Government’s research
establishments. Others are collaborative projects involving only industrial
participants in joint research for companies with similar interests.
Within the context of these policies the Government has considered the
next stage in a national collaborative research programme in information
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
277
Technology
Transfer
DTI Research
Establishments
British
Technology
Group
technology. The Government has continued with its support for ESPRIT
(European Strategic Programme of Research into Information Technology),
and under ESPRIT II (1988—92) there will be a British contribution through
the Community budget of some £200 million. A new programme of support
by the Community for information technology will entail a further
contribution by Britain of some £180 million.
The Government also recognises that some resources should be devoted to
national programmes complementary to ESPRIT. The largest of these is the
Information Advanced Technology Programme, which is funded jointly by
the DTI and the Science and Engineering Research Council, which are
providing £34 million and approximately £27 million respectively in the
period 1988-92. British companies are also encouraged to participate in
European Community research and development programmes.
The DTI aims to encourage technology transfer, particularly in three areas:
links between industry and educational institutions, research councils and
government research establishments; the access of small firms to sources of
technology, especially in those localities where technology transfer networks
are least developed; and the diffusion of new technologies likely to have
pervasive applications but in novel and unfamiliar ways, often requiring
changes in other aspects of existing products and processes.
The range of the DTI’s programmes includes: the establishment of
regional technology centres; programmes to promote and facilitate wide¬
spread adoption of modern manufacturing techniques and technologies and
of information technology; and access to technical information from
overseas.
The Department’s research establishments are the National Physical Lab¬
oratory (see p 265), the National Engineering Laboratory (research and
development in mechanical engineering, including manufacturing systems
and robotics, materials applications, thermodynamics and fluid power
systems), the Warren Spring Laboratory (environmental process en¬
gineering) and the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (see p 265).
Following a review of the structure of the four establishments, it was an¬
nounced in 1988 that they should concentrate on research required by the
Government rather than on industrially relevant research and development.
In the case of the National Engineering Laboratory, where roughly three-
quarters of the work is for the benefit of industry, the Government’s view is
that ownership should eventually be transferred to the private sector. The
Warren Spring Laboratory and the Laboratory of the Government Chemist
have become executive agencies within the public sector in order to increase
their flexibility and responsibility. The other laboratories are also to become
executive agencies.
British Technology Group (BTG) promotes the development of new
technology into commercial products, particularly where the technology
originates from public sector sources, such as universities, polytechnics,
research councils and government research establishments. It offers to take
responsibility for protecting and licensing inventions from these sources,
provides funds for development, seeks licensees and negotiates licence
agreements with industry.
As part of its technology transfer role, BTG also provides finance to
British industry to encourage innovation, most commonly through equity or
project finance. Project finance offers companies up to 50 per cent of their
278
BRI TAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
development costs. BTG also helps companies with licensing exploitation of
their developed inventions overseas. BTG approaches transactions on a
commercial basis and expects to recover its investment by means of a
percentage levy on sales of the resulting product or process. In cases where a
particular technology requires the setting up of a new company, BTG can
perform a catalytic role in launching start-up companies.
BTG also has a role in assisting technology transfer between companies.
It assesses the patent position and commercial potential of companies’
proprietary technology and licenses this technology to other companies
worldwide. BTG currently has a portfolio of over 7,000 British patents and
patent applications worldwide and some 500 licence agreements with more
than 100 industrial firms in Britain and overseas. It has 600 development
projects at universities and other public sector institutions, and projects with
industrial companies. Its licensing activities provide most of its income,
which in 1989-90 was just over £25 million.
Some of the major technical achievements which it has exploited or
supported are cephalosporin antibiotics, pyrethin analogues, cancellous
bone pins, cholesterol assays, dental silicate cement and magnetic resonance
imaging.
13 Manufacturing
Industry
Structure
Introduction
Manufacturing accounted for 22 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)
in 1989 and for about one-fifth of the workforce in employment. Around 80
per cent of visible exports consisted of manufactured or semi-manufactured
goods. Almost all manufacturing is carried out by private businesses, the
Government having returned manufacturing enterprises in state ownership
to the private sector in the 1980s.
Table 13.1 shows the number of businesses in manufacturing in 1988. Of
those employing over 1,000 people, some 24 per cent were engaged in all
kinds of engineering, 23 per cent in motor vehicle and other transport
equipment manufacturing and just over 16 per cent in the food, drink and
tobacco industries. The ten largest manufacturing concerns (by £ million
turnover in the latest financial year) are Imperial Chemical Industries
(11,699), BA f Industries (11,358), Hanson Trust (7,396), Unilever (7,364),
Grand Metropolitan (6,029), Ford Motor Company (5,936), British
Aerospace (5,639), General Electric Company (5,553), British Steel (4,906)
and Allied Lyons (4,504).
Table 13.1: Manufacturing—Size of Businesses bv 4 umover and Employment
Annual
turnover
(£’()()())
Number of
businesses''
1988-89
Employment
size
Number of
businesses'1
1988-89
Employment
23-50
51-100
101-250
251-500
501-1,000
1,001-5,000
over 5,000
36,100
26,524
32,346
19,305
13,754
16,069
6,343
1-9
10-19
20-49
50-99
100-199
200-499
500-999
1,000 and over
103,573
13,864
15,464
6,234
3,631
2,456
806
577
295,290
197,613
476,404
429,637
501,469
751,287
555,810
1,664,852
Total
150,441
Total
146,605
4,872,362
Source: Size Analysis of United Kingdom Businesses 1990. Business Monitor PA 1003.
^Defined as legal units, which includes companies, public corporations, partnerships, sole proprietors, general
government and non-profit-making bodies.
“Employment figures are mainly derived from Central Statistical Office inquiries and from value added tax (VAT)
sources and relate generally to 1988.
The number of businesses analysed by turnover excludes 19,578 units with turnover up to £22,100, the threshold for
filing compulsory VAT returns during the 12months ended spring 1989.
Growth
Manufacturing output, output per head and profitability have all risen from
the low point of the recession of 1980-81. In 1989 output was 27-2 per cent
280
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
higher than in 1983 (see Table 13.2). Output per head increased by about 20
per cent between 1985 and 1989—a better record than that of the other
major industrialised economies. Net manufacturing profitability, in terms of
the rate of return on capital employed, rose steadily in the 1980s. The index
of output finally exceeded its 1979 level in 1987 and reached 119-3 in 1989
(1985=100). Part of the improvement in productivity reflects the shedding
of labour in the early 1980s which firms undertook in response to the
recession. Manufacturing employment in Great Britain fell from 7T million
in 1979 to 5-8 million in 1982; in 1989 it was 5T million. Productivity rose
until the late 1980s and has since stabilised.
Table 13.2: Indices of Manufacturing Output (1985 = 100)
Share of
output 1985
(weight per 1,000)
1983
1988
1989
Metal manufacturing
Other minerals and mineral
products
Chemicals and man-made
fibres
Other metal goods
Mechanical engineering
Electrical and instrument
engineering
Motor vehicles and parts
Aerospace and other
transport equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles
Clothing, footwear and
leather
Paper, printing and
publishing
Other manufacturing
38
50
104
53
124
142
55
53
131
31
37
102
80
94-2
97-1
90- 9
96-5
94- 3
84-4
95- 2
104-0
99-5
93-4
91- 9
93-4
93-8
122-0
117-4
113-6
111-7
105-6
117-7
119-7
110-3
105-6
102-2
102-4
125-0
128-1
125- 0
119-8
118-9
112-6
110-3
126- 7
125-2
131-8
106-0
97-5
100-2
131- 8
132- 5
Total
1,000
93-8
114-3
119-3
Source: Central Statistical Office.
The recovery since 1981 has been most notable in chemicals and electrical
and instrument engineering, both in terms of output and productivity.
Productivity has also grown sharply in metal manufacturing (see fable 13.3),
where there has been extensive reorganisation and modernisation.
Investment in manufacturing tends to be cyclical and 1983 saw the
beginning of an upturn following a decline after 1979. In terms of constant
(1985) prices, fixed investment exceeded its 1979 level to reach £10,271
million in 1988 and rose a further 5 per cent in 1989. Total fixed capital ex¬
penditure in manufacturing (excluding leased assets) at current prices was
MANUFACTURING INDUS TRY
281
High-
technology
Industries
Take-up of
Advanced
Technology
£12,426 million in 1989, comprising £10,223 million in plant and
machinery, £1,595 million in new building work and £608 million in
vehicles. Investment by sector is shown in Table 13.3. In addition, assets
worth a further £1,620 million were leased to manufacturers by the financial
community.
The underlying level of exports of manufactured goods has risen in
volume terms. On the basis of overseas trade statistics, the index stood at
131-9 in 1989 (1985=100). This represented a considerable recovery from
1981. Manufacturing exports rose to nearly £75,500 million in 1989, on an
industry basis, compared with £40,000 million in 1983 and £34,800 million
in 1980, at current prices. Manufacturing exports accounted for 30 per cent
of total sales in 1989.
Among the leading exports in 1989 were motor vehicles and other
transport equipment (£14,622 million), chemicals and man-made fibres
(£13,088 million), electrical and electronic engineering products (£12,638
million), mechanical engineering and metal goods (£11,920 million),
aerospace products (£7,114 million), and metal manufacturing and mineral
products (£6,632 million).
Import volumes rose strongly in the 1980s, with the index reaching 151-3
in 1989 (1985=100). Imports were valued at £92,300 million in 1989.
Manufacturing imports accounted for about 37 per cent of home demand in
1989.
The high-technology manufacturing industries in Britain divide into the
broad categories of electrical, electronic and instrument engineering,
chemicals and aerospace. The definition is arrived at primarily by selecting
industries with the highest levels of research and development spending in
relation to their gross output. In some cases assessments of the ratio of
scientific and technical staff to other staff are also counted.
Most of the electrical and electronic industries—office machinery, elec¬
tronic data-processing equipment, basic electrical equipment, telecom¬
munications equipment, electric instruments and control systems, radio and
electronic capital goods, and components—are included. Within instrument
engineering, precision equipment for measuring and checking, and medical,
optical, photographic and filming equipment are included. In chemicals the
definition covers specialised organics, plastics materials, synthetic resins,
synthetic rubbers and pharmaceuticals. Aerospace production as a whole is
defined as high-technology. The high-technology industries have shown
strong growth in recent years, with levels of output, productivity and exports
well above the average for manufacturing.
Microelectronics are increasingly used in production processes in Britain. Of
20,400 engineering sites surveyed in 1989, 60 per cent used computers for
some aspect of manufacturing management. Some 48 per cent of 12,300
design sites used mechanical design, while 25 per cent of 14,900 sites with
machine tools used Computer Aided Design (CAD). About 95,000
computers were installed in the engineering sector in 1989, valued at £2,200
million, and firms reported that new expenditure on computer equipment
was planned to reach £1,100 million during 1990. Many British concerns are
also making use of advanced materials, such as carbon fibre composites in
the aerospace industry, new types of plastics in the automotive sector and
high-fibre, cholesterol-free protein in food production.
In the traditional branches of heavy industry, re-equipment and
rationalisation have led to significant improvements in productivity in recent
282
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mineral and
Metal Products
Iron and Steel
Products
years. For example, British Steel’s modernisation of its facilities at Port
Talbot in south Wales and elsewhere helped the company to raise labour
productivity levels above those of its main international competitors. The
widespread adoption of Advanced Manufacturing Techniques (AM I ) has
enabled the motor vehicle industry to become more efficient. This sector
spent almost twice as much on research and development in 1988 as in 1983,
as did the chemicals industry.
The Government provides financial assistance to companies and research
organisations seeking to develop and improve the technologies needed by
industry. It has, for example, made available resources to encourage and
assist companies to take advantage of the emerging technologies of multi¬
vendor computer communications.
The Sectors of Manufacturing
The relative sizes of the various branches of manufacturing are shown in the
first columns of Tables 13.2 and 13.3. Table 13.3 also shows employment,
productivity and investment levels in each sector. A more detailed
description of the main branches is given in the sections that follow. The
statistics in Tables 13.4-13.12 are supplied by the Department of Trade and
Industry and the Central Statistical Office. Sales figures given are for the sale
of the principal products of each industry, so that they exclude, for example,
any non-electrical goods produced by firms classified as part of the
electronics industry. Where reference is made in the text to the total sales of
an industry, the total includes principal products, merchanted goods, the
sale of waste products, services and work done. For this reason, total sales
figures are generally higher than those given for principal products. In all
cases, the figures given are for the most recent year available.
Britain is the world’s tenth largest steel-producing nation. British producers
delivered 16-9 million tonnes of finished steel in 1989, of which 65 per cent
was sold on the home market and the remainder exported. Britain’s steel
industry has operated a balance of payments surplus continuously since
1983. The major areas of steel production are Wales, Scotland and northern
England, and substantial primary production of steel takes place in the
Midlands.
British Steel pic is the fourth largest steel company in the Western world
and accounts for some 76 per cent of crude steel production in Britain.
British Steel’s output is based on flat products, plate, heavy sections, tubes
and stainless items. Its products are used principally in the packaging,
construction, automotive, engineering, transport, metal goods and energy
industries for many different applications.
Some 40 other steel-producing firms, represented by the British
Independent Steel Producers’ Association, are engaged in the manufacture
of engineering and other special steels, wire rod and wire products,
reinforcements for use in the construction industry, and other more
specialised goods. They are responsible for about 40 per cent by value of
total British steel deliveries.
The industry has achieved significant advances in operational and cost
efficiency over the past decade as a result of extensive rationalisation,
investment in modern plant and continuous improvement of operating
performance. At the same time, product ranges have been extended and
product quality enhanced.
Table 13.3: Output, Employment, Productivity and Investment in
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
be
C
X
3
u
3
3
c oo
2 j 2
3 3 ^ —
0 u £ 3
^ ^ --5 ^
o
u
o
3 cti 3^
e-^s
3 ^ 11
-
;-c“
<U
CL
<?> ^
oo x
05 X
w II
3
<U 00
E 2
1, 05
3 00
£ 05
<U
3
w
3 "poc
3 S oo
CL_C
3 FE ~
2 £
05
o>
oc
05
05
CM
<3mTt<OO5tOCMO)00
CO in <3
XTtTrxcocMcocMX^xcoco
COSOCMOOCOCMC00005CM—>
OOCOSO — <OCM05 05r^cOCMI>
'<td5in'^coind)Or:'eo-^-4<!o
I>00O!OOO-O500 O!OOO —
CO CM CO O m 00 05 CO 05 CM o
CM CO 05 CO CO — in CM O- Tf
co co co i> cm cm in m
Tt< CMCM(0i0O 05 05C0i0i0i0'-^
05CMCOCOCOCOXCM — COiOCM-^
CO_ —t o. 00 CM OO 0_ J>- 05^ i> CO 1> CM
co in oT Tf o' cm in o cm co 05'' 00"'
be 3
■J2
13
OJ
"0
be
3
0
be 3
.£ "O
3 3
5 ^
u 01
"E
3
£•£
£ c .y
? ■= s ^
3 ^ 3 -3
3 t^i a; 1- 03
c'S.E ^ c
“ E ^
c ^5-3.3
n "3 _ 3 u
u. a
<u o
n iu
r; -3
CD
E'E
b fc-o'E 5
QJ r- CD CJ W
_c o 5J 50 3
o -O
•O 3
3 n
n ^
u •£
C.^
 -
c "O
i- 0
L> o
ti.
s- be
w c
"S^
CD D3
T5 ■§
3 Q. &C
^ _ 3
i-^-r
3 S c
oj a ^
> ^3
3.c ciS
<5 3 c
* £lg
qj I- u
‘Zj
a; zr:
H U 0-
(D V
CLJ=
n x
co
CM
O
CM
05
05
O.
CM
CO
03
05
n
c
h
283
Source: Central Statistical Office and Employment Gazelle.
'Employees in employment in Great Britain.
284
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Non-ferrous
Metals
Ceramics
Other Mineral
Products
Table 13.4: Mineral and Metal Products
Sales3
(£ million)
1988
Exports
(£ million)
1989
Imports
(£ million)
1989
Metal manufacturing
of which: iron and steel products
non-ferrous metals
Non-metallic mineral products
of which: glass and glassware
ceramic and heat-
resistant goods
7,929
5,659
2,270
7,453
1,302
1,395
5,255
2,790
2,465
1,377
358
496
6,426
2,649
3,777
1,587
638
364
^Sales and trade Figures are not suitable for purposes of comparison, since they are given for different years.
Output of non-ferrous metals and their alloys in 1989 included primary
aluminium, of which nearly 526,000 tonnes were delivered, and secondary
aluminium, of which 107,000 tonnes were delivered. Some 102,500 tonnes
of copper and copper alloy semi-manufactures were exported. Primary
metal production relies mainly on imported ores, concentrates and partially
refined metal. Secondary and recycled metal plays an important part in raw
material supply.
Britain is a major producer of specialised alloys for high-technology
requirements in the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and
other fuel industries. Titanium and titanium alloys are produced and used in
aircraft production, power generation and North Sea oil production. Nickel
alloys are produced, notably for use in aero-engines operating in high
temperature environments.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands and Wales. In recent
years considerable progress has been made in the development of
‘superplastic’ alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than conventional
alloys. Aluminium lithium is a relatively new alloy which has been developed
by British Alcan Aluminium and is used in aircraft. It is lighter, stronger and
stiffer than normal aluminium.
The ceramics industry comprises manufacturers of a wide range of clay
products, including domestic pottery, sanitaryware and tiles, and clay pipes
used in the building trade. Total sales of ceramic goods in 1989 were £1,207
million. The domestic pottery industry is an important element within the
group. It includes the manufacture of china, earthenware and stoneware,
and accounts for over 30 per cent of the industry’s output. Production of
tableware is concentrated in Stoke-on-Trent. Britain is the world’s leading
manufacturer of fine bone china, much of which is exported.
Research is being conducted into ceramics for use in housebuilding and
diesel and jet engines. Important industrial ceramics invented in Britain
include silicon carbides developed by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority and sialons developed at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Glass-reinforced cement composites for the construction industry were
invented in Britain in the early 1970s and are manufactured under licence in
over 40 countries.
British companies manufactured 5,800 types of bottle and jar in 1989,
forming a large part of the glass industry. They are major suppliers to the
food, drink and pharmaceutical industries. Another major sector is devoted
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
285
Chemicals and
Man-made
Fibres
Chemicals
to the manufacture of flat glass in its various forms, chiefly by the float glass
process developed in Britain by Pilkington Brothers and licensed to
glassmakers throughout the world. Pilkington has also developed an energy¬
saving window glass which reflects room heat without impairing visibility.
Sales of flat glass principal products amounted to £751 million in 1989.
Britain is the world’s biggest exporter of china clay (kaolin). In 1989 some
31 million tonnes, valued at £211 million, were sold overseas. The main
company involved is English China Clays.
Britain’s chemicals industry is the third largest in Western Europe and the
fifth largest in the Western world. Nearly half of its production of principal
products is exported, and in 1989 it had a trade surplus of more than £2,100
million. One company, Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), accounts for a
substantial part of the industry’s production and is the fourth largest
chemicals company in the world. Traditionally Britain has been a major
producer of basic industrial chemicals, such as inorganic and basic organic
chemicals, plastics and fertilisers. Sales of the principal fertiliser products
reached £635 million in 1989. Although these sectors still make up about 38
per cent of the industry’s output, the most rapid growth in recent years has
been in the production of speciality and ‘problem-solving’ chemicals,
especially pharmaceuticals, pesticides and cosmetics. The value of chemicals
produced increased by 4-4 per cent between 1988 and 1989.
Table 13.5: Chemicals and Man-made Fibres
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
25,423 13,088 10,969
10,230 6,299 6,322
4,359 2,078 1,292
4,779 2,142 1,134
2,531 663 426
■See Table 13.4, footnote a.
Chemicals and man-made fibres
of which: basic industrial
chemicals
specialised industrial
products
pharmaceuticals
soap and toilet
preparations
Sales of the principal products of organic chemicals amounted to £4,000
million in 1989 and those of miscellaneous chemicals for industrial use were
in excess of £2,800 million; the surplus on overseas trade in the latter sector
was nearly £460 million.
Notable recent British discoveries and developments in agricultural
chemicals include pyrethroid insecticides, Id’s diquat and paraquat her¬
bicides, systemic fungicides and aphicides, genetically engineered micro¬
bial pesticides and methods of encouraging natural parasites to attack
common pests in horticulture. A substantial proportion of world research
and development in agrochemicals is conducted in Britain.
Exports of cosmetics, toiletries and perfumery in 1989 were £480 million,
compared with imports of £317 million. The home market amounted to
about £ 1,500 million.
A high proportion of inorganic chemicals production consists of relatively
286
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Plastics
Pharmaceuticals
simple bulk chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-metallic
oxides, serving as basic materials for industry. The most important products
sold in the organic chemicals range (by weight) are ethylene (T5 million
tonnes produced in 1989), benzene (626,700 tonnes) and propylene
(440,500 tonnes).
About one-third of semi-manufactured plastics production is exported.
Expansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of
which the most important are polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene
and polypropylene. Total sales of plastics packaging products, valued at just
over £2,000 million in 1989, were largely accounted for by the home market.
Output rose by nearly 45 per cent between 1985 and 1989. A new group of
plastics materials reinforced with carbon fibres is also in commercial
production. They have up to three times the strength but are only 20 per
cent of the weight of steel, and are being increasingly used in aircraft and
vehicle manufacture. ICI has produced the world’s first biodegradable
thermoplastic, Biopol, which has so far been used as a slow release agent for
drugs and herbicides, as well as for making bottles and films that can be
disposed of without polluting the environment. Synthetic rubbers in large-
scale production include butadiene-based neoprene for tyres, high-styrene
for shoe soles and flooring, and oil-resistant nitrile rubbers.
With the development of multi-layer technology, plastics are fast replacing
traditional packaging materials such as paper, tin and glass.
Specialised products in the paint industry include new ranges of synthetic
resins and pigments, powder coatings, non-drip and quick-drying paints and
paints needing only one top coat. Two significant recent innovations have
been solid emulsion paint and a temporary water-based finish, which can be
removed easily by chemical treatment, for vehicle bodies and road markings.
ICI is the world’s largest paint manufacturer. Sales of the principal paint and
varnish products were nearly £1,600 million in 1989.
The pharmaceutical industry in Britain includes some of the world’s largest
multi-national research-intensive manufacturers, as well as middle-sized and
smaller specialist companies, with a total gross output in 1989 of around
£6,000 million. Pharmaceutical exports were valued at £2,142 million; the
industry’s trade surplus of £955 million was the second largest of all
manufacturing sectors. Employing over 70,000 people directly, it supports
employment for 250,000 others in related activities.
The pharmaceutical industry invested more than £800 million in research
and development in 1989. This sum amounts to more than 10 per cent of all
manufacturing industry’s research and development in Britain, representing
about 8 per cent of total world expenditure on medicines research. Progress
in pharmaceutical research has helped to reduce dramatically the impact of
former scourges such as polio, tuberculosis, diphtheria and measles. Other
diseases have proved harder to conquer, but British pharmaceutical
laboratories continue to search for innovative medicines to treat the whole
range of illness and disability.
British firms make 11 of the world’s 50 best-selling medicines. Glaxo’s
ulcer treatment Zantac and Id’s beta-blocker Tenormin, for the treatment
of high blood pressure, are respectively the first and fifth best-selling
medicines in the world. The United States subsidiary of Britain’s Wellcome
Foundation developed Retrovir (also called Zidovudine), the first treatment
for HIV infection to gain government approval, as well as Zovirax, the first
routine treatment for the herpes group of viruses. Other recent major |
developments pioneered in Britain are semi-synthetic penicillins and
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
287
Fibres
Metal Goods
and Mechanical
Engineering
cephalosporins, both powerful antibiotics, and new treatments for asthma,
arthritis and coronary heart disease.
In biotechnology, Britain has made major advances in the development of
human insulin, genetically-engineered vaccines and the production of
antibiotics by fermentation. The British company Celltech was the first
licensed by the United States Food and Drug Authority for the large-scale
production of monoclonal antibodies, proteins which can seek out a
particular substance. They are used to diagnose diseases, identify different
blood types and can be used in the treatment of a range of conditions,
including cancer.
Britain leads in the development of molecular graphics, which contribute
to the rational design of new and improved medicines through a computer-
aided technique for analysing the structures of complicated organic
molecules on a visual display unit.
The main types of man-made fibre are still those first de¬
veloped—regenerated cellulosic fibres such as viscose and the major syn¬
thetic fibres such as nylon polyamide, polyester and acrylics. Extensive
research continues to produce a wide variety of innovative products with
characteristics designed to meet market needs, such as anti-static and flame-
retardant fibres. More specialist products include the aramids (with very
high thermal stability and strength), elastanes (giving very high stretch and
recovery), melded fabrics (produced without the need for knitting or
weaving), and carbon fibres (originally developed for the aerospace industry
but now finding applications in other areas, such as the motor vehicle and
sports goods industries).
Since much of the production of this industry is of capital equipment, it
suffered particularly during the recession which began in 1979. However,
from 1984 there was a recovery in the industry. Exports of mechanical
engineering machinery amounted to about 14 per cent of all visible exports
in 1989.
Of particular importance are fabricated steel products, total sales of which
reached £2,500 million in 1989. Output includes pressure vessels, heat
exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil-refining (process) plant,
steam-raising boilers (including those of high capacity for power stations),
nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant, and fabricated steelwork
for bridges, buildings and industrial installations. Sales of boilers and process
plant fabrications in 1989 were nearly £2,000 million.
Britain is among the Western world’s largest producers of tractors, which
make up over three-quarters of the country’s total output of agricultural
equipment. Sales of the principal products of the tractor industry were more
than £1,200 million in 1989, of which about £780 million was accounted for
by overseas sales. Recent technical innovations include computer-controlled
tractors, a highly efficient pesticide sprayer and combined mower/
conditioners that significantly reduce the drying time for grass. Much of the
new machinery is designed for use in a variety of conditions to meet the
needs of overseas farmers. The Royal International Agricultural Exhibition,
held annually near Coventry, has a specialised tropical machinery centre,
where demonstrations of such machinery are given.
Almost all of Britain’s machine tools are purchased by the engineering,
vehicles and metal goods industries. The most commonly used metal-cutting
machine tools are milling, grinding and turning machines. The manufacture
of computerised, numerically-controlled machine tools and the adoption of
flexible manufacturing systems have become increasingly important. Total
288
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 13.6: Mechanical Engineering and Metal Goods
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
Mechanical engineering
of which: industrial plant and
23,425
10,285
10,264
steelwork
agricultural machinery
and tractors
machine tools
machinery for
process industries
and non-metallic
materials working
mining, construction and
mechanical handling
equipment
3,285
507
499
1,523
2,002
973
814
676
1,035
2,911
2,164
2,547
Other metal goods
3,977
11,012
1,861
1,635
1,692
2,277
Electrical,
Electronic and
Instrument
Engineering
sales of metal-working machine tools doubled between 1984 and 1989, when
they reached about £1,400 million, and exports rose by two-thirds over the
same period.
In 1989, most sales of textile machinery were to export markets. Recent
British innovations include computerised colour matching and weave
simulation, friction spinning, high-speed computer-controlled knitting
machines and electronic jacquard attachments for weaving looms.
Overseas sales of mining machinery and tunnelling equipment are
substantial, while exports of construction equipment amounted to £1,086
million in 1989 (almost three-quarters of output). J. C. Bamford Ltd is the
world’s first and second largest manufacturer of backhoe loaders and
telescopic handlers respectively. It exports over 60 per cent of its output.
The British mining equipment industry is very strong, especially in the
production of coal-cutting and road-heading (shearing) equipment,
hydraulic roof supports, conveying equipment, flameproof transformers,
switchgear, and subsurface transport equipment and control systems. The
main products of the mechanical handling equipment industry are cranes
and transporters, lifting devices, escalators, conveyors, powered industrial
trucks and air bridges. Electronically controlled and automatic handling
systems are also produced. Britain is an important producer of other
machinery such as industrial engines, pumps, valves and compressors, and
pneumatic and hydraulic equipment.
Despite an overall decline in the castings industry, some foundries have
been investing in new melting, moulding and quality control equipment.
Cosworth Engineering, for example, has developed a high-quality
aluminium casting process and uses it to produce cylinder heads in quantity
for Mercedes-Benz and Ford cars.
Output by this group of industries has grown steadily since 1982. Sales of the
principal products of basic electrical equipment amounted to about £3,000
million in 1989. Total sales of electronic data-processing equipment rose by
82 per cent between 1985 and 1989, reaching more than £7,400 million.
Electrical,
Electronic and
Instrument
Engineering
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
289
Computers
Communications
Equipment
The computer sector, which has grown strongly over the past five years,
produces an extensive range of computer systems, central processors and
peripheral equipment. They range from large computers for large-scale data-
processing and scientific work to mini- and microcomputers for use in
control and automation systems and for home, educational and office use.
Britain is one of the top three markets in Western Europe for data-
processing equipment; expenditure on data-processing as a proportion of
GDP is the highest in Western Europe. Reflecting the importance of Britain
as a market, many of the leading overseas manufacturers of data-processing
equipment—for example, IBM, Unisys, Compaq and Seiko—have
established manufacturing plants in Britain. Other companies have
concentrated on developing new products for specialised markets. For
example, the transputer, produced by Inmos, is effectively a computer on a
single chip, which can be combined with hundreds of others in parallel to
form a machine as powerful as existing ‘supercomputers’ but at less than
a quarter of their price. British firms and research organisations, with
government support, are also heavily involved in the development and
application of the new family of ‘three-five’ semiconductor materials, such as
gallium arsenide, which are already used in a number of microwave devices,
and which will ultimately enable much faster computers to be produced.
Table 13.7: Electrical, Electronic and Instrument Engineering
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
5,229 5,356 6,714
2,692 1,505 1,510
1,970 467 712
1,588 n.a n.a.
3,189 1,639 1,482
2,816 2,455 3,565
2,024 1,216 2,615
2,953 n.a n.a
“See Table 13.4-, footnote a.
n.a. = not available.
Data-processing equipment
Basic electrical equipment
Communications equipment
Electrical instruments and
control systems
Radio and electronic capital goods
Electronic components
Consumer electrical and
electronic goods
Instrument engineering
The main communications products are switching and transmission equip¬
ment, telephones and terminals for telex, facsimile and teletext. British
Telecom (BT) is the main customer for network equipment and carries out
research and development work in co-operation with suppliers. Mercury
Communications is licensed to compete with BT in the provision of network
services, while the market for terminals and telephones has been fully
liberalised. Innovative work is being particularly stimulated by the expansion
of cable television and the growth in value added network services. There
has been rapid expansion in the market for cellular telephones since 1984.
One important part of the industry produces transmission equipment and
cables for telecommunications and information networks and other pur¬
poses. Its products include submarine and high-specification data-carry-
ing cables. BT, supported by a technically advanced cable industry, has led
the way in the development of optical fibre communications systems. BT has
also paved the way for simpler and cheaper optical cables by laying the first
290
BRI TAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Electrical
Engineering and
Appliances
non-repeatered cable, over 100 km (62 miles) long, and developing the first
all-optical repeater. Well over half of the world’s undersea communications
cables (of all types) have been made and laid by another British company,
STC Submarine Systems, which, with its United States and French partners,
completed the laying of the first transatlantic optical fibre cable, TAT 8, in
1988. Britain also has a world lead in the transmission of computerised data
along telephone lines for reproduction on television screens. Sales of
telegraph and telephone apparatus and equipment by British firms more
than doubled between 1979 and 1989.
Another expanding sector of the industry is that covering the manufacture
of radio communications equipment, radar, radio and sonar navigational
aids for ships and aircraft, thermal imaging systems, alarms and signalling
equipment, public broadcasting equipment and other capital goods. Radar
was invented in Britain and British firms are still in the forefront of technical
advances. Racal Avionics’ X-band radar can distinguish different types of
aircraft flying at very low altitude and is in use at airports in several
countries. Cable and Wireless has the submarine cable-laying robot
‘CIRRUS’, which can work at depths of up to 1 km (3,280 ft) controlled
entirely by a computer on its mother ship.
A range of electrical and electronic measurement and test equipment is
made in Britain, as well as analytical instruments. Production of process
control equipment is a large and expanding area, along with the
manufacture of numerical control and indication equipment for use in
machine tools. British companies are among the leaders in several types of
advanced electronic medical equipment. Pioneering work has been
undertaken in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a technique in which the
patient is placed in a strong magnetic field and scanned with radiofrequency
energy. The resulting information is processed by computer to construct
images of internal organs and tissues. MRI enables large areas of the body to
he examined internally without recourse to surgery or potentially harmful
radiation. Developments in laser technology since the 1960s helped British
doctors in 1986 to invent new techniques for destroying cancers in their early
stages and for unblocking arteries.
British companies also produce other advanced electronic medical
equipment, including ultrasound scanners, electromyography systems and
patient monitoring systems for intensive and coronary care and other uses.
The comprehensive indigenous electronics components industry is sup¬
plemented by subsidiaries of a number of large overseas companies. The
manufacture of integrated circuits is an area of particularly rapid change.
Britain has strength in the manufacture of advanced components over a
wide range of products and application areas.
The electrical engineering industry manufactures a wide variety of products
for the electricity supply sector, ranging from power plant, cable trans¬
formers and switchgear to lighting, plugs and sockets and other instal¬
lation equipment. It makes extensive use of advanced technologies in its
products and processes.
The domestic electrical appliance sector is dominated by a few large firms.
The major electronic consumer goods produced are radio and television sets,
and high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field British
manufacturers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in
the mass market.
The instrument engineering industry produces measuring, photographic,
cinematographic and reprographic equipment; watches, clocks and other
timing devices; and medical and surgical instruments and appliances. Its
MANUFACTURING INDUS FRY
291
Motor Vehicles
and Other
Transport
Equipment
(excluding
Aerospace)
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
precision instrument and medical branches both earn significant and grow¬
ing export surpluses, but the sector as a whole is contracting.
Total sales of motor vehicles, engines and parts were just over £21,610
million in 1989. Car output is dominated by five groups, accounting for 99
per cent of the total. They are Rover (in which the Government had a
majority shareholding prior to the sale of the company to British Aerospace
in 1988), Ford (which acquired jaguar in 1989), Vauxhall, Peugeot-Talbot
and Nissan. The remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist producers
such as Lotus and Rolls-Royce, whose cars are renowned for their quality
and durability. The West Midlands and the South East account for the major
proportion of total employment in the motor industry.
The industry has faced increased competition from imports, particularly
from continental Europe and Japan. However, British manufacturers are
responding by forming collaborative ventures. Rover’s 800, 200 and 400
ranges were designed and developed in collaboration with Honda. Recent
inward investment projects by Nissan, Honda and Toyota, locating
vehicle—and in some cases engine—plants in Britain, financed by overseas
firms, will lead to increased production and employment in the sector in the
mid-1990s.
Table 13.8: Motor Vehicles and Other Transport Equipment
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
12,137 3,922 9,787
4,888 2,831 3,700
7,908 7,556 4,554
868 313 186
‘See Table 13.4, footnote a.
Motor vehicles (including
bodies, trailers, caravans
and engines)
Motor vehicle parts
Other transport equipment
of which: shipbuilding and
repairing
Major component manufacturers include GKN, which developed a
viscous control unit improving vehicle traction and stability; Lucas, which
pioneered direct fuel injection for small automotive diesel engines; T&N,
which has recently launched more efficient pistons for engines; and BBA
Automotive Components, with its new automatic clutch and throttle system.
Total sales by British manufacturers of motor cycles, pedal cycles and
miscellaneous vehicles were £252 million in 1989. The largest pedal cycle
manufacturer is Raleigh, which was taken over by the specially created Derby
International Corporation in 1987.
Britain has a long tradition of shipbuilding and remains active in the
construction, conversion and repair of merchant vessels, warships and
offshore structures.
I he largest sector is the building of warships, including both nuclear-
powered and diesel-electric submarines, frigates, glass-reinforced plastics
vessels, fast patrol craft and specialist naval auxiliaries. As well as meeting all
the needs of the Royal Navy, the warship yards build and convert ships for
overseas governments.
292
BR11 AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aerospace
British yards build some of the most sophisticated and technologically
complex merchant vessels in the world, including ferries and offshore
support and research vessels, as well as more traditional ships and craft of all
kinds for the leisure market. In 1989 British merchant shipbuilders
completed orders for the construction of all kinds of vessels with a total value
of £674 million. The shipbuilding industry is supplemented by ship-
repairers, including the Royal Dockyards, which the Government leased to
commercial management in 1987. Repairers also modernise and convert all
types of vessels and floating structures. The British marine equipment
industry offers a complete range of products from engines to sophisticated
navigational systems.
More than two decades of oil exploitation in the North Sea have generated
a major offshore industry, now mature, in Britain. Shipbuilders and
fabricators build fixed platforms and semi-submersible units for drilling,
production and emergency/maintenance support, drill ships, jack-up rigs,
modules and offshore loading systems. Several thousand manufacturing and
service industry firms supply a wide range of goods and services, including
consultancy, design, project management, and research and development, to
the offshore industry. In conjunction with the Offshore Supplies Office of
the Department of Energy, the Department of Trade and Industry has a
responsibility for promoting Britain’s offshore interests overseas and
maintains a central co-ordination unit to assist this activity.
Britain’s aerospace industry is the third largest in the world, behind those of
the United States and the Soviet Union. In 1989 it had a turnover of more
than £11,400 million. Exports, according to the Society of British Aerospace
Companies, totalled £7,890 million and contributed £3,220 million in net
terms to the balance of payments. Over the past decade, the industry has
doubled its productivity, doubled its turnover and trebled its exports in real
terms.
As the largest British exporter of manufactured goods, British Aerospace
(BAe) manufactures an extensive range of aerospace, space and electronic
products. It has developed its own family of civil aircraft, with seating
capacities ranging from 5 to 122 seats, which includes the 146 family of
regional airliners (one of the world’s quietest jetliners), the ATP (advanced
turboprop) airliner, the 125 (the world’s best-selling middle-sized business
jet) and the Jetstream 31 and 41 commuterliners. BAe owns a 20 per cent
share of the European consortium Airbus Industrie, which has sold over
1,400 airliners. BAe supplies the wings of the whole family of Airbus
Industrie airliners.
The military production of BAe includes the V-STOU Harrier, the Hawk
trainer and the Tornado combat aircraft in collaboration with German and
Italian manufacturers. BAe also produces the Harrier II and Goshawk (a
development of the Hawk for the United States Navy) jointly with the
United States firm McDonnell Douglas. As a partner of Eurofighter, BAe
has a 33 per cent share of the production of the European Fighter Aircraft
(EFA), which is being produced in collaboration with German, Italian and
Spanish manufacturers. BAe is a major producer of air-, sea- and ground-
launched guided weapons, including the Rapier air defence system and
naval Seawolf system.
Short Brothers of Belfast produces a range of aerospace products,
including the Shorts 330 and 360 commuter airliners and the military
freighter version of the 330 known as the Sherpa. It also produces the
Tucano, a turboprop basic military trainer which is in use with the Royal Air
Force. The company, which was privatised in 1989 by its sale to the Canadian
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
293
Table 13.9: Aerospace
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
Aircraft and associated equipment ) 4 2,144 994
Aero-engines and parts J ’ " 2,685 1,810
Total, including products
not specified above 8,466 7,114 3,997
SeeTable 13.4, footnote a.
firm Bombardier, also produces guided missiles and a wide range of
airframe components, some of them in composites, for other aerospace
manufacturers overseas, such as the wings for the Dutch Fokker 100 twin-jet
airliners.
In addition to its production of aerospace equipment, Westland manu¬
factures a range of helicopters, notably the Sea King and Lynx military
helicopters and the civilian W30. In collaboration with Agusta of Italy,
Westland is developing the multi-role EH 101 three-engine helicopter, which
will be delivered to the Royal Navy and the Italian Navy by the mid-1990s.
The company is a leading manufacturer of composite helicopter blades.
Rolls-Royce is one of the three major manufacturers of aero-engines in the
Western world, with a turnover in 1989 of some £2,360 million and an order
book at the end of 1989 of £4,500 million. The company’s civil engine group
produces engines for airliners and executive and corporate jets. Its RB211-
535 engines have been selected by 75 per cent of the airlines using Boeing
757 airliners. I he RB211-524G and H engines, which were launched in
1986 with orders from Cathay Pacific and British Airways to power their
Boeing 747-400 airliners, entered service in 1989. The company’s new Tay
turbofan engines are in service with the Gulfstream IV and Fokker 100
airliners, and are also available as replacement engines for older aircraft.
Rolls-Royce is a partner in the five-nation International Aero Engine
consortium which produces the V2500 aero-engine, now in service on the
new Airbus Industrie A320 airliner.
The military engine group of Rolls-Royce produces a wide range of
engines for military aircraft and helicopters. These include the Turbo-Union
RBI99 for the Panavia Tornado; the Pegasus series of vectored thrust
engines for the Harrier, the Adour and the Spey jets; and the RTM 322 and
MTR390 helicopter engines. Rolls-Royce is a partner in Eurojet, a
consortium from four countries formed to develop the EJ200 for the
Eurofighter’s EFA. In addition, the company produces gas turbines for
power generation and for oil and gas pumping, gas turbine power for 25 of
the world’s navies, and propulsion systems for the Royal Navy’s nuclear-
powered submarines.
Aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems
essential to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls,
electrical generation, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin
furnishings, flight-deck control and information displays. British firms have
made important advances in the development of ejector seats, fire-fighting
equipment and flight simulators, and are playing a major role in the
development of both fly-by-wire and fly-by-light technology, where control
surfaces are moved by means of automatic electronic signalling and fibre
294
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Satellite
Equipment
Food, Drink and
Tobacco
optics respectively, rather than by mechanical means. They provide radar
and air traffic control equipment and ground power supplies to airports and
airlines throughout the world.
Over 400 companies in Britain are involved in space activities. The British
industry’s major strength is in the manufacture of satellites. British
Aerospace (Space Systems) is Europe’s largest—and the world’s third
largest—producer of communications satellites. It has been the prime
contractor for all such spacecraft launched by the European Space Agency
(ESA), as well as for scientific probes such as the Giotto satellite. BAe has
developed and built 18 space pallets (payload and instrument carriers) for
the United States Space Shuttle and has over 20 orders for the SPEED A
lightweight payload bay structure for the ESA’s Ariane 4 rocket launcher,
which enables Ariane to launch two or more spacecraft independently
during the same mission. British Aerospace (Space Systems) was the prime
contractor for the Olympus 1 satellite, the world’s most powerful
communications satellite, launched in June 1989.
Marconi Space Systems (a subsidiary of GEC) has acted as principal
contractor on many telecommunications satellite payloads, including those
for the ESA’s Olympus satellite (Inmarsat). BAe is prime contractor for the
second generation of Inmarsat satellites. GEC Ferranti Defence Systems
produce the inertial guidance system for the European Ariane launcher and
Pilkington Space Technology is the world’s leading producer of solar cell
coverglasses for satellites.
The trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies, which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, every two years (the most recent was in September 1990).
Britain has a large and sophisticated food processing industry, which has
accounted for a growing proportion of total domestic food supply in recent
decades. The industry’s interests are advanced by Food From Britain, a body
with a wide remit to improve the marketing of British food and agricultural
produce both domestically and overseas.
Convenience foods (particularly frozen foods, annual sales of which now
exceed £3,000 million), yoghurts and instant snacks have formed the fastest-
growing sector of the food market in recent years. The market in health and
slimming foods is also growing.
Production of milk was some 14,473 million litres in 1989, of which nearly
half was for sale as liquid milk. Eight out of ten households in Britain receive
milk through a doorstep delivery system employing about 35,GOO people
driving electric vehicles. Domestic milk consumption per head (2 litres—3-5
pints—per week in 1989) is among the highest in the world. Consumption of
skimmed milk is rising as some people seek to reduce the fat content in their
diet.
The main milk products are butter (134,000 tonnes produced in 1989),
cheese (285,000 tonnes), condensed milk (201,000 tonnes) and dried whole
and skimmed milk (234,000 tonnes). The dairy industry accounted for 74
per cent of new butter supplies to the British market in 1989, 67 per cent of
new cheese supplies and nearly all of other milk products. Butter exports in
1989 were 72,000 tonnes and cheese exports 37,000 tonnes, compared with
62,000 tonnes and 15,000 tonnes respectively in 1979. The other main
exports are skimmed and whole milk powder (80,000 and 75,000 tonnes
respectively in 1989).
About 80 per cent of bread is manufactured in large mechanised bakeries,
most of which use a British process (the ‘Chorleywood’ process). This process
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
295
or similar procedures are used in many other countries. After years of
decline, overall consumption of bread stabilised in the 1980s. There has been
increased demand for wholemeal varieties at the expense of the standard
sliced white loaf, though recently this has slackened with the introduction of
soft-grained white bread. Biscuit exports were valued at £105 million in
1989.
Table 13.10: Food, Drink and Tobacco
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
Food manufacturing
of which: meat products
milk and milk products
flour-based products
sugar and confectionery
cocoa and chocolate
goods
animal feedstuffs
Drinks*
of which: brewing and malting
distilling and
compounding
soft drinks
Tobacco*
33,852 2,995 7,371
4,254 717 1,892
3,840 472 703
4,532 196 143
2,028 95 487
3,279 338 387
4,084 198 141
6,081 1,895 1,502
1,981 130 180
1,944 1,668 237
1,857 59 372
1,962 512 107
See Table 13.4, footnote a.
'Sales figures exclude duty paid.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic drinks produced in Britain is
Scotch whisky. There are 114 distilleries in Scotland and the well-known
brands ol blended Scotch whisky are made from the products of a number of
different distilleries. Guinness pic, owners of the United Distillers pic and of
Arthur Bell and Sons, accounts for 40 per cent of Scotch whisky output and
25 per cent of the British market. Some 85 per cent of all Scotch whisky
produced is exported. The value of whisky exports was £1,470 million in
1989, the United States taking nearly a fifth by volume.
In the brewing and malting industry there are six major brewery groups
whose products are sold nationally. Demand for traditional cask-conditioned
ales grew substantially in the 1970s but has now stabilised. The main raw
materials used are malt, sugar, other cereals and hops. British malt, which is
made almost entirely from home-grown barley, is used by brewers
throughout the world. Lager has increased steadily in popularity since the
late 1960s and accounts for nearly 50 per cent of beer sales. In 1989 sales of
beer in Britain exceeded £ 10,800 million, over 2-5 per cent of GDP.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There
are some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are
marketed on a national scale. Sales of the principal soft drink products
reached £2,258 million in 1989, an increase of 41 per cent compared with
the figure for 1985.
The British tobacco industry manufactures 99 per cent of cigarettes and
tobacco goods sold in Britain. Almost all of domestic output is provided by
three major manufacturers (Imperial Tobacco, Gallaher and Carreras
Rothmans). The industry specialises in the production of high-quality
296
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Textiles,
Footwear,
Clothing and
Leather
cigarettes made from flue-cured tobacco and achieves significant exports,
with the participation of BAT Industries: countries in Europe, the Middle
East and Africa are important markets. Britain’s most important sources of
raw tobacco are Brazil, the United States, Zimbabwe, India and Canada.
Textiles, footwear, clothing and leather make a substantial contribution to
the British economy in terms of employment, exports and turnover.
Together, they employ 521,000 people, equal to 2-4 per cent of total
employment and just over 10 per cent of manufacturing employment. For
textiles, there is a high degree of regional concentration. Particularly
important areas are the North West (mainly cotton), West Yorkshire (mainly
wool), the East Midlands (lace and knitwear), Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Most of the clothing industry is widely scattered throughout the
country and does not represent a large proportion of employment in any
region, although there are significant concentrations in the inner city areas
of cities such as Manchester, Leicester, Leeds and London. The industries’
main products are yarn, woven and knitted fabrics, apparel, industrial and
household textiles, and carpets based mainly on wool, cotton and man-made
fibres.
Table 13.11: Textiles, Footwear, Clothing and Leather
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
6,545 2,315 4,302
1,469 635 437
1,096 546 1,836
1,860 553 1,111
1,134 206 456
1,174 222 961
4,279 943 2,515
984 130 242
838 374 553
'See Table 13.4, footnote a.
Textile industry
of which: woollen and worsted
industry
cotton and silk industry
hosiery and other
knitwear
carpets, rugs and matting
Footwear
Clothing, hats and gloves
Made-up textiles
Leather and leather goods
The textile industry has around 4,900 firms, comprising a few large multi¬
process companies, including two of the largest in the world—Coats Viyella
and Courtaulds Textiles—and a large number of small and medium-sized
firms. Increased investment in new machinery and enhanced attention to
design, training and marketing have helped the industry to raise its
competitiveness.
The Multi-Fibre Arrangement of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade allows a measure of restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from
low-cost countries into the European Community.
Britain’s wool textile industry is one of the largest in the world. In the last
few years the industry’s export earnings have been consistently high. There
are two main branches, woollens and worsted. An increasing amount of man¬
made fibre is blended with wool. West Yorkshire is the main producing area,
but Scotland and the west of England are also famous as specialised
producers of high-quality yarn and cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are
scoured and cleaned in Britain in preparation for spinning. British mills also
process the bulk of rare fibres such as cashmere and mohair. Sales of the
MANUFACTURING INDUS TRY
297
Other
Manufacturing
principal products of the woollen and worsted industry amounted to £1,380
million in 1989, exports accounting for £635 million of this total, to give a
trade surplus of nearly £200 million.
Low-cost competition has cut progressively into British markets for cotton.
Production includes yarn and fabrics of cotton, spun man-made fibres and
mixtures of these. The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland.
About half the value of carpet and rug output is made up of tufted carpets,
in the production of which the pile, usually with a high man-made fibre
content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Woven carpets, mainly
Axminster, account for most of the remainder of sales. There is a higher
wool content in woven types, although in these, too, more use is being made
of man-made fibres. 1 he high quality and variety of design make Britain one
of the world’s leading producers of woven carpets. Industrial textiles account
for an increasing proportion of the industry’s output, covering products
such as conveyor belting and geotextiles used in civil engineering projects.
Many of these are non-woven, made of fibres assembled using advanced
techniques.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and man¬
made polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacture of carpets, cordage
and ropes, and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the
packaging, upholstery, building and motor vehicle industries.
The clothing industry is labour intensive, with about 11,000 companies
accounting for 5-6 per cent of total manufacturing employment. While a
wide range of clothing is imported from the rest of Europe and Asia, British
industry supplies two-thirds of domestic demand. Exports have risen since
the mid-1970s and the British fashion designer industry became prominent
during the 1980s. The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises about 1,600
companies, mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are of
small to medium size. The footwear manufacturing industry is made up
predominantly of small companies. Imports have risen to high levels in
recent years, accounting for about 70 per cent of total sales in 1989.
The wooden furniture industry is very diverse, comprising some 6,200
companies which supply the domestic, contract and institutional markets.
Domestic production of wood for industrial use has been steadily increasing
and deliveries in 1989 amounted to just over 6 million cubic metres (212
million cubic feet). I here were 112 paper and board mills employing 33,000
people in 1989, operated by 21 companies. Among the largest British groups
are Wiggins feape, St Regis and Davidsons. Overseas paper and board
groups with manufacturing investments in Britain include Georgia Pacific,
Kimberly Clark, Consolidated Bathurst, the Scott Corporation and United
Paper Mills of Finland. Total sales of pulp, paper and board manufactures
exceeded £2,100 million in 1989.
There has been a substantial growth in newsprint production in Britain.
British newsprint producers now supply about 28 per cent of British
demand.
There has been a significant trend towards waste-based packaging grades
in order to reduce the industry’s reliance on imported woodpulp supplies.
The use of recycled waste paper is increasing and research is helping to
extend it. Waste paper provides about half of the industry’s fibre needs.
Domestically produced wood pulp represents only a small percentage of raw
material supplies.
Total sales and receipts of general British publishers and printers doubled
between 1984 and 1989. Mergers have led to the formation of large groups
in newspaper, magazine and book publishing, the largest being the Maxwell
298
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Communications Corporation. However, general printing, engraving,
bookbinding and a large part of publishing still include many small firms.
With the increasing use of new technology, such as computer typesetting,
fragmentation of the industry into small specialised units took place in the
1980s. The book-publishing industry is a major exporter, selling one-third of
production in overseas markets. Security printers (of, for example,
banknotes and postage stamps) are important exporters, the major company
being De La Rue. Total employment in the paper, printing and publishing
industries in 1989 was 484,000. About half of employment in the printing
and publishing industry, and more than half of its output, is concentrated in
firms based in the South East.
Table 13.12: Other Manufacturing
Sales'1 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
1988 1989 1989
7,509 443 3,247
8,850 1,314 4,908
11,947 1,047 873
10,102 2,266 3,118
573 362 783
;lSee Table 13.4, footnote a.
Timber and wooden furniture
Paper and paper products
Printing and publishing
Processing of rubber and
 pfastics-
Toys and sports goods
Rubber tyres and tubes sold by British manufacturers in 1989 were valued
at £1,075 million, about half of which went overseas. The most important
other rubber goods are vehicle components and accessories, conveyor
belting, cables, hoses, latex foam products, and footwear, gloves and
clothing. Tyre manufacturers include subsidiaries of United States and other
overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber includes natural,
synthetic and recycled rubber.
There are some 530 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games and
425 manufacturers of sports equipment. British fishing tackle and golf and
tennis equipment are established in export markets. Jewellery, gold and
silverware and the refining of precious metals are industries with a strong
craft tradition.
14 Construction and
Service Industries
Introduction
In 1989 services contributed around 64 per cent of gross domestic product,
compared with 45 per cent in 1960, and accounted for 69 per cent of
employees in employment, compared with 48 per cent in 1960. Overseas
trade in services, particularly financial services, has also grown, and in 1989
overseas earnings from services amounted to about 40 per cent of the value
of exports of manufactures.
Between 1978 and 1980 total service employment in Britain rose by
500,000; it then fell for two years, but recovered again to grow from about
13-1 million in 1982 to 15-7 million in 1989, a net increase of 2-6 million jobs,
compared with a net decline of some 837,000 in production industries. Much
of this was accounted for by growth in part-time (principally female)
employment. Since the late 1970s employment has grown more rapidly in
the private sector than in the public sector, partly reflecting the
Government’s policy of restricting employment in public sector services. The
fastest-growing sectors in the 1970s, measured by employment, were leisure
and personal services, financial services, distribution, and hotels and
catering. In the 1980s financial services, which are discussed in other
chapters, continued to grow strongly.
Among the reasons for the growth in services is the tendency to spend a
greater proportion of income on personal, financial and leisure services as
real incomes rise. While consumers have to some extent exchanged services
such as public transport, laundries and cinemas for goods such as cars,
washing-machines and television sets, this has generated demand for fresh
services in the distribution, maintenance and repair of these goods.
Increased consumer expenditure on the running costs of cars is a significant
factor in the rise in consumer expenditure on services. Demand for British
air travel, hotel and catering services has resulted from the increase in real
incomes in other countries. By the same token, the substantial rise in real
disposable incomes in Britain has resulted in more holidays being taken by
Britons both within Britain and overseas.
Other factors include a greater readiness to use an increasingly wide
variety of banking services and the spread of home ownership, which has
increased demand for legal and estate agency services. Demographic
changes, such as the increasing proportion of elderly people in the
population, help to explain the growth of medical services.
Changes in technology have also played a part in the growth of services.
Examples range from the computer services industry to the provision of cash
and credit by means of cards, and the growth of information systems such as
viewdata and teletext.
A notable trend is the growth in franchising, an operation in which a
company owning the rights to a particular form of trading licenses them to
franchisees, usually by means of an initial payment with continuing royalties.
300
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
Cleaning services, film processing, print shops, hairdressing and cosmetics,
fitness centres, courier delivery, car rental, engine tuning and servicing, and
fast food retailing have been among the major areas where franchising has
developed. It is estimated that franchising’s share of total retail sales is
presently about 10 per cent, a figure which is likely to increase in the 1990s.
Construction
The construction industry, excluding materials, accounts for 6-5 per cent of
gross domestic product. The industry experienced growth during 1989, with
the total value of output in Great Britain reaching £46,120 million, of which
new work accounted for £27,330 million (59 per cent) and repairs and
maintenance the remainder. In housing, new work was valued at £8,080
million and repairs and maintenance at £10,200 million. About 1 million
people are employed in the industry, accounting for 4-7 per cent of the
employed labour force. There are also more than 500,000 self-employed.
Efficiency and productivity are benefiting from new computerised
techniques such as the use of electronic load safety measures for cranes,
distance measuring equipment, computerised stock ordering and job
costing, and computer-aided design. Increasingly, major contractors are
managing projects (particularly higher value ones) and using subcontractors
to do the actual work.
Government promotion of the construction market is the responsibility of
the Department of the Environment. Building regulations prescribe
minimum standards of construction in England and Wales. Made by the
Secretary of State for the Environment and administered and enforced by
local authorities, the regulations apply to new building, the installation or
replacement of fittings, and alterations and extensions to existing buildings.
There are broadly similar controls under separate legislation in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. As an alternative to local authority building control and in
order to simplify procedures, an optional system of private certification of
compliance with building regulations is provided for in the Housing and
Building Control Act 1984 and was introduced in 1985. The British Board of
Agrement, sponsored by the Department, assesses and issues reports and
certificates relating to products and systems for use in the construction
industry. The Government is concerned to see quality assurance extended to
the construction process as well as to the materials used.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1989 over 90 per cent of the
work was done by private firms. Although there were over 100,000 firms
employing two or more people, 95 per cent of them employed fewer than
25. Some large firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and
workshops, mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some
undertake responsibility for projects from initial design to finished building.
All but the smallest projects are generally carried out under professional
direction, either by architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil
engineering projects, by consulting engineers. The latter, acting on behalf of
a client, may advise on the feasibility of projects, draw up plans and supervise
the construction work.
In Britain the financial control of projects and some of the work normally
associated with architects is carried out by surveyors of various disciplines.
Financial aspects and control of project costs are undertaken by quantity
surveyors and construction surveyors. The inspection and maintenance of
buildings are carried out by building surveyors. In addition, town planning
CONSTRUCTION AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
301
Housing
Major
Construction
Projects
Consultancy
Contracting
and municipal surveyors deal with local planning issues. There are also
independent estates and valuation surveyors who deal with the management
of privately owned property.
On 1 April 1990, the Property Services Agency, previously responsible for
all construction projects undertaken directly by the Government, including
work for the armed forces in Britain and overseas, was restructured into two
separate organisations. These are Property Holdings and PSA Services.
Property Holdings performs the government landlord functions for its
Common User Estate, as well as other long-term government activities. PSA
Services comprises four operating divisions. PSA Projects offers man¬
agement and design services for major projects. PSA Building Management
provides a range of services in maintenance and estates surveying and the
management and design of locally designed projects. PSA Specialist Services
offers a range of specialist professional services in relation both to specific
commissions and to other supervisory support services. PSA International
provides a range of services overseas almost exclusively in support of the
Ministry of Defence and is the marketing arm of PSA Services overseas.
During 1989 a total of 163,000 dwellings were started in Great Britain. Starts
in the public sector were 23,000 and those for private owners 140,000. Some
166,000 dwellings were completed, 22,000 in the public sector and 144,000
in the private sector.
Among important construction projects in hand or recently completed in
Britain are the new British Library, the extensive development in London’s
former docklands (including the Limehouse link road), the M25 motorway
widening scheme, the Dartford Bridge, the A55 Conwy Tunnel, the Glasgow
Concert Hall and the Channel Tunnel.
In 1989 members of the Association of Consulting Engineers won contracts
to become involved in new overseas commissions for construction projects
worth nearly £7,800 million. British companies provided consulting
engineering services in 1989 for many projects around the world. At the
beginning of 1990 the total value of overseas projects in which members of
the Association were involved amounted to more than £34,000 million. The
most important sources of new work by value were the Far East (including
Hong Kong, the People’s Republic of China, Japan and the Republic of
Korea), the rest of Asia, Australasia and the Middle East. Among the biggest
projects were the Greater Cairo Wastewater Scheme, valued at some £1,000
million; the Great Man-made River Project in Libya, costed at £2,300
million; and a feasibility study for the Madrid—Barcelona high-speed railway
in Spain, valued at £6,600 million.
Commercial structural work and the construction of thermal power
stations accounted for 59 per cent of the value of all projects. British
consulting engineers, process engineers and chartered surveyors had
estimated net earnings of £425 million in 1989 from overseas commissions.
Overseas construction contracts awarded to British companies in 1989
included a £550 million residential and commercial complex in Saudi
Arabia; a link for the transmission of power between the north and south
islands of New Zealand, valued at £200 million; and a conference and
exhibition centre in Singapore, costed at £500 million.
I he export interests of the various sectors of the British construction
industry are promoted by the Export Group for the Constructional
Industries, the Association of Consulting Engineers, the British Consultants
Research and
Advisory
Services
DISTRIBUTION
WHOLESALE
TRADES
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bureau (whose members include architects, surveyors and management
consultants), the Building Materials Export Group, the Federation of
Manufacturers of Construction Equipment and Cranes, and the British
Water Industries Group.
The Government’s national research and advisory body on construction and
building is the Building Research Establishment, which is part of the
Department of the Environment. It has four laboratories, including a fire
research station, and is the site of a building energy management systems
centre. Research is also carried out by the major construction and materials
firms, universities, colleges of technology and research associations, which
also provide advisory services.
The Building Centre Group consists of four building centres throughout
Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information services on
materials, products, techniques and building services.
Service Industries
There were 4-5 million people engaged in the distributive and allied trades
in Great Britain in early 1990, together with a large number of owners of
businesses. There were 932,000 people in wholesaling, some 2-2 million in
retailing, just under 11 million in hotels and catering, and 215,000 in the
repair of vehicles and consumer goods. The distributive and allied trades
accounted for about 14 per cent of national income in 1989.
According to the most recently published Census of Production, there were
115,000 businesses, with a turnover valued at over £187,000 million (see
Table 14.1), engaged in wholesaling and dealing in Great Britain in 1987.
This represented a growth in stock of businesses of 26 per cent and of
turnover at current prices of 77 per cent since 1980. The most important
sectors within the wholesaling industry by proportion of total turnover were
food and drink (20 per cent), industrial materials and petroleum products
Table 14*1: Wholesale Trade in Great Britain 1987'
Number of
businesses
Turnover6
(£ million)
Food and drink
Petroleum products
Clothing, furs, textiles and footware
Coal and oil merchants
Builders’ merchants
Agricultural supplies and livestock dealing
Industrial materials
Scrap and waste products
Industrial and agricultural machinery
Operational leasing
Other goods
16,764
1,008
10,020
3,683
4,527
3,205
5,891
4,084
8,415
3,027
54,354
36,987
22,392
8,521
2,277
7,488
7,920
22,714
2,151
12,257
3,068
61,310
Total wholesaling and dealing
114,978
187,085
Source: Business Monitor SDA26. Wholesaling, 19S7.
■' Figures cover businesses registered for value added tax with an annual turnover of £142,000 or more and are grossed
up to include those not surveyed.
h Excludes value added tax.
CONS I RUCTION AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
303
(12 per cent each) and a general category of sales in which is included
chemists’ sundries, electrical goods, and paper and board products (33 per
cent). This last category of goods achieved the greatest growth of any
wholesale sector between 1980 and 1987, rising from about 24 per cent to 33
per cent of total turnover. The largest drop in market share was experienced
by the wholesale petroleum products sector, which fell from 20 per cent of
the total to about 12 per cent during the same period, while the share of food
and drink sales was stable.
The co-operative movement in Britain, represented by the Co-operative
Union, has its own wholesale organisation, the Co-operative Wholesale
Society (CWS), with 237 outlets, to serve the needs of retail societies; its
turnover was £2,559 million in 1988-89. Retail societies are encouraged to
buy from the CWS, which is the principal supplier to the 85 retail co¬
operative societies, and it is also a major retailer in Scotland, Northern
Ireland and south-east England. Co-operative Retail Services (CRS), with
about 497 outlets, is the largest group within the co-operative movement and
accounts for about one-fifth of its annual turnover. The CWS, the CRS and
the Co-operative Union are all based in Manchester. The Institute of
Grocery Distribution estimates that there were more than 3,700 co-operative
outlets of all kinds in 1988, of which nearly half sold food and drink.
In the food and drink trade almost all large retailers now carry out the
functions of the wholesaler by having their own buying and central
distribution operations. Elsewhere in the trade voluntary groups have been
formed by wholesalers with small independent retailers, in which the
retailers are encouraged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as
possible from the wholesaler. This has helped to preserve many smaller
retail outlets for the wholesaler, including the traditional ‘corner shops’ and
village stores, of value to the local community, and has given small retailers
the advantages of bulk buying and co-ordinated distribution.
London’s wholesale markets play a significant part in the distribution of
foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main market for fruit and vegetables,
Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
RETAIL TRADES Of the 25 largest retailers in Western Europe by sales reported in either
financial or calendar years embracing 1987 to 1989, ten were British firms.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years. The Census of Production 1987 found about 241,000 retail
businesses, with 345,000 outlets, in Great Britain (see Table 14.2). While
employment in the retail trades fell by about 100,000 people between 1980
and 1987, and the numbers of retail businesses and outlets fell by 6 per cent,
total retail turnover increased from £59,800 million to £105,000 million, a
rise attributable in large measure to the increase in retail prices. In recent
years, the large multiple retailers (those with ten or more outlets) have grown
in size, decreasing their store numbers but increasing outlet size and
diversifying their product ranges. Decline has been particularly evident
among small independent businesses and retail co-operative societies. Shops
selling durable household goods have experienced the fastest growth in
turnover in recent years, while hire and repair businesses and food retailers
have recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the grocery market are Sainsbury, Tesco,
Safeway, Asda and Gateway. In 1989—90 Sainsbury had some 358 stores and
the company’s sales amounted to nearly £6,211 million. Tesco had about 379
outlets and sales were valued at over £5,402 million. Retail co-operative
societies are voluntary organisations controlled by their members,
membership being open to anyone paying a small deposit on a minimum
304
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trends
iMrge Shopping
Centres
Table 14.2: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1987^
Number of
businesses
Number of
people
Number engaged
of outlets (’000s)
Turnover*
(£ million)
Single-outlet retailers
Small multiple retailers
Large multiple retailers (ten
or more retail outlets)
213,378
26,613
213,378
69,384
786
306
29,522
12,180
862 62,706
1,228 62,925
Food retailers 73,681 98,016 806 37,146
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers 47,296 59,810 272 10,538
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers 31,162 58,380 293 10,255
Household goods retailers 42,760 60,406 307 17,353
Other non-food retailers 38,973 52,473 233 8,983
Mixed retail businesses 4,937 11,363 375 19,060
Hire and repair businesses 2,045 5,020 32 1,293
Total retail trade
240,853 345,467
2,319 104,627
Source: Business Monitor SDA 25. Retailing, 1987.
Tigures cover businesses registered for value added tax; it is estimated that the total number of retail businesses too small
to register for value added tax is about 30,000, but these businesses account for no more than 0-5 per cent of total retail
turnover.
^Includes value added tax.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
share. Retail co-operatives and the Co-operative Wholesale Society (see
p 303) are members of the Co-operative Union, as are a number of other co¬
operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£5,600 million in 1989—90), Boots, Kingfisher, Storehouse, W. H. Smith,
Argos, Littlewoods, Savacentre and John Menzies.
About 20 million people regularly purchase goods through mail order
catalogues. In 1989 sales by general mail order totalled some £3,700 million,
representing 3 per cent of all retail sales and 4-7 per cent of non-food retail
sales. The volume of mail order sales increased rapidly in the 1970s but fell
back in the period 1980—84. Leading items sold by the general mail order
catalogue companies include clothing, footwear, furniture, household
textiles, televisions, radios and electrical goods. The leading mail order
catalogue businesses are Great Universal Stores, Littlewoods, Grattan/Next,
Freemans, Empire and J. D. Williams.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple
retailers; the nine largest have nearly 71 per cent of retail turnover. Other
developments include an increase in very large self-service stores selling a
wide variety of products, diversification by food multiples into selling a wider
range of goods, the creation of specially designed shopping precincts, the
growth of shops selling computers, software and video-cassettes, and an
increasing emphasis on price competition.
Britain has a wide range of complementary shopping facilities inside and
outside town and city centres. There continues to be a demand for the
CONSTRUCTION AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
305
Diversification
Promotions
Use of
Technology
services provided by small, specialised shops, but the trend is towards larger
shops in order to increase efficiency and the range of goods available. The
main multiple grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of
their stores both in towns and cities and on suburban and out-of-town sites.
Also, retailers of goods such as do-it-yourself products, furniture and
electrical appliances have for some years found it advantageous to develop
retail warehouses outside town and city centres, particularly to attract
shoppers with cars. More recently, there has been a trend towards the
grouping of retail warehouses into retail warehouse parks.
Proposals have also been made recently for a number of regional out-of-
town shopping centres, sometimes as part of retail and leisure complexes, on
sites which offer good access to large numbers of customers with cars and
ample space for car parking, and which benefit from low acquisition and
operating costs. One of the few such centres built to date is the Metro Centre
at Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, which includes over 93,000 sq m (1 million sq
ft) of floorspace. The Meadowhall shopping centre in Sheffield opened in
September 1990, and the Lakeside centre at Thurrock in Essex is due to
open shortly.
Britain also has a wide variety of purpose-built shopping centres in towns
and cities, and there is increasing interest in the modernisation and
redevelopment of these and other town centre facilities in order to improve
their attractiveness and their ability to compete efficiently.
All new retail development requires planning permission from the local
planning authority. These authorities must consult the Department of the
Environment and equivalent departments in Scotland and Northern Ireland
before granting permission for developments of 23,325 sq m (250,000 sq ft)
or more. The Government’s policy is to encourage the provision of a wide
range of shopping facilities to the public, while ensuring that the cumulative
effects of major new retail development do not undermine the viability and
vitality of existing town centres.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to
offer a much bigger range of goods and services than previously. This has
been especially noticeable for the large food retailers, which often sell non¬
food products such as beer, wines and spirits, clothing and household
appliances, as well as packaged groceries. Another trend is that many
superstores and large supermarkets offer fresh as well as packaged food,
often with special counters or areas for fresh meat, fish, vegetables and bread
baked on the premises. Some large retailers have in recent years begun to
provide financial and estate agency services.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis both on price competition and quality
as a means of promoting sales. With the growth of payments by credit card,
certain of the large retailers have issued their own credit cards for regular
customers in an attempt to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are already having a major impact on
retailing in Britain. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock
control and a reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets
introduced the first operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in
Britain at Spalding (Lincolnshire) in 1979. Gomputerised shopping services
are being introduced in the home which enable people to order goods from
retailers. Some large multiple retailers are using electronic order and invoice
systems in dealing with their suppliers, following a legal change permitting
tax invoices in forms other than paper. Small independent retailers are also
306
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vehicle and
Petrol Retailing
Hotels and
Catering
using electronic ordering, pricing and delivery systems. High-speed labelling
techniques are being adopted, including the use of electronic printers which
can overprint labels, the use of pressure-sensitive glues and printing in foil
instead of ink.
‘EFTPOS’ (electronic funds transfer at point cf sale) is a system which
enables shoppers to pay for goods using a debit or credit card to transfer
funds electronically via terminals in retail premises. Several major EFTPOS
schemes are well established, with altogether more than 60,000 terminals, a
number that is growing quickly. In many cases the terminals are integrated
with the retailers’ in-house computer systems.
In 1989 there were 450,000 people employed in Britain in the retail
distribution of motor vehicles and parts, in petrol stations and in the repair
and recovery of vehicles. The retail motor trade consists of firms selling
vehicles, which had about 8,085 franchised new car outlets in 1989 (the
largest of which was Ford, with 1,700); those selling car parts and ac¬
cessories; those providing car hire; fitting centres for replacement tyres and
automotive parts; and driving schools.
In spite of the continuing increase in the number of road vehicles, the
number of petrol stations is declining, and at the end of 1989 there were
under 20,000, representing a drop of 18 per cent since 1982. However,
during the same period the average outlet increased its physical turnover of
petrol by more than 50 per cent. One-third of all outlets were owned by oil
companies, a figure which remained broadly constant throughout the 1980s.
The companies with the largest number of outlets retailing petrol in 1989
were Shell (2,832), Esso (2,564) and BP/National (2,047). There were about
15,000 outlets selling diesel fuel. Unleaded petrol continued to become more
widely available in 1989 and is now sold at more than 90 per cent of outlets.
Its sales now account for about 30 per cent of the petrol retailing market.
Between 1982 and 1989 the proportion of self-service petrol statfbns rose
from about 30 per cent of the total to 55 per cent.
The hotel and catering trades employed 1 • 1 million people in Great Britain
in 1989: 284,000 people were employed in hotels and other residential
establishments; 280,000 in public houses and bars; 272,000 in restaurants,
cafes and snack bars; 142,000 in clubs; and 127,000 in canteens. A large
number of self-employed people are also engaged in hotels and catering.
There were about 54,000 hotels in Great Britain in 1988—89, with a turnover
of £4,050 million in 1988. Many licensed hotels as well as most of the
numerous guest houses are small, with fewer than 20 rooms. Of the major
hotel business groups, the biggest is Trusthouse Forte pic, which runs 800
hotels, including some 290 in Britain, and has catering and leisure interests.
Among the largest firms running holiday centres (including holiday camps
with full board, self-catering centres and caravan parks) are Butlins, Warner
Holidays and Pontins, with 40, 29 and 21 centres respectively.
Many restaurants, snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other
establishments sell take-away food. Britain has a very wide range of
restaurants, of which a substantial number specialise in Chinese, Italian,
Indian and Greek foods. ‘Fast-food’ catering, in which establishments sell hot
food such as hamburgers or chicken to be eaten either on the premises or
elsewhere, is becoming increasingly significant.
Sales of beer from licensed premises were £9,850 million in 1988; those of
spirits were £4,520 million; and those of wines were £4,151 million. There
were about 87,700 public houses (‘pubs’, which mainly sell beer, wines, soft
drinks and spirits for consumption on the premises) in Britain in 1988. Many
CONSTRUCTION AND SERVICE INDUS FRIES
307
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Computing
Services
Management
Consultancy
Market
Research
public houses are owned by the large brewing companies, which either
provide managers to run them or offer tenancy agreements; others, called
free houses, are independently owned and managed. In 1989 the
Government announced that it proposed to act in several areas to strengthen
competition in the sale of beer and other drinks in public houses; 1990 saw
the restructuring of many aspects of the brewing industry in response to this.
Business services include advertising, market research, management
consultancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computing services and
auction houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 10-6 percent in 1989 to £7,555 million. The
press accounted for nearly 64 per cent of the total, television for 30 per cent,
posters for nearly 4 per cent, and commercial radio and cinema for the rest.
These proportions have remained roughly constant since 1983. By product
category, the largest advertising expenditure is on food, retail and mail order
services, financial services, motor cars and leisure equipment. Campaigns are
planned mainly by advertising agencies, of which there are several hundred
in Britain; in some cases they also provide marketing, consumer research
and other services.
1 he computing services industry comprises software houses, whose services
include the writing of bespoke (application specific) sof tware; production of
packaged software for more general applications; consultancy; facilities
management; computer bureau services, which process customers’ data; and
systems houses, which provide complete computer systems (hardware and
software). It also includes companies providing information technology
education and training, third party maintenance, contingency planning, and
recruitment and contract staff.
The industry is one of the fastest growing sectors of the British economy.
I he turnover of companies in the Computing Services Association totalled
over £3,000 million in 1989. Members of the Association provide
employment for over 60,000 people, representing about 75 per cent of the
computing services industry in Britain. The industry has traditionally been
strong in professional services and bespoke software, and has been especially
active in the provision of systems in the financial services sector. New
developments include the adoption of advanced software engineering
techniques, the design of systems kernels, systems integration and facilities
management.
There are about 11,800 management consultants in Britain, of whom 3,600
are practising members of the Institute of Management Consultants. Among
the largest management consultancy companies are the 33 members of the
Management Consultancies Association, whose turnover amounted to £650
million in 1989. Revenue earned within Britain comprised £575 million, an
increase of 37 per cent on the previous year, while overseas revenue
amounted to £75 million. The Association reports a growing demand for
services supporting the application of information technology, particularly
microprocessing, to all aspects of business. The Association’s members
account for some 65 per cent of Britain’s fee-paying management con¬
sultancy market.
The 31 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations (AMSO)
accounted for about 75 per cent of total turnover by market research
companies in 1989. I he turnover of AMSO members increased to £239
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
Auction
Houses
MISCELLA¬
NEOUS
SERVICES
Films and
Television
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million in 1989 from £205 million in 1988. The largest company, the AGB
group, had a turnover of £45 million. Research on behalf of business-to-
business services and industrial goods by AMSO members accounted for
60 per cent of revenue, while research for all consumer goods accounted for
the remaining 40 per cent.
Britain is one of the world’s three leading countries for international
conferences (the others being the United States and France). With the steady
increase in new and renovated facilities, some 80 towns and cities are well
equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions. Among the most modern
purpose-built conference and exihibition centres are the International
Conference Centre and the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre, the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre
and the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in London, the Brighton
Centre in East Sussex, the Harrogate Centre in North Yorkshire, the
Bournemouth International Centre in Dorset, St David’s Hall in Cardiff, the
Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre in Glasgow, the G-MEX Centre
in Manchester, the Royal Centre in Nottingham, the English Riviera Centre
in Torquay and the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre. Other
large exhibition facilities are the Earls Court, Olympia, Alexandra Palace,
London Arena (Docklands) and Wembley Arena sites in London. New
centres are being constructed in Birmingham, Glasgow and Cardiff.
Britain’s chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets
for works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers
and dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
worldwide and their turnovers have expanded rapidly in recent years.
Sotheby’s handled sales valued at £1,820 million in 1989, while Christie’s
handled sales valued at £1,329 million, increases compared with 1988 of
nearly 80 per cent and 70 per cent respectively.
Some 13,400 businesses provided film, theatre, literary, musical,
broadcasting and related services in Great Britain in 1988. There are many
self-employed people in these fields. About 500,000 people work in arts-
related activities in Britain. Scientists, engineers and technicians engaged in
industrial research and development and their support staff number
183,000. There were 13,800 businesses connected with sport, recreation,
gambling and betting, at least 10,500 hairdressing and beauty parlours and
some 8,900 dry cleaners. Other services include sanitation, photographic
studios, religious organisations, tourist offices, learned societies, employers’
and trade union organisations, and firms providing funeral services and
managing cemeteries and crematoria.
Recent years have seen further development of the independent programme
production sector, and of specialised film and television services. The British
Broadcasting Corporation and the commercial television stations have
agreed to meet a government target whereby 25 per cent of original
programmes will be made by independent producers by 1993. New technical
developments include origination on professional standard video as opposed
to film, and an increasing use of computer-generated graphics and picture
manipulation in both production and post-production work. Production of
films for cinema (an activity particularly cyclical in nature) declined in the
mid-1980s.
The Department of Trade and Industry conducts an annual inquiry into
the value of overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition
CONSTRUCTION AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
309
TOURISM AND
TRAVEL
Tourist
Authorities
of cinema and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a
surplus of receipts over expenditure. In 1989 receipts by film and television
companies were £457 million, while expenditure was £380 million. Film
companies receipts totalled £263 million and television companies’ receipts
£194 million. A total of 101 film companies and 21 television broadcasting
companies reported overseas transactions in the 1989 inquiry.
Tourism is one of Britain’s most important industries and is a major and
growing source of employment. It is estimated that about 1-5 million jobs in
Britain were supported by tourism spending in 1989. The British Tourist
Authority forecasts that around 200,000 new jobs will be created in the
period 1988-93.
In 1989 overseas residents made 17-2 million visits to Britain—an increase
since 1988 of 9 per cent; they spent £6,850 million, compared with £6,200
million in the previous year. British residents made 3 T1 million trips abroad,
an increase of 8 per cent compared with 1988, and spent £9,380 million,
giving a deficit on the travel account of £2,530 million. Over 84 per cent of
these visits were to Western Europe. About 62 per cent of overseas visitors to
Britain came from Western Europe and 20 per cent from North America.
A total of 2,971 travel agencies, with about 8,000 offices (over 90 per cent
of the total), belong to the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA). In
general, travel agents are small businesses but many ABTA members have
more than one office. There are a few large firms—for example, Lunn Poly,
with some 500 branches, and Thomas Cook, with about 365. Computerised
information and booking systems are used extensively in travel agencies.
There are also 700 tour operator members of ABTA; some 344 companies
are both retail agents and tour operators. AB FA operates financial
protection schemes to safeguard its members’ customers, maintains codes of
conduct drawn up with the Office of Fair Trading, and offers a free
conciliation service to help to resolve complaints against members and an
independent arbitration scheme for tour operators’ customers.
Official support for the promotion of tourism to and within Britain is
provided by the British Tourist Authority (B I A) and the tourist boards for
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The boards have been
asked by the Government to encourage tourism in regions where
unemployment is high and where there is potential for development.
Following a review of both tourism promotion and the development of
tourism in England in 1988, the Government determined that the existing
organisation needed to be simplified and that, while government financial
support should be continued, it needed to be more sharply focused. The
B FA has been asked to improve cost-effectiveness and to extend
partnerships with the industry, to devolve greater authority to its overseas
markets and to transfer some of its operations to the private sector. The
English Tourist Board (E I B) has been asked to devolve many of its activities
and to allocate more of its funding to regional tourist boards, thus allowing
them scope to increase their marketing activities and their encouragement of
local tourism. The centralised operations of both the BTA and the ETB are
to be scaled down.
At the same time, a new strategy for the development of tourism in
Northern Ireland was announced, which concentrates on the stimulation of
demand through different marketing, the co-ordinated development of the
industry through improved access, accommodation and amenities, and the
identification of tourism attractions in Northern Ireland as centres of
international excellence.
310
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Throughout Britain over 16,000 hotels and other serviced ac¬
commodation are inspected and (Town classified by the tourist boards. The
classifications ‘Listed’ and one to five crowns indicate the range of facilities
and services provided. Those with higher quality standards are distinguished
by the terms ‘Approved’, ‘Commended’ or ‘Highly Commended’ along¬
side their classification. A similar arrangement applies to self-catering
accommodation. The quality standard of holiday caravans, chalets and
camping parks is indicated by a ‘Q’ symbol and one to five ticks. Information
on tourist facilities and accommodation is available from official tourist
information centres throughout Britain (most of which are administered by
local government) and on videotext information services in Britain and
overseas.
Energy and Natural
Resources
Energy and non-fuel minerals make an important contribution to the British
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1988 was £15,293
million (representing about 3-8 per cent of gross domestic product), of which
crude oil accounted for 45 per cent, coal 28 per cent and natural eas 13 per
cent. 1
All minerals in C^reat Britain are privately owned, with the exception of
gold, silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal
and some minerals associated with coal. In Northern Ireland gold and silver
are owned by the Crown, while rights to petroleum and other minerals are
vested in the Government. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the
right to exploit all minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive
right to extiact coal, or license others to do so, both on land in Great Britain
and under the sea, is vested in the British Coal Corporation. Normally,
ownership of minerals belongs to the owner of the land surface but in some
aieas, particularly those with a long history of mining, these rights have
become separated. Mining and quarrying, apart from coalmining, are
usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain
lakes and from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community and is a major world producer of oil, natural gas and coal. The
other main primary sources are nuclear power and some water power;
secondary sources are electricity, coke and very small quantities of town gas.
Since 1980 Britain has been self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a result
of offshore oil production, and self-sufficiency should be maintained for a
number of years. There are large reserves of coal, which is expected to
continue to supply a significant proportion of the country’s energy needs.
Nuclear power provided nearly 21 per cent of electricity available from the
British public supply system in 1989.
Private sector companies carry out offshore oil and gas production and oil
refining, while a publicly owned body is at present responsible for most coal
production. The electricity supply industry in Great Britain, apart from
nuclear power, is to be privatised, as is the electricity supply industry in
Northern Ireland. The Secretary of State for Energy is responsible for these
industries in Great Britain, except for electricity in Scotland, which is under
the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State for Northern
Ireland is responsible for all energy matters there.
312
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
Energy policy is designed to ensure the secure, adequate and economic
provision of energy to meet Britain’s requirements. The Government, while
encouraging the exploitation of Britain’s diversity of energy sources, seeks to
ensure that all economic forms of energy are produced, supplied and used as
efficiently as possible, having regard also to the international application of
the technologies involved. The Government stresses the importance of the
continued profitable development of Britain s oil and gas resources, the
development of a competitive coal industry, the safe and economic
development of nuclear power, and the most cost-effective use of energy
through the adoption of energy efficiency measures. It also funds an
extensive research and development programme into renewable sources of
energy.
Privatisation has already had a considerable impact in the energy field,
with the transfer of British Gas, Britoil and Enterprise Oil, and the planned
transfer of the electricity supply industry, to the private sector. The
Government wishes to privatise the coal industry during the next
Parliament. It considers that these industries will thus improve their
competitiveness and efficiency, free of government pressures, and attract
new investment to provide cheaper and cleaner energy.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy
questions, notably through its membership of the European Community and
of the International Energy Agency (a body with 21 member countries
attached to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
Inland primary energy consumption amounted to 340-2 million tonnes of
coal equivalent in 1989 (see Table 15.1), about the same as in 1988. Energy
consumption by final users in 1989 amounted to 59,078 million therms1 on a
‘heat supplied’ basis, of which transport consumed 32 per cent, industrial
users 28 per cent, domestic users about 27 per cent, and commerce,
agriculture and public services 13 per cent.
Table 15.1: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Net imports of electricity
1979 1984 1987 1988 1989
139-0 135-2 109-3 116-1 118-2
129-6 79-0 116-2 112-0 108-1
71T 76-5
13-8 19-5
2-2 2-1
85-9
19-8
2-1
4-7
81-5
22-9
2-4
5-2
80-5
25-9
2-3
5-2
Total
355-7 312-2 338-1 340-1 340-2
Source: Department of Energy.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
The Government encourages the improvement of energy efficiency through
the work ol the Energy Efficiency Office (EEO). Since its establishment in
1983 the EEO has promoted efficiency in various ways, and significant
energy savings are being achieved every year, fhe Government believes that
1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
313
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
energy efficiency can make a significant contribution to alleviating the
problems of climate change, which could threaten sustainable development.
The EEO, with a budget of £26 million in 1990—91, is now concentrating
on key areas of energy use and offers advice backed by technical support.
In particular, it promotes the work of its regional energy efficiency officers
and provides a best practice programme which gives industrial and com¬
mercial consumers advice on energy efficiency and on how it can be imple¬
mented.
The Home Energy Efficiency Scheme provides advice and grants to low-
income households for insulation measures, such as loft, tank and pipe
insulation, draughtproofmg and hot-water tank insulation. Householders
are eligible if they receive income support, housing benefit, family credit or
community charge benefit.
The Government promotes investment in combined heat and power
(CHP)—the co-generation of electricity and heat—within the best practice
programme. Some 500 CHP plants, both in industry and buildings, are in
operation. They contribute about 3 per cent of electricity demand in
Britain.
Britain’s energy position is strengthened by substantial oil and gas reserves
offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS). The total area
covered by production licences is 98,893 sq km (38,183 sq miles) out of a
total designated area of about 651,650 sq km (251,600 sq miles), over which
Britain has exercised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil.
The Government has granted exploration and production licences as a result
of 11 offshore licensing rounds since 1964. In 1990 it launched the twelfth
round and the first separate round of offshore licensing for frontier areas.
Expenditure on offshore and onshore exploration and development
amounted to some £2,650 million in 1989. By the end of 1989, 4,004 wells
had been or were being drilled in the UKCS: 1,832 development wells, 1,364
exploration wells and 808 appraisal wells.
Britain’s offshore supplies industry is the second largest in the world and has
headed considerable technological advance. The Offshore Supplies Office
(OSO) of the Department of Energy is responsible for promoting a fair
commercial opportunity for British suppliers in the UKCS and throughout
the world. It is estimated that British suppliers are winning orders worth
between £2,000 million and £3,000 million a year worldwide.
The OSO provides the secretariat for the Offshore Industry Advisory
Board. The Board is the principal source of high-level co-ordinated advice
on the development of strategy for Britain’s offshore supplies industry. It is
assisted by four sub-committees: the Offshore Industry Liaison Committee
reviews UKCS activity; the International Collaboration Advisory Group
promotes mutually beneficial collaboration with other countries; the
Offshore Industry Exports Advisory Group considers export strategy; and
the Offshore Energy Technology Board (OETB) determines priorities for
research and development.
Before the 1970s Britain was almost wholly dependent for its oil supplies on
imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small number of land-
based oilfields. However, the first notable offshore discovery of oil in the
UKCS was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975.
Output of crude oil from the UKCS in 1989 averaged 118 million barrels
(252,050 tonnes) a day, making Britain the world’s eighth largest producer.
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HI 4
North Sea
Fields
Structure of the
Oil Industry
There were 44 offshore fields producing crude oil at the end of 1989, and
the Secretary of State for Energy approved 13 new offshore development
projects during the year.
The largest producing fields are Brent and Forties. Production from most
large fields is controlled from production platforms of either steel or
concrete which have been built to withstand severe weather, including gusts
of wind of up to 260 km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 m (100 ft).
Primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum gases,
amounted to about 91-8 million tonnes in 1989 (see f able 15.2). Output is
forecast to decline slowly, but Britain should remain self-sufficient in oil well
into the 1990s and a significant producer into the twenty-first century. The
Government’s oil policy is intended to encourage exploration and
development with the objective of maximising economic oil production for
the foreseeable future. Remaining recoverable reserves of UKCS oil in the
proven plus probable categories amount to between 510 and 1,200 million
tonnes, while the total remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as high as
5,160 million tonnes. The Petroleum Act 1987 empowers the Secretary of
State to require those responsible to submit to him for approval programmes
setting out measures to be taken in connection with the abandonment of
offshore installations and pipelines.
Table 15.2: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1979 1984 1987 1988 1989
Oil production3
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption
Exports (including re-exports)
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
Imports:
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
01 0-3 0-6
77-7 125-6 122-8
73-2
90-6
84-6
38-8
14-4
57-9
16-0
81-4
75-9
16-4
25-0
28-5
74-7
67-7
80-6
18-7
33-1
20-8
0-8
113-7
79-8
72-3
70-5
18-9
32-8
21-4
0-7
91-0
81-4
73-0
49-2
20-1
36-3
21-7
Sources: Department of Energy and HM Customs and Excise.
a Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
About 250 companies, including several large oil companies, operate in
Britain or engage in work in the UKCS. The two leading British oil
companies are British Petroleum (BP) and Shell Transport and trading,
which are the two largest industrial companies in Britain in terms of
turnover. Exploration and development of the UKCS are carried out by the
private sector. The Government now takes all royalty from UKCS oil in cash
and has terminated its rights under participation agreements with the oil
companies.
Oil
50
i
50
100 150 km
_l i
 1
100 miles
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Terminals
[] UK Continental Shelf
Norway o<
o!
Magnus
Deveron
Osprey
Eider
Tern
N Cormorant
S Cormorant
N W Hutton
Shetland
Islands
Don
Thistle
Murchison
Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
Strathspey
N Alwyn
Ninian
Emerald
Orkney
Islands yj
p?aqo Highlander
'a.aS Claymore
Plotted
Ness /q nn^e
•J Beryl
Central | Crawford
Brae .N Brae
V. Miller
Chanter
Balmoral
- ^.Maureen
^4^-Cyrus
* Moira
Glamis
Forties
» Montrose
Arbroath
Ekofisk
Innes
Argyll
Duncan
316
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
Consumption
and Trade
Oil Pipelines
Research
GAS
BRH AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Onshore production of crude oil is much less significant than offshore
production. In 1989 it amounted to 722,000 tonnes, 66 per cent of which
came from Britain’s largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset), which
started production in 1979. In addition to minor production from various
mining licensees, other onshore fields include Humbly Grove, Horndean
and Herriard (Hampshire), Nettleham and Stampton North (Lincolnshire)
and Crosby Warren (Humberside). At the end of 1989, 268 landwrard
petroleum licences were in force, covering an area of 46,000 sq km (17,800
sq miles).
At the beginning of 1990 the distillation capacity of Britain’s 13 oil refineries
stood at 91 million tonnes a year. Excess capacity has largely been
eliminated, while existing refineries have been adapted to the changing
pattern of demand by the construction of new upgrading facilities (‘catalytic
crackers’), which are leading to a higher output of unleaded petrol and other
lighter products at the expense of fuel oil.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding re¬
finery consumption) in 1989 totalled over 73 million tonnes, including 24
million tonnes of motor spirit, 8-5 million tonnes of kerosene, 18-4 million
tonnes of gas and diesel oil (including derv fuel used in road vehicles) and
111 million tonnes of fuel oil.
Exports of crude oil amounted to 49-2 million tonnes in 1989. Virtually all
exports went to Britain’s partners in the European Community and the IEA,
the largest markets being the Netherlands, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Canada and the United States. Some 20-1 million tonnes of
petroleum products were also exported. Though self-sufficient, Britain
continues to import other crude oils, to enable the full range of petroleum
products to be made efficiently and economically.
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 75 per cent of offshore oil in 1989. Some
1,733 km (1,077 miles) of major submarine pipeline bring oil ashore from
the North Sea oilfields (see map, p 315). Major crude oil onshore pipelines in
operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore moorings to refineries
include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Tranmere to Stanlow,
and Gruden Bay to Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined
products to major marketing areas; for example, a 423-km (263-mile)
pipeline runs from Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester.
The main government research and development effort in offshore
technology is undertaken by the Department of Energy through the OETB.
Advice on offshore safety is provided by the Offshore Safety and
Technology Board. A Petroleum Science and Technology Institute was set
up in Edinburgh in 1989. It works in conjunction with Heriot-Watt and
Edinburgh universities, and is funded by 35 oil companies and the
Department of Energy. Its activities are concentrated on exploration,
appraisal, development and production. I he Offshore Technology Park in
Aberdeen comprises several projects and is part-funded by the Scottish
Development Agency. The leading oil companies have extensive research
and development programmes in support of oil exploration and production,
and on new and improved fuels.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in central London. For many years gas was produced from coal, but
during the 1960s growing imports of oil brought about production of town
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
317
Structure
Production
Transmission
and Storage
gas from oil-based feedstocks. Following the first commercial natural gas
discovery in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore gas production in
1967, supplies of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and by 1977 natural gas
had replaced town gas in the public supply system in Great Britain. Some
£12,000 million has been spent on developing natural gas resources on the
UKCS and over 720,000 million cubic metres have been produced.
Under the Gas Act 1986, the gas industry in Great Britain, in state ownership
since 1949, was privatised and the assets of the British Gas Corporation
transferred to the new company, British Gas pic. The Act also established the
Office of Gas Supply, to monitor British Gas’s activities as a public gas
supplier, and the Gas Consumers Council, to look after the interests of
consumers.
British Gas has about 2-5 million shareholders. In 1989-90 the turnover of
British Gas and its subsidiary companies amounted to £7,983 million, of
which gas supply accounted for £6,909 million. Current cost operating profit
was £1,095 million. British Gas has over 79,000 employees.
Total production of natural gas from the 28 fields in the UKCS in 1989
amounted to 44,745 million cubic metres. This includes gas used for drilling,
production and pumping operations. Gas produced and used on North Sea
production platforms and at terminals accounted for 3,139 million cubic
metres, leaving 41,606 million for general supply. Supplies of UKCS gas to
British Gas (41,000 million cubic metres in 1989) were slightly lower than in
1988 and accounted for 79-8 per cent of its total natural gas supplies, the
remainder coming from Norway. UKCS production comes mainly from
eight major gasfields: Leman, Frigg (UK), Indefatigable, North Alwyn,
Viking, Flewett, West Sole and Victor. In addition, gas from the South
Morecambe field in the Irish Sea and from the twin North Sean and South
Sean fields is used to augment supplies to meet peak demand in winter. In
1989 two new gas developments were approved, Welland North and
Welland South, and one incremental project, Audrey phase 2.
Remaining recoverable gas reserves, including possible gas from existing
discoveries and potential future discoveries, are estimated to be in the range
of 890,000 million to 318 million million cubic metres. Indigenous offshore
natural gas reserves are likely to meet most of the British demand well into
the next century.
The British Gas national and regional high-pressure pipeline system of some
17,600 km (11,100 miles) transports natural gas around Great Britain. It is
supplied from four North Sea shore terminals, and from a terminal in
Barrow-in-Furness (Cumbria). I he high-pressure transmission system is
inspected regularly.
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are
used, including salt cavities and storage facilities for liquefied natural gas.
British Gas has also developed the partially depleted Rough field as a major
gas store. This, the first such use of an offshore field, involves the injection
into the Rough reservoir in summer of gas drawn from the national
transmission system for recovery at high rates during periods of peak winter
demand.
Sales of gas by the supply industry in Britain totalled 18,552 million therms
in 1989-90. About 47 per cent of all gas sold by British Gas to its 17-7 million
consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, the remainder being
for household use. Gas is used extensively in industries requiring the control
Consumption
Gas
Research
COAL
British Coal
Corporation
Production
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES 319
of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, such as the pottery industry,
and in certain processes for making iron and steel products. In 1989-90,
5,743 million therms of gas were sold to industry in Britain, and 2,919
million therms to commercial and other non-domestic users. An increasingly
large part of domestic demand is for gas for central heating. In 1989-90,
9,890 million therms were sold to domestic users.
British Gas spends some £75 million a year on its research and development
programme, principally carried out at five establishments throughout
Britain. It has information exchange and research agreements with a
number-of overseas gas companies and carries out research in collaboration
with universities and industry both in Britain and overseas. Its research
programme covers engineering, design, materials technology and
instrumentation, and electronics, related to all aspects of the gas business,
from exploration and production, storage and transmission, and pipeline
inspection to distribution and utilisation.
British Gas makes a wide range of technology, products, processes and
services available worldwide.
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to Roman times. It recommenced
in the thirteenth century. It played a crucial part in the industrial revolution
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and in its peak year, 1913, the
industry produced 292 million tonnes of coal, exported 74-2 million tonnes
and employed over a million workers. In 1947 the coalmines passed into
public ownership by means of the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1946,
which set up the National Coal Board, subsequently the British Coal
Corporation. The Government has announced that it will introduce
legislation to privatise the coal industry during the next Parliament. The
Coal Industry Act 1990 provides for a major capital reconstruction of British
Coal, and includes clauses enabling the Secretary of State for Energy to
reduce or extinguish its accumulated group losses at the end of the 1989-90
financial year and to pay further grants in respect of redundancy and
restructuring costs.
British Coal has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction
of coal in Great Britain. It is empowered to license private operators to work
mines with an employee limit of 150 and opencast sites with a production
limit of 250,000 tonnes so that underground and opencast deposits too small
lor British Coal to work can be usefully exploited. It also has powers to work
other minerals, where discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or
working, coal; and to engage in certain petrochemicals activities beneficial to
the future of the coal industry. Retail sales are largely in private hands,
although British Coal makes bulk sales to large industrial consumers and has
signed three-year contracts to supply coal to the electricity generating
companies in England and Wales.
In 1989-90 total output of 96-8 million tonnes comprised 75-2 million
tonnes ol deep-mined coal, 18-3 million tonnes from opencast mines and 3-3
million tonnes from other sources (including licensed collieries and tip coal).
At the end of March 1990 there were 73 British Coal collieries in operation.
The main coal-bearing regions are shown on the map on p 320. Where
mining operations have ceased, British Coal has accepted responsibility for
the restoration of the surface area of collieries and of tips which dose in the
four years after 31 March 1990.
ilasgow
Edinburgh .
Carlisle A ^
Workington Durham
.Dpncastei
Sheffield:
iManchester
islottmgham
Vale of Belvoir
London
Bristol
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Coal
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
I I I I I—I—I
I 1 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Coalfields
Potential coalfields
Potential lignite fields
Newcastle
upon Tyne
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
321
Development
Consumption
Research
ELECTRICITY
Restructuring
and
Privatisation
Britain’s coal industry is one of the largest in Western Europe, and one of the
world’s most technologically advanced. British Coal has a substantial capital
investment programme, which amounted to £505 million in 1989-90.
T echnical progress has been concentrated on equipment capable of
obtaining higher output from fewer faces. By early 1990 some 50 to 60 per
cent of all coal faces were equipped with heavy duty supports available in all
seam sections. New designs of power loader and face conveyor are being
brought in whenever they are cost-effective. Production at the new mining
complex at Selby in North Yorkshire (one of the world’s most advanced deep
mines) is planned to build up to 10 million tonnes a year. Total estimated
expenditure on the development of a new mine at Asfordby within the Vale
of Belvoir (Leicestershire) is £471 million.
Significant reserves of lignite (brown coal) have been discovered in
Northern Ireland in the clay basins around Lough Neagh and at
Ballymoney. Companies under government licence are prospecting to
determine their extent, possibly over 1,000 million tonnes.
In 1989-90 inland consumption of coal was 108-9 million tonnes, of which
75 per cent was by power stations, 10 per cent by coke ovens and 4 per cent
by domestic users. With a substantial proportion ol coal being used by power
stations for electricity generation, British Coal sales of coal to them totalled
77-7 million tonnes in 1989-90. Exports of coal in 1989-90 were 2-5 million
tonnes, while imports amounted to 12-3 million tonnes.
In 1989—90 British Coal spent £27-5 million on research. It has two main
research establishments: Technical Department at Stanhope Bretby in
Staffordshire, for work on mining methods and equipment, and develop¬
ing systems for remote and automatic control; and the Coal Research
Establishment at Stoke Orchard (near Cheltenham), concentrating on the
utilisation ol coal, including research and development on improved
combustion and coal and ash handling techniques, together with new ways of
making gaseous, liquid and smokeless fuels from coal. These developments
aim to ensure the clean and efficient use of coal. The coal liquefaction plant
at Point of Ayr (Clwyd), opened in 1990 and costing £40 million, converts 2-5
tonnes of coal a day into petrol, diesel and other transport fuels. The
Government has offered 50 per cent of the cost (up to a total of £8 million) of
a programme aimed at speeding the development of cleaner coal-fired
electricity. This is part of a £27 million project to bring topping cycle
technology, which offers a 20 per cent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
from coal-fired power stations, to the demonstration stase by the earlv
1990s. 7
Under the Electricity Act 1947 the electricity supply industry in Great
Britain was brought into public ownership in 1948, although two subsequent
Acts (1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation. Electricity from
the supply system is available to all premises in Britain except for some very
remote households. The main transmission system (national grid) in Great
Britain is one of the largest fully interconnected power networks in the
Western world.
The Electricity Act 1989 provides for the restructuring and offer for sale of
certain parts of the electricity supply industry in England and Wales and
in Scotland. In the Government’s view, privatisation would promote
competition in generation and supply, which would be in the customer’s
interest, and would leave generating and supply companies free to manage
their commercial opportunities without interference from government.
322
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumption
Generation
In England and Wales the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB),
responsible for the operation and maintenance of power stations and owner
of the national grid, has been split into four companies: PowerGen, owning
37 per cent of the GEGB’s non-nuclear generating capacity; National Power,
comprising 63 per cent of the CEGB’s non-nuclear generating capacity; a
publicly owned nuclear company, Nuclear Electric pic; and the National
Grid Company, owned through a holding company by the 12 regional
electricity companies. These are the successor companies to the area
electricity boards and each has a statutory duty to offer terms for the supply
of electricity. It is expected that the sale of the supply companies will take
place in November 1990; those of National Power and PowerGen are
planned to take place in February 1991.
The Electricity Council, the central co-ordinating body of the industry in
England and Wales, has been replaced. Some of its service functions are
carried on by the Electricity Association, jointly owned by the electricity
companies of Great Britain. Regulation of the industry is in the care of the
Office of Electricity Regulation, headed by the Director General of
Electricity Supply, who is responsible for the promotion of competition and
oversees the protection of consumer interests.
Restructuring in Scotland has created three companies. Two vertically
integrated regional companies, Scottish Power pic, based on the SSEB (but
without its nuclear capacity), and Scottish Hydro-Electric pic, based on the
NSHEB, generate, transmit and distribute electricity. They also buy it from
Scottish Nuclear Ltd, a government-owned company which operates the
nuclear power stations at Hunterston (Strathclyde) and Torness (Lothian).
Scottish Power and Scottish Hydro-Electric will be offered for sale in May or
June 1991. The boundary separating their areas runs from Loch Long on
the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay (see map, p 323).
The Government has also announced its intention to privatise the
electricity supply industry in Northern Ireland, where generation,
transmission and distribution are at present carried out by Northern Ireland
Electricity, a public corporation.
Sales of electricity in 1989 amounted to 267,343 gigawatt hours (GWh).
Domestic users took 35 per cent of the total, industry 36 per cent and
commercial and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales
is for space heating, one-sixth for water heating and one-tenth for cooking.
Electricity is used in industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and
lighting. It is supplied to some 25 million consumers, of whom 22 million are
in England and Wales, L7 million are supplied by Scottish Power, 600,000
by Scottish Hydro-Electric and 599,000 are in Northern Ireland.
Generation by the public electricity supply industry in Britain amounted to
292,911 GWh in 1989. Conventional steam power stations provided over 75
per cent of the total, nuclear stations 23 per cent, and gas turbine, hydro¬
electric and diesel plant 2 per cent. Public supply power stations consumed
123-7 million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1989, of which coal accounted for
65 per cent and oil 7-6 per cent. The output capacity of the 167 generating
stations of the electricity boards at the end of March 1989 totalled 66,996
megawatts (MW). An analysis of electricity generation by and output
capacity of the public supply system is given in fable 15.3.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(19,797 GWh in 1989). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemicals, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries, and the nuclear
power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA)
Tilbury /
W. Thurrock | • Bradwell
Didcot B w~,
Littlebrook V.
324
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 15.3: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated (GWh) Output
  Percent capacity3
1979 1984 1989 1989 (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
Other hydro-electric plant
34,604 49,498 66,740
239,317 209,121 219,714
758
1,175
3,628
1,947 542
2,055 2,067
3,368 3,845
23
75
6,973
51,882
2,982
2,788
1,293
Total
279,482 265,990 292,911
100 65,922*
Electricity supplied (net)f 259,836 246,367 271,729
Source: Department of Energy.
;l At31 December 1988.
4 This total includes 4 MW of wind power.
' Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at pumped-storage
stations).
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
and British Nuclear Fuels pic. In 1989 these nuclear plants supplied 4,994
GWh of electricity to the public supply system.
The Electricity Act 1989 allows independent generators to compete on
equal terms with the major generators and have equal access to the grid
transmission and local distribution systems.
The last large-scale power stations to be built were based on turbines of
500 MW and 660 MW. Station capacities have increased and there are 15
stations with a capacity of 2,000 MW or more each, including Kingsnorth
(Kent), Europe’s largest mixed-fuel station burning either coal or oil. The
Drax coal-fired station (North Yorkshire), which has an output capacity of
4,000 MW, is the largest coal-fired station in Western Europe. The larger
turbines have a higher thermal efficiency (the ratio of the net electrical
energy output to the heat energy input) than earlier units, and their
introduction, coupled with the closure of less efficient plant, has resulted in a
gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency, leading to substantial savings in
fuel consumption. Average thermal efficiency of conventional steam stations
in England and Wales was 33-7 per cent in 1989-90. The Government is
considering proposals for future generation capacity in Northern Ireland,
from the mid-1990s, including a lignite-fired power station.
To control acid emissions the Government expects National Power and
PowerGen each to fit some flue gas desulphurisation equipment to coal-fired
power stations. The first of these operations, at Drax, is in progress. In
addition, the Government has endorsed a ten-year programme to control
nitrogen oxide emissions through the installation of low nitrogen oxide
burners at the 12 largest power stations, at an estimated cost of £190 million.
The Government encourages the construction of combined cycle gas
turbine (CCGT) power stations, which emit about half the amount of carbon
dioxide of a coal-fired station. Five CCGT stations in England have been
given planning permission.
The pumped-storage station at Dinorwig (Gwynedd), the largest of its type
in Europe, has an average generated output of 1,728 MW. (In pumped-
storage schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
325
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
and Privatisation
British Nuclear
Fuels
water to high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive turbines,
rapidly providing a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to meet
sudden increases in demand.)
I he National Grid Company, together with Electricite de France, runs a
2,000-MW cross-Channel cable link, which started operating in 1986,
increasing the capacity for the transmission of electricity between the two
countries. Transmission lines linking the Scottish and English grid systems
enable cross-border trading. This interconnector is run jointly by the
National Grid Company and the two Scottish regional companies. It has a
nominal capacity of 850 MW, with an increase to 1,600 MW planned by
1993-94.
Britain has been developing nuclear power since 1956, when the world’s first
industrial-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria), began to
supply electricity to the national grid. There are 16 nuclear power stations in
operation: nine Magnox stations (with capacities ranging from 200 to 840
MW) and seven Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor stations (AGRs; ranging from
1,200 MW to 1,320 MW). Construction of a pressurised water reactor (PWR)
of 1,182 MW at Sizewell (Suffolk) should be completed in 1994.
The Government wishes to preserve the strategic role of nuclear power,
maintain diversity of supply, avoid too great a reliance on a single fuel and
obtain the benefits of this environmentally clean source of energy. It has
decided that all the nuclear power stations in Great Britain will remain in the
public sector and will review the prospects for nuclear power as the PWR at
Sizewell nears completion. The Magnox stations, AGRs and PWR in
England and Wales are contained in a new company, Nuclear Electric pic,
which will provide between 15 and 20 per cent of electricity in England and
Wales in the mid-1990s. The two AGRs in Scotland supply 50 per cent of all
the Scottish electricity requirement.
In England and Wales the regional electricity supply companies are
statutorily obliged to buy a minimum amount of non-fossil-fuelled gen¬
erating capacity, including nuclear. Since the price of nuclear electricity is
likely to be somewhat higher than that of fossil-fuelled electricity, a levy may
be raised on all sales from sources which could be environmentally
damaging, including fossil fuels, so that the additional cost is shared by all
electricity suppliers. Although the Electricity Act 1989 allows for a similar
obligation there, the Government has no plans at present to introduce one in
Scotland, which already has a high level of non-fossil-fuelled generating
capacity.
British Nuclear Fuels pic provides services covering the whole nuclear fuel
cycle: uranium conversion, uranium enrichment (through its shareholding
in Urenco Ltd), fuel element fabrication, transport and reprocessing of spent
fuel, and the manufacture of specialised fuel element components. All of its
shares are held by the Government. The company, with headquarters at
Risley (Cheshire), conducts operations at four further sites: Springfields
(Lancashire), where fuel is manufactured; Capenhurst (Cheshire), where
uranium is enriched to provide fuel for nuclear reactors; Sellafield
(Cumbria), w'here Calder Hall is located and where spent fuel is reprocessed;
and Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway).
There is a large-scale investment programme in progress involving
expenditure of some £5,500 million over the next ten years. The major part
of this expenditure relates to the Sellafield site and comprises the
refurbishment of facilities for treating spent fuel from Magnox power
326
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Research
Nuclear Safety
stations, the construction of a thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP)
which will take spent fuel from British and overseas oxide reactors, and the
construction of facilities to process and package radioactive waste.
Treatment plants worth some £500 million are being built to further the
company’s objective of virtually eliminating the radioactivity levels of liquid
discharges. The remainder of the programme involves the construction of
further centrifuge enrichment plant at Capenhurst, and refurbishment and
construction of new plant at Springfields.
The nuclear research and development funded by the Department of
Energy is carried out by the UKAEA, which has been reorganised as nine
semi-autonomous businesses operating as AEA Technology. Those
specialising in key aspects of nuclear research and development are AEA
Thermal Reactors, AEA Fast Reactors, AEA Fuel Services, AEA
Decommissioning and Radwaste, and AEA Fusion. The work is carried out
at six sites: Harwell and Culham (Oxfordshire), Risley, Winfrith (Dorset),
Windscale (Cumbria) and Dounreay (Highland). In addition, safety research
is carried out by AEA Safety and Reliability at Culcheth (Cheshire). AEA
Technology operates as a trading fund, which allows it to function
commercially, and its research and development work funded by the
Department of Energy is on a customer-contractor basis. AEA Technology is
a major international supplier of contract services with numerous customers,
including the electricity generators, British Nuclear Fuels pic, other
government departments, and industry.
Co-operation on nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes
place within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and
membership of bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Nuclear Energy Agency, as well as through direct links on research
between AEA T echnology and equivalent organisations overseas.
Britain takes part in the co-operative research programmes of the
European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), including one on es¬
tablishing the feasibility of achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion. A
major component of this programme is the Joint European Torus (JET)
project at Culham, which started operating in 1983. In 1988 the UKAEA
agreed with its French and German counterparts to set out the terms for
European fast reactor research and development collaboration. Permission
has been given for the building of a demonstration fast reactor reprocessing
plant at Dounreay, the focus of fast reactor development in Britain.
The Government and the nuclear industry give high priority to safety at
nuclear installations and the industry has an excellent safety record. Britain
has a rigorous system of nuclear safety regulation, enforced by the Health
and Safety Executive’s Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, which ensures that
high standards of safety are incorporated into the design, construction,
operation, maintenance and eventual decommissioning of all nuclear plant.
While the safety of such plant in Britain is the ultimate responsibility of the
nuclear operator, the Inspectorate has extensive powers and an operator
must satisfy it before a licence is granted. Operators must protect their
workers and the public by complying with the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974, as well as with the conditions of their nuclear site licences under
the Nuclear Installations Act 1965. The Inspectorate has the power to shut
down a plant if it is believed to be unsafe and may also require improvements
to an installation if it thinks the appropriate safety standards are not being
met.
Discharges have to be kept within the limits and conditions set by
Industrial Technology
At the National Engineering
Laboratory, East Kilbride,
Scotland, engineers have
designed and built a suite of
wire rope testing machines,
enabling them to assess
accurately the performance
of the large-diameter wire
ropes used for anchoring
structures in the offshore oil
industry.
An engineer at Switched
Reluctance Drives
tests one of the company’s
‘intelligent’ motors.
Microchip technology
has contributed to making
the motors more efficient,
adaptable and controllable
than conventional ones.
Service Industries
Blackpool Pleasure Beach attracts
over 6-5 million visitors a year.
Billingsgate, in London,
is Britain’s largest inland fish
market. About four-fifths of the
fish and fish products
it handles comes from
domestic sources.
The fine art auctioneers
Sotheby’s are established
worldwide and handled sales
valued at £1,820 million in
1989-90.
The Scottish Conference and
Exhibition Centre, Glasgow,
provides a venue for a wide
variety of events, including large
sporting or entertainment
events with audiences of up
to 10,000.
Exports
Established in 1976, the Body Shop
produces and sells naturally-based skin
and hair care preparations. Its overseas
earnings have more than doubled in
two years and in 1990 it won a
Queen’s Award for Export.
One of the most spectacular
modern buildings in the City of
London belongs to Lloyd’s, an
incorporated society of private
insurers whose origins go
back to the seventeenth
century. It has built up a
considerable worldwide
market in insurance.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
327
Emergency Plans
Research on
Electricity
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
authorisations granted under the Radioactive Substances Act 1960. In
England and Wales authorisations are granted jointly by the Secretary of
State for the Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, and in Scotland by the Secretary of State for Scotland. The terms of
the authorisations ensure that those most exposed to discharges receive less
than the maximum dose limit recommended by the International
Commission on Radiological Protection. Within the limits, operators of
nuclear facilities are required to keep discharges as low as reasonably
achievable and failure to do so makes them liable to prosecution.
Compliance with the legislation is overseen by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Pollution in England and Wales, and by Her Majesty’s Industrial Pollution
Inspectorate in Scotland.
Britain plays a major part in international discussions on nuclear safety,
and has a number of bilateral agreements and arrangements, with, for
example, France, the Soviet Union and the United States, covering the
exchange of information relating to all matters affecting nuclear safety.
International conventions have been established on the early notification of
a nuclear accident with possible transboundary effects, and on the mutual
provision of assistance in the event of a nuclear accident or radiological
emergency.
The precautions taken in the design and construction of nuclear installations
in Britain and the high safety standards in their operation and maintenance
reduce the chance of accidents which might affect the public to an extremely
low level. However, all operators are required to prepare emergency plans,
including those for dealing with an accidental release of radioactivity, which
are regularly tested in exercises under the supervision of the Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate.
A collective programme of research in England and Wales is the
responsibility of the industry as a whole. Some of the work is already done in
collaboration with Scottish Power, Scottish Hydro-Electric and Northern
Ireland Electricity, which contribute towards its cost (£194 million in
1987-88). There is also collaboration between the supply industry and the
plant manufacturers to co-ordinate research on plant and systems. The
research establishments comprise the Central Electricity Research
Laboratories at Leatherhead (Surrey; National Power), the Berkeley Nuclear
Laboratories (Gloucestershire; Nuclear Electric) and the Marchwood
Engineering Laboratories on Southampton Water (PowerGen). Research on
distribution technology and electricity utilisation is at present undertaken at
the Electricity Association Research Centre at Capenhurst and by the
regional electricity companies.
The Department of Energy is supporting research and development in the
renewable energy technologies, to stimulate the full economic exploitation of
alternative energy sources and encourage industry to develop internal and
export markets. The present phase of its detailed research programme,
published in 1988 and comprising over 250 projects with a financial
commitment of £60 million, aims to promote the commercialisation of those
renewable technologies which are economically attractive and to reduce the
uncertainty in the economics and potential contribution of those which are
promising but still uncertain. The Department is providing £20-3 million in
funding for 1990—91 and work is concentrated on the most promising
technologies.
328
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wind Power
Geothermal
Energy
Tidal Power
Passive Solar
Design
Wind power constitutes one of the most promising renewable energy sources
for electricity generation. Experimental wind farms, jointly funded by the
Department of Energy and the electricity generating companies, and costing
up to £30 million, are planned to be built between 1990 and 1992 at sites in
England and Wales. Each wind farm will have an area of 3 to 4 sq km (1-2 to
1 -5 sq miles) and will contain about 25 vertical- or horizontal-axis turbines,
each 30 m (100 ft) high with 30-m diameter blades and with an output of 300
to 500 kW. They are expected to provide electricity for 15,000 people. At
one of the sites, Capel Cynon (Dyfed), investigations are well advanced. The
Department supports other major projects: two vertical-axis wind turbines,
inaugurated in 1986 and 1990 at Carmarthen Bay (Dyfed); a 300-kW
turbine also at Carmarthen Bay; a 3-MW, 60-m (200-ft) turbine, in
collaboration with Scottish Hydro-Electric, on Orkney, inaugurated in 1987;
a 1-MW, 55-m (180-ft) diameter turbine at Richborough (Kent), inaugurated
in 1990; and two 300-kW turbines at the National Engineering Laboratory
(East Kilbride), which are being commissioned in 1990. The Energy
Research Group of the Science and Engineering Research Council is
supporting a number of projects on the integration of wind and diesel
electrical generation, which has particular relevance to small, isolated
communities.
Under its geothermal hot dry rock programme, the Department is in¬
vestigating the economic possibilities of extracting heat from rocks at a depth
of 2 to 6 km (1 -25 to 4 miles). Research involving government expenditure of
over £25 million since 1977 has been extended at a cost of £8T5 million over
three years from 1988. The work is mainly carried out by the Camborne
School of Mines in Cornwall, where a project is being conducted to establish
the technology for creating a suitable deep underground heat exchange
zone from which the heat could be withdrawn. A conceptual design study
was started in 1989 and a review of hot dry rock research and development is
being carried out in 1990.
Tidal power is one of the most promising of the renewable technologies for
large-scale electricity generation. Its exceptionally high tidal range makes the
Severn estuary one of the best potential sites in the world, and the
Department of Energy has funded, with the Severn Tidal Power Group and
the electricity supply industry, a £4-2 million study into the viability of a
Severn tidal barrage, of which a general report has been published. The
Government has made a 50 per cent contribution to two phases of studies,
costing £2 million, on an energy barrage on the Mersey estuary. The
Government and the Mersey Barrage Company are jointly funding a third
phase of studies.
Passive solar design is considered the best way to utilise solar energy in
Britain and has already proved cost-effective in both domestic and non¬
domestic buildings, using their form and fabric to admit, store and distribute
solar energy for heating and improving daylight. The Department of Energy
has increased expenditure on its research and development programme,
which includes over 30 projects worth some £3-6 million and involves
architects, schools of architecture and developers; while the Department of
Trade and Industry has funded work on photovoltaic cells, which convert
sunlight directly to electricity. A major project initiated in 1987, with
European Community backing and including the British glass manufacturer
Pilkington pic, was the establishment of a test centre at Strathclyde
University to facilitate experiments on passive solar design and equipment.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
329
Biofuels
Wave Energy
Exploration
Production
Biofuels offer possibly the largest contribution from the renewable energy
resources in the medium term. The main work of the Department’s
programme is on the combustion of wastes, anaerobic digestion (particularly
as applied to the production and use of landfill gas) and energy forestry.
The Department also has a research and development programme into wave
energy, based on a project on the island of Islay. The small-scale shoreline
device has been constructed by the Queen’s University of Belfast, which is
carrying out a complementary study to assess the potential for shoreline
devices in Britain.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met
by imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important
contribution to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1988 totalled
over 384 million tonnes, valued at £1,854 million. The total number of
employees in the extraction industry was some 43,000 in 1988. The locations
of some of the more important minerals produced in Britain are shown on
the map on p 330.
Exploration for and exploitation of indigenous metalliferous mineral
resources to meet the needs of industry are being encouraged by the
Government. The British Geological Survey is carrying out a long-term
programme for the Department of Trade and Industry aimed at identifying
areas with the potential for economic extraction of minerals.
Table 15.4: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1978
1983
1988
Sand and gravel
Silica sand
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay and ball clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
110-2
6-2
35-3
88-8
16-7^
13-4
3- 2
7-3
25-5"
4- 2
l-4;'
4-2
0-2
0-2
107-0
4-0
36-9
94-0
12-4;'
14-7
2- 9
6-3
22-4'*
3- 4
0-7a
0-4
0-5
0-1
136-4
4-3
52-0
125-7
14-5a
18-9
n.a.
6-1
18-9;*
3-9
1-1
0-2
0-8
0-1
Source: United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook I9S9.
'' Great Britain only,
n.a. = not available.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 15.4. In terms of value, production of sand and
gravel was estimated at £543 million in 1988, limestone and dolomite £498
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
331
England and
Wales
Water Service
Companies
million, clays £285 million, igneous rock £200 million, sandstone £68
million, potash £58 million, salt £39 million, chalk £38 million, gypsum and
anhydrite £24 million, tin £14 million and fluorspar £10 million. Britain is a
major world producer of several important industrial minerals, including
china clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth, celesdte and gypsum; and produces
significant amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, slate, fluorspar, potash,
salt, silica sands, fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes and talc, mostly for
home consumption. Small amounts of diatomite, calcspar, chert and flint,
anhydrite and china stone are also produced. In 1988 the production of
metal in non-ferrous ores totalled 10,800 tonnes, mainly tin and zinc from
Cornwall. The Cornish mines, one of the very few sources of tin in the
European Community, produced some 3,400 tonnes in 1988, satisfying
about half of Britain’s demand. Small amounts of copper and silver were
produced in association with tin and zinc, and some lead and zinc with
barytes and fluorspar. A little gold came from a mine in north Wales.
Production of sand and gravel, and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous
rock and sandstone), as aggregates for use in construction constitutes two-
thirds, by value, of Britain’s output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the
world’s second largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (22
million tonnes in 1988).
Water
Britain’s water supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and
boreholes. Water for public supply in England and Wales amounted to
16,896 megalitres (Ml) a day in 1988—89 and average daily supply per head
was over 336 litres. About 99 per cent of the population in Great Britain and
96 per cent in Northern Ireland are connected to the public water supply
system.
With the abolition of the rating system, on which charges for domestic
water, sewerage and sewage disposal were largely based, the Government
has said that it is for each water undertaking in England and Wales to decide
how it wishes to charge, and has given them until the year 2000 to introduce
new methods of charging. Water metering is one of the choices being
considered. Since 1981 optional metering for domestic users has been
available throughout England and Wales. Local trials of compulsory
domestic metering in England started in 1989 and will last for about three
years. Industrial users are charged for their water supply according to actual
metered consumption.
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for
Wales, and the Director General of Water Services are responsible for the
general oversight of the water industry and for enforcing the duties which
the Water Act 1989 places upon the water and sewerage companies. The
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for
Wales are responsible for policy relating to land drainage, flood protection,
sea defence, and the protection and development of fisheries.
Under the Water Act 1989 the utility functions of the water authorities in
England and Wales have been privatised. The ten water and sewerage
companies, through their principal operating subsidiaries, the water service
companies, are responsible for water supply, sewerage j and sewage
treatment.
:«2
National Rivers
Authority
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
It is the Government’s view that freedom from government intervention
in management and from public ownership constraints on financing will
help to improve service standards and enable the new companies to attract
investment. It is also envisaged that the companies will have scope for
innovation and diversification into various commercial undertakings.
A system of economic regulation and guaranteed standards of service is
overseen by the Director General of Water Services, and there is a new
system of safeguarding and improving the quality of water supplies.
The National Rivers Authority, an independent body, has regulatory and
river management functions including pollution control and quality
regulation of river, coastal and ground waters; management of water
resources; land drainage; flood protection; fisheries; nature conservation
and recreation.
The 29 statutory water companies operate as water undertakers in certain
areas. Should they convert to pic status, they may also become sewerage
undertakers by agreement with the relevant water service company or on
sites where no service exists.
Some 26,875 Ml a day were abstracted in England and Wales in 1987—88, of
which public water supplies accounted for 17,250 Ml a day. The CEGB took
some 4,600 Ml a day, primarily for cooling in connection with electricity
generation, other industry about 3,700 Ml a day, and the remainder was
used in agriculture and fish farming.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage
disposal rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. In addition,
the Central Scotland Water Development Board is primarily responsible for
developing large water sources and supplying water in bulk to its five
constituent member authorities, the regional councils in central Scotland.
Water is charged for according to type of consumer: those paying
community water charges; non-domestic consumers paying by means of non¬
domestic water rates; and non-domestic consumers paying through metered
charges. Charges and rates are decided by each authority.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland
sources. An average of 2,204 Ml a day was supplied in Scotland in 1988—89.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the promotion of the
conservation of water resources and the provision by water authorities of
adequate water supplies, and has a duty to promote the cleanliness of rivers
and other inland waters, and the tidal waters of Scotland. River purification
authorities have a statutory responsibility for water pollution control.
The Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for
public water supply and sewerage throughout Northern Ireland. The
Department is also responsible for the conservation and cleanliness of water
resources and, with the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland,
may prepare a water management programme with respect to water
resources in any area. There is a domestic water charge which is contained in
the regional rate, while agriculture, commerce and industry pay metered
charges. There are abundant potential supplies of water for both domestic
and industrial use. An average of 659 Ml of water a day was supplied in
1988-89.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
333
Development
Projects
Research
The water industry in England and Wales is committed to a ten-year
investment programme costing over £26,000 million. Thames Water is
constructing an 80-km (50-mile) distribution system to meet the growing
demand for water in London. This is due to be completed in 1996. Another
example is North West Water, which has embarked on a major 25-year
programme of investment to clean up the polluted rivers of the Mersey
Basin.
Several organisations and centres of expertise provide water research
services to government, the National Rivers Authority, water companies and
the Scottish river purification boards. The Water Research Centre has main
laboratories at Medmenham (Buckinghamshire) and at Swindon (Wiltshire).
Research undertaken covers environmental issues, treatment processes,
mains and pipeline rehabilitation, and drinking water safety. Other
organisations conducting research include Hydraulics Research Limited,
universities, the Meteorological Office, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, and several institutes of the Natural Environment Research
Council.
16 Agriculture, Fisheries
and Forestry
Land Use
Farming
Agriculture
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity.
About 2-2 per cent of the working population are engaged in agriculture.
Self-sufficiency in food and feed is estimated at 56 per cent of all food and
feed, and at 75 per cent of indigenous-type food and feed. Food and
beverages accounted for about 10 per cent of Britain’s imports by value in
1989, compared with about a quarter in the 1960s. The agricultural
contribution to gross domestic product was £6,025 million in 1989, about 1-4
per cent of the total. Britain is also a major exporter of agricultural produce
and food products, agrochemicals and agricultural machinery.
The Government aims to foster an efficient and competitive agriculture
industry through the provision and sponsorship of research, development
and advisory services, the provision of financial support where appropriate,
measures to control disease, pests and pollution, and improved marketing
arrangements for food and food products. It also encourages the industry to
adopt high standards on animal welfare. The Agriculture Act 1986 gives
agriculture ministers a responsibility to achieve a balance between the
interests of agriculture, the economic and social interests of rural areas,
conservation and recreation. Schemes have been introduced to encourage
the planting of new farm woodlands and the use of farmland for a variety of
alternative projects. The European Community set-aside scheme encourages
agricultural stabilisers by offering an alternative to surplus production and
an opportunity for farmers affected by reductions in support to diversify.
Some 77 per cent of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. The area of agricultural
land has been declining, although there has been a reduction in the net rate
of loss in recent years. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under
crops and grass. Some 6 million hectares (over 15 million acres) are used for
rough grazing; most of it is in hilly areas. Soils vary from the thin poor ones
of highland Britain to the rich fertile soils of low-lying areas such as the
fenlands of eastern England. The temperate climate and the relatively even
distribution of rainfall over the year ensure a long growing season; streams
rarely dry up and grassland normally remains green throughout the year.
In 1989 there were some 257,000 farm holdings in Britain, of which about
75 per cent in England, Scotland and Wales were wholly or mainly owner-
occupied, while virtually all the farms in Northern Ireland are owner-
occupied. The average area (including rough grazing) of full-time businesses
is 107-3 hectares (265 acres). It is estimated that the 12 per cent of holdings
in the largest size group accounted for 57 per cent of activity, while the
smallest size of holding (45 per cent of farms) accounted for only 2-6 per cent
of activity. In Wales and Northern Ireland output from smaller farms is
more significant than in the rest of Britain.
336
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and Sheep
The number of people engaged in agriculture in 1989 was about 573,000.
Labour productivity has increased by 58 per cent since 1979. Total income
from farming (that of farmers, partners, directors and their spouses) was
£2,167 million in 1989, 11 percent more than in 1988.
There are over 500,000 tractors and some 53,000 combine harvesters in
use. A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and preserving grass are
also employed. Horticultural crops such as blackcurrants and brussels
sprouts are frequently harvested by machine, and milking machines are used
on the vast majority of dairy farms. Most farms have a direct electricity
supply, the remainder having their own generators.
Dairy herd monitoring, account analysis, budgeting and the monitoring of
cash-flow and performance have all benefited in recent years from computer
technology. Computer models of typical farms allow many varieties of crops
and livestock to be considered, as well as demands for labour, land, capital
and buildings.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight
of total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 16.1.
Table 16.1: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product
1978-80
average
1989
(provisional)
Red carcase meat
Eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat
Potatoes
86
101
100
69
48
45
78
n.a.
93
99
100
67
74
58
122
87
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
n.a. = not available.
About three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef
cattle and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and
moorland areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and
south-western England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland
areas, as does dairying, and partly on arable farms. British livestock breeders
have developed many of the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with worldwide
reputations, for example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef breeds,
the Jersey, Guernsey and Ayrshire dairy breeds, Large White pigs and a
number of sheep breeds. Because of developments in artificial insemination
and embryo transfer, Britain is able to export semen and embryos from high-
quality donor animals.
Table 16-2 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock
products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in
Scotland and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. In 1989
the average size of dairy herds in Britain was 62, while the average yield of
milk per dairy cow was 4,999 litres (1,100 gallons). Average household
consumption of liquid (including low-fat) milk per head in 1989 was 2 0 litres
(3-5 pints) per week.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
337
Table 16.2: Livestock and Livestock Products
1978-80 1987 1988 1989
average (provisional)
Cattle and calves (’000 head) 13,561
Sheep and lambs (’000 head) 30,388
Pigs (’000 head) 7,802
Poultry (’000 head)3 128,537
Milk (million litres) 15,291
Eggs (million dozen) 1,171
Beef and veal (’000 tonnes) 1,078
Mutton and lamb (’000 tonnes) 257
Pork (’000 tonnes) 674
Bacon and ham (’000 tonnes) 213
Poultry meat (’000 tonnes) n.a.
12,158 11,872 12,016
38,701 40,942 42,885
7,942 7,980 7,717
128,628 130,809 120,198
14,811 14,444 14,246
1,025 1,041 943
1,118 947 967
311 343 383
780 802 741
197 197 193
987 1,048 1,004
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
“'Excluding ducks, geese and turkeys. Data for 1987-89 cannot he compared with data for earlier years owing to changes
in coverage of poultry holdings,
n.a. = not available.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national
dairy herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. The remainder is
derived from suckler herds producing high-quality beef calves in the hills
and uplands, where the traditional British beef breeds, such as Hereford and
Aberdeen Angus, continue to be important. Imported breeds which have
established themselves include the Charolais, Limousin, Simmental and
Belgian Blue.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production, with more than 40 breeds
and many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb
production is the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also
important.
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep. Grass
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation
and methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for
winter feed. Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and
cattle, producing young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Pig production occurs in most areas but is particularly important in eastern
and northern England. There is an increasing concentration into specialist
units and larger herds.
Output of poultry meat has continued to benefit from better husbandry
and genetic improvements. Since 1979 British production has increased by
just over a third and stayed at over 1 million tonnes in 1989. Production of
broilers from holdings of over 100,000 birds accounts for over a half of total
production. In 1989 British egg production fell by 100 million dozen,
reflecting concern about salmonella. Over two-thirds of laying birds are in
flocks of 20,000 or more. Britain remains broadly self-sufficient in poultry
meat and eggs.
The welfare of farm animals is protected by regulations and it is an offence
to cause unnecessary pain or distress to commercially reared livestock. For
example, there are regulations requiring owners of intensive units to arrange
for the daily inspection of their stock and the equipment on which it
338
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crops
depends. There are advisory codes and recommendations for the welfare of
all major species of farm animals and compliance is monitored by the State
Veterinary Service. The Government has announced an animal welfare
initiative, designed to get common standards throughout Europe.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural
land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter, and advises on any
legislative changes it considers necessary. The Government has adopted
most of its recommendations for the protection of livestock at markets,
including tighter controls on the marketing of calves.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern and
central southern England and eastern Scotland. In Britain in 1989 cereals
were grown on 3-9 million hectares (9-6 million acres). Production of cereals,
at 22-4 million tonnes, was higher than in the previous two years. Between
40 and 50 per cent of available wheat supplies (allowing for imports and
exports) are normally used for flour milling, and about 50 per cent for
animal feed. About 30 per cent of barley supplies are used for malting and
distilling, and the remainder for animal feed. After many years of growth,
the recent decreases in the area and yield of oilseed rape continued in 1989.
Large-scale potato and vegetable production is undertaken in the fens (in
Cambridgeshire and south Lincolnshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers
Table 16.3: Main Crops
1978-80 1987 1988 1989
average (provisional)
Wheat
Area (’000 hectares) 1,357
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 7,419
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 5-46
Barley
Area (’000 hectares) 2,343
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 9,933
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4-25
Oats
Area (’000 hectares) 155
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 615
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 3-97
Potatoes
Area (’000 hectares) 208
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,908
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 33-20
Oilseed rape
Area (’000 hectares) 77
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 213
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 2-78
Sugar beet
Area (’000 hectares) 209
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 7,373
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 35-23
1,994 1,886 2,104
11,940 11,750 13,843
5-99 6-23 6-58
1,830 1,878 1,657
9,225 8,773 7,960
5-04 4-67 4-80
99 120 120
452 540 550
4-59 4-50 4-60
179 181 176
6,713 6,899 6,269
37-60 38-10 35-70
388 347 323
1,353 1,040 953
3-49 3-00 2-95
200 198 194
7,992 8,152 8,000
39-91 41-30 41-24
Sources: Agriculture in the United Kingdom: / 9H9 and Agricultural Census June / 9S9.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
339
Horticulture
Organic
Farming
Food Safety
Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early
potatoes are an important crop in south-west Wales, Kent and south-west
England. High-grade seed potatoes are grown in Scotland and Northern
Ireland.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides over 50 per cent of
requirements, most of the remainder being refined from raw cane sugar
imported from developing countries under the Lome Convention.
Table 16.3 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
In 1989 the land utilised for horticulture was about 201,000 hectares
(497,000 acres). Vegetables grown in the open (excluding potatoes)
accounted for 7T7 per cent, orchards for 14-4 per cent, small fruit for 6-3
per cent and ornamentals (including hardy nursery stock and flowers grown
in the open) for 7-7 per cent. More than one vegetable crop is, in some cases,
taken from the same area of land in a year, so that the estimated area actually
cropped in 1989 was 234,000 hectares (579,000 acres).
Field vegetables account for about 38 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural
enterprises are increasing productivity with the help of improved planting
material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery. Some field
vegetables, for example, are raised in blocks of compressed peat or loose-
filled cells, a technique which reduces root damage and allows plants to
establish themselves more reliably and evenly. There are government grants
for replanting apple and pear trees.
Glasshouses are used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers, sweet peppers,
lettuces, flowers, pot plants and nursery stock. Widespread use is made of
automatic control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic control of
watering. Energy-efficient glasshouses use thermal screens, while low-cost
plastic tunnels extend the season for certain crops previously grown in the
open. Government grants are available for replacing heated glass and
heating systems.
Under the European Gommunity’s Common Agricultural Policy (see
p 341), a wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality
standards.
The Government encourages organic farming along with other farming
enterprises. The board of the United Kingdom Register of Organic Food
Standards, an independent body set up with government support by Food
From Britain in 1987, has drawn up national standards for organic food
production. Support is also provided from the Government’s research and
development programme and, as appropriate, through national grant
schemes and by advice from the agricultural advisory service.
The Food Safety Directorate was set up in 1989 within the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in order to focus ministry resources more
effectively on maintaining the safety and quality of Britain’s food supplies.
Food safety responsibilities are separated from food production
responsibilities within the Ministry. In addition, a consumer panel has been
set up, to give consumers a direct means of conveying their views on food
safety and consumer protection issues to the Government. The Food Safety
Act 1990 revises and streamlines the existing body of food law in Great
Britain so that food safety and consumer protection may be improved
throughout the food chain. The Act combines basic rules with enabling
powers, so that detailed regulations can adapt to technological change and
innovation. It introduces more effective enforcing powers and greatly
increased penalties for offenders.
340
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EXPORTS
MARKETING
Co-operatives
ROLEOFTHE
GOVERNMENT
The Government is keen to encourage the growth of exports related to
agriculture, and their volume increased in the ten years up to 1987, although
in 1988 it fell. The volume of these exports rose strongly in 1989, when their
value amounted to £6,273 million, the main markets being Western Europe,
North America and the Middle East. Exports include speciality products
such as fresh salmon, Scotch whisky, biscuits, jams and conserves, as well as
beef and lamb carcases and cheese. Food From Britain is a national
organisation which promotes the marketing of food and agricultural
produce in the domestic and overseas markets. It receives support for its
export activity from the British Food Export Council, while the British
Agricultural Export Committee of the London Chamber of Commerce
represents exporters of technology, expertise and equipment. The
Agricultural Engineers’ Association represents exporters of agricultural and
horticultural machinery. In 1989 Britain exported £846 million of farm
machinery and spares.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal
International Agricultural Exhibition, held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire,
provides an opportunity for overseas visitors to see the latest techniques and
improvements in British agriculture. Over 225,000 visitors attended in 1989,
of whom some 20,000 were from overseas. Virtually every British
agricultural machinery manufacturer is represented at the exhibition, which
is also the most important pedigree livestock event in the country. Other
major agricultural displays include the annual Royal Smithfield Show, held
in London, which exhibits agricultural machinery, livestock and carcases; the
Royal Highland Show; the Royal Welsh Show; and the Royal Ulster
Agricultural Show. There are also important regional shows.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co¬
operatives and marketing boards. The latter are producers’ organisations
(each including a minority of independent members appointed by
agriculture ministers) with certain statutory powers to regulate the
marketing of milk, wool and potatoes. For the most part the boards buy from
producers or control contracts between producers and first-hand buyers; the
Potato Marketing Board, however, maintains only a broad control over
marketing conditions, leaving producers free to deal individually with
buyers. For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock, apples and pears, there
are marketing organisations representing producer, distributor and
independent interests.
Food From Britain is responsible for improving the marketing of food and
agricultural products, both in the domestic market and abroad. Its quality
assurance schemes for producers guarantee a variety of food products.
Grants are sometimes available to improve the marketing and processing of
agricultural products.
A substantial amount of agricultural and horticultural produce is handled by
marketing co-operatives, whose turnover is around £1,500 million a year.
Since the late 1970s a number of central co-operative grain stores have been
established, and new vegetable groups and fruit-marketing co-operatives
have been formed to meet the demand from retailers for a continuous
supply of fresh, quality produce. Food From Britain provides a range of
advisory services for co-operatives and the Government may assist their
development with grants.
Four government departments have joint responsibility—the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food; the Department of Agriculture and
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
341
Common
Agricultural
Policy
Fisheries for Scotland; the Welsh Office; and the Department of Agriculture
for Northern Ireland.
The European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) accounts
for about two-thirds of the Community’s budget and aims to ensure stable
agricultural markets and a fair standard of living for agricultural producers,
and to guarantee regular supplies of food at reasonable prices. For many
commodities minimum prices are set annually at which agencies of the
member states will purchase products, and there are levies on imports to
maintain internal support prices. Intervention stocks can be disposed of
within the Community where this can be done without disrupting internal
markets. Exports are facilitated by the provision of export refunds to bridge
any gap between Community prices and world prices. In some cases, in
particular in the beef and sheep sectors, there are also direct payments to
producers.
The support prices, as well as rates of levy, export refunds and other aids,
are set in European Currency Units and are converted into the currencies of
the member states at fixed rates of exchange—‘green rates’—which can be
out of line with the market rate of exchange between each currency and the
European Currency Unit. Monetary compensatory amounts, based on the
percentage difference between the green and market rates of each currency,
are applied to prevent distortions in trade. They operate as import subsidies
and export levies for countries whose currencies’ market rates are below the
green rates, and as import levies and export subsidies for countries whose
currencies’ market rates are above the green rates.
Nearly all the Community’s agricultural expenditure (£18,000 million in
1989) is channelled through the European Agricultural Guidance and
Guarantee Fund. The Fund’s guarantee section finances market support
arrangements, while the guidance section provides funds for structural
reform—for example, farm modernisation and investment—and payments
to assist certain farmers to change to alternative enterprises.
Agricultural production under the CAP has increased considerably in
recent years, partly in response to rapid technical progress and farming
efficiency, but also reflecting the high level of price support under the CAP.
As consumption has remained relatively stable, this has resulted in the
emergence of surpluses.
Britain has consistently pressed for CAP reform, to bring supply and
demand into better balance and to increase the role of market forces in
agriculture. Considerable progress has been made. Average effective
Community support levels have been reduced in real terms each year since
1984. The most notable step towards achieving these objectives was the
package of reforms agreed by the European Council of Ministers in 1988.
This introduced a legally binding limit on CAP market support expenditure
and brought in or extended stabilisers for most CAP commodities. Stabilisers
ensure that CAP support is automatically cut if production exceeds specified
quantities. Significant price cuts of up to 20 per cent have already been made
in a number of sectors. Further reforms, restricting intervention in the beef
regime, were agreed in 1989.
Each of the price-fixing settlements in 1988, 1989 and 1990 consolidated
this reform process, the cost being within the guidelines established by the
Council, and the stabiliser mechanisms remained intact. The settlements also
helped to improve the competitive position of British farmers. Green pound
devaluations were agreed which represent a significant step in the process of
meeting the Community’s commitment to phasing out the differences
between ‘green’ and market rates of exchange by the end of 1992.
342
Price
Guarantees,
Grants and
Subsidies
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Agriculture and
Protection of
the Countryside
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Expenditure in Britain in 1989—90 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies
and on CAP market regulations was estimated to be £257 million and £998
million respectively. About £1,359 million was reimbursed from the
Community budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the CAP; potato market support
measures are operated through the Potato Marketing Board and the
Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland, and a price stabilisation
fund for wool is administered by the British Wool Marketing Board. The
Government intends to end the guarantee arrangements when par¬
liamentary time permits.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production
grants, some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist
farmers and horticulturists with or without improvement plans, and there is
special financial help for hill and upland farmers in the form of headage
payments on cattle and sheep (known as compensatory allowances).
Community assistance may also be made to help to improve facilities for the
marketing and processing of agricultural products, while launching aid is
available to production and marketing groups in the horticultural sector.
Local authorities provide some 5,800 statutory smallholdings in England
and 950 in Wales. They make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working
capital to their tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried
out by the Government, which, while now seeking to dispose of holdings to
its sitting tenants, still owns and maintains about 116,600 hectares (228,150
acres) of land settlement estates, comprising some 1,525 crofts and holdings. |
In the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western Isles,
Orkney and Shetland) much of the land is held by tenants known as
‘crofters’. Crofting is administered by the Crofters Commission, and benefits
from government grants for land improvements and some other agricultural
work.
The agricultural holdings legislation protects the interests and rights of
landlords and tenants, with provision for arbitration in the event of a
dispute. Most agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit,
which is then ineffective unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation
from an independent body (in England and Wales, the Agricultural Land
I ribunal and in Scotland, the Scottish Land Court). On termination of
tenancy, the tenant is entitled to compensation in accordance with a special
code. Practically all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but,
under a practice known as ‘conacre’, occupiers not wishing to farm all their
land let it annually to others. About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, ll
and is used mainly for grazing.
Agriculture ministers have a general duty, under the Agriculture Act 1986,
to seek to achieve a reasonable balance between the needs of an efficient and
stable agriculture industry and other interests in the countryside, including
the conservation of its natural beauty and amenity and the promotion of its
enjoyment by the public. In addition, they are required to further
conservation of the countryside in the administration of farm capital grant
schemes both in national parks and in sites of special scientific interest
designated by the Nature Gonservancy Council.
The Government has introduced the Environmentally Sensitive Areas
(ESAs) Scheme, under which 19 areas in Britain—ten in England, five in
Scotland, two in Wales and two in Northern Ireland—have been designated.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
343
Professional,
Scientific and
Technical
Services
They are notable for the quality of their landscape and the wealth of their
flora and fauna, which make them vulnerable to change in farming
practices. The areas are diverse in character and include low-lying wetland
grazing marshes, chalk downs and upland tracts of heather—for example,
the Broads in England; Breadalbane in Scotland; the Lleyn Peninsula in
Wales; and Mourne and Slieve Croob in Northern Ireland. The scheme is
voluntary and farmers in ESAs are offered agreements under which they
receive payments (partly funded by the European Community) for farming
along environmentally beneficial lines intended to conserve the special
character of the area.
Government grant schemes to increase the opportunities open to farmers
to develop new sources of income as an alternative to surplus production and
to enhance environmental protection include the Farm Diversification
Scheme, which encourages new business enterprises on farms. This scheme
has attracted over 2,500 applications since it started in 1988. The Farm
Woodland Scheme assists the planting of woodlands on productive ag¬
ricultural land, with incentives for broadleaved trees and a planting limit of
36,000 hectares (88,960 acres) over three years. I he Farm and Conservation
Grant Scheme focuses assistance on measures to contain farm pollution and
to improve conservation. The European Community set-aside scheme,
introduced in Britain in 1988, offers annual payments to farmers to take at
least 20 per cent of their arable land out of agricultural production for five
years. Additional payments for managing set-aside land for the benefit of
wildlife, landscape and the local community are available under the
Countryside Premium Scheme (at present limited to eastern England). The
Government has also designated ten nitrate sensitive areas in England,
where payments will be made to farmers who voluntarily undertake to
restrict their agricultural practices and thus prevent unacceptable levels of
nitrate leaching from farmland into water sources.
In England and Wales the Government’s Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service (ADAS) provides a wide range of professional, scientific,
technical and veterinary services for agriculture and its ancillary industries.
Most types of advice and servicing are on a fee-paying basis, although initial
advice to farmers on conservation, rural diversification (including use of land
for woodlands) and animal welfare is available free. Similar services are
provided in Scotland by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, the
Scottish Agricultural Gollege and a section of the State Veterinary Service. In
Northern Ireland these services are available from the Department of
Agriculture’s advisory and scientific services.
These organisations also advise the Government on the scientific,
technical and business implications of policy proposals and assist in
implementing policies concerning animal and plant health, disease and pest
eradication, food hygiene, animal welfare, land drainage and other capital
grant schemes, and safeguarding agricultural land in relation to other land
uses.
ADAS carries out research and development work under commission
from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and works under
contract directly for others and for levy-funded bodies. These undertakings
are carried out at the Central Science Laboratory and the Central Veterinary
Laboratory; at a range of husbandry farms and horticulture stations across
England and Wales; and through regional centres or on clients’ premises. A
diagnostic service for the practising veterinary surgeon is provided at 19
veterinary investigation centres.
344
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Farm Animals
Fish
Britain is free from many serious animal diseases. If they were to occur,
diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease and classical swine fever would be
combated by a slaughter policy applied to all animals infected or exposed to
infection, and by control over animal movements during the outbreaks.
The Government has taken comprehensive measures to tackle the new
cattle disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, and to ensure that con¬
sumers are protected from any remote risk. Acting on the best available
scientific advice, it has banned the feeding of ruminant protein to
ruminants; ordered the destruction of the milk and carcases of affected
animals; banned from human use those offals from other cattle which might
be harbouring the agent; and committed significant funding for research
(see p 345). It has also established an expert committee to advise on matters
relating to spongiform encephalopathies.
The Government has also introduced comprehensive measures to combat
salmonella in eggs and poultry, including the compulsory monitoring of
poultry flocks and the slaughter with compensation of salmonella-infected
flocks.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, birds, meat, and
meat products so as to prevent the introduction of animal or avian diseases.
Special measures apply to prevent the introduction of rabies, and dogs, cats
and certain other mammals are subject to import licence and six months’
quarantine. There are severe penalties for breaking the law. There have
been no cases of rabies outside quarantine in Britain since 1970.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the
welfare of farm livestock are the responsibility of the government veterinary
services. They have laboratory facilities and investigation centres performing
specialist research work and advising private practitioners responsible for
treating animals on the farm.
The health of Britain’s farmed and wild fish stocks is excellent. The fisheries
departments operate statutory controls to prevent the introduction and
spread of serious diseases of fish and shellfish. I hese controls include the
licensing of live fish imports and deposits of shellfish on the seabed, and
movement restrictions on sites where outbreaks of notifiable diseases have
been confirmed.
Plants
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
The agriculture departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant
pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction ol new ones. They
also issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany
plant material exported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to
encourage the development of healthy and true-to-type planting stocks.
The supply and use of pesticides, and their maximum residue levels, are
controlled under the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 and the
Control of Pesticides Regulations 1986 made under it. All pesticides supplied
for use in Britain must have been approved under statutory arrangements
for their safety, efficacy and, where appropriate, humaneness in use. The
Government has instituted a review of those pesticides which were approved
before 1981 and intends to speed the consideration of applications for new
pesticides.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products are
prohibited except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture
ministers, who are advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary
Products Committee, which comprises independent experts.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORES TRY
AGRICULTURAL
AND FOOD
RESEARCH
345
The agriculture departments, the Agricultural and Food Research Council
(AFRC) and private industry share responsibility for research, which is
carried out in a network of research institutes, specialist laboratories and
experimental farms, in the British Society for Horticultural Research, set up
in 1990, and in university departments.
1 he total government-funded programme of research and development
in agriculture and food amounts to some £220 million a year and aims to
maintain an efficient and competitive industry in Britain consistent with
high standards of animal welfare and care for the environment. The work of
the AFRC and the agriculture departments is co-ordinated into national
programmes, primarily on the recommendations of the Priorities Board for
Research and Development in Agriculture and Food, which advises on the
reseaich needs of the industries and the allocation of available resources
between and within areas of research.
The AFRC, a non-departmental public body, receives funds from the
science budget through the Department of Education and Science, and
income from work commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, by industry and by other outside bodies. 1 he Council supports
research at its seven institutes, which specialise in animal health, animal
physiology and genetics, grassland and the environment, arable crops, plant
science, food and engineering. The Council also funds a number of groups
or departments in universities and, through its research grants scheme,
supports many projects in universities, polytechnics and colleges. In addition
to commissioning research with the AfRC and other organisations, the
Ministry carries out research and development work in the laboratories,
experimental husbandry farms and horticulture stations of ADAS and in its
food science laboratories.
The five Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes, funded by the
Department of Agriculture and fisheries for Scotland, cover areas of
research complementary to those of the AFRC institutes, while including
work relevant to the soils, crops and livestock of northern Britain.
Development work in Scotland is carried out by the Scottish Agricultural
College, which operates from three sites.
In Northern Ireland research is carried out by the Department of
Agriculture in a number of research divisions and at the three agricultural
colleges. Links with the Queen’s University of Belfast and the Agricultural
Research Institute of Northein Ireland include basic and applied research.
Agricultural research is also conducted or sponsored by private industry,
in particular by related industries such as agrochemicals and agricultural
machinery.
I he food industry also funds or undertakes relevant research. The
Government will continue to fund strategic research essential for the public-
good, for example, into food safety, human health, animal welfare and flood
protection, but plans to withdraw funding from research which promises
commercial application or exploitation within a reasonable timescale for
which it looks to industry to take on a greater degree of funding. Planned
reductions in government expenditure on such research and development
will amount to some £30 million by 1991-92.
I he Government promotes extensive research relevant to the control of
salmonella and listeriosis. It is contributing half the cost of a £12 million
research programme, over three years, into bovine spongiform en¬
cephalopathy and has increased funding into sugar beet research. It has set
up a unified organisation for horticultural research. Through the AFRC the
Government sponsors studies into the consequences of global climate
change, to enable agriculturists to make a planned response to possible
346
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
alterations in crop production, cropping patterns, and plant and animal
diseases.
Fish Caught
The Fishing
Fleet
Fisheries
Britain, one of the European Community’s leading fishing nations, plays an
active role in the implementation and development of the Community’s
Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), which was agreed in 1983. The CFP covers
access to coastal waters, the conservation and management of fish stocks,
fisheries arrangements with third countries, the allocation of catch quotas
among member states, the trade in and marketing of fish and fish products,
and financial aid to promote the adaptation and development of the
Community’s fishing fleet. ..
The fishing industry provides about 61 per cent of British fish supplies,
and is an important source of employment and income in a number of ports.
Cod, haddock, whiting, herring, plaice and sole are found in the North Sea
off the east coasts of Scotland and England; mackerel, together with cod and
other demersal fish, off the west coast of Scotland; sole, plaice, cod, herring
and whiting in the Irish Sea; and mackerel, sole and plaice off the south-west
coast of England. Nephrops, crabs, lobsters and other shellfish are found in
the inshore waters all around the coast. At the end of 1988 there were near y
17,100 fishermen in regular employment and nearly 5,400 occasionally
employed. The Government aims to encourage the development of a viable,
efficient and market-oriented fisheries industry within the CFP framework.
In 1989 demersal fish (caught on or near the bottom of the sea) accounted
for 46 per cent by weight of total British landings, pelagic fish (caught near
the surface) for 41 per cent and shellfish for 13 per cent. Landings of all
types of fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled
624,425 tonnes. Cod and haddock represented 23 and 21 per cent
respectively of the total value of demersal and pelagic fish landed, while
anglerfish (8 per cent), whiting (7 per cent), plaice (7 per cent), mackerel (6
per cent) and sole (5 per cent) were the other most important sources o
earnings to the industry. Landings of nephrops represented 11 per cent ol
the total value of all British landings of fish and shellfish in 1989
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned salt-water fish and shellfish in
1989 totalled 448,100 tonnes, those of freshwater fish 33,200 tonnes, those
of fish meal 265,300 tonnes and those of fish oils 177,600 tonnes. Exports
and re-exports of salt-water fish and fish products amounted to 369,200
tonnes and those of freshwater fish to 16,900 tonnes. The European
Community has banned the import of primary whale products in order to
help to conserve whale populations.
At the end of 1988 the British fishing fleet consisted of 7,859 inshore vessels
under 24-4 m (80 ft) in length and 273 deep-sea vessels longer than 24-4 m.
Among the main ports from which the fishing fleet operates are Aberdeen,
Peterhead, Fraserburgh (Grampian), Lerwick (Shetland), Kinlochbervie,
Ullapool (Highland), North Shields (Tyne and Wear) Grimsby
(Humberside), Lowestoft (Suffolk), Brixham (Devon), Newlyn (Cornwall),
and Kilkeel, Ardglass and Portavogie (Northern Ireland). Britain s distant
water fleet was considerably reduced following the loss of access, for example
around Iceland, caused by the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles in
1976. A much smaller fleet has, however, continued to maintain its activities
in distant waters.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Fish Farming
Administration
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
Fisheries
Research
347
Britain s fish farming industry continues to grow quickly, with production
centred on Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout, which are well suited to the
climate and waters. Production of salmon and trout has grown from less than
1,000 tonnes in the early 1970s to some 29,000 tonnes of salmon and 16,000
tonnes of trout in 1989. Shellfish farming concentrates on molluscs such as
oysters, mussels, clams and scallops, producing an estimated 5,000 tonnes a
year.
The fish and shellfish farming industries make an important contribution
to rural infrastructure, especially in the highlands and islands of Scotland.
They employ more than 5,000 people. In 1989 the industries were estimated
to have a combined wholesale turnover of some £150 million. Production is
based on almost 1,200 businesses on some 1,800 sites.
The fisheries departments are responsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The
safety and welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to
shipping generally are provided for under legislation administered by the
Department of Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority is concerned with all aspects of the
industry, including consumer interests. It undertakes research and de¬
velopment, provides training, and encourages quality awareness. It also
admmisters a government grant scheme for fishing vessels, to promote a
safe, efficient and modern fleet.
Only British vessels may fish within 6 miles of the coast; certain other
Community member states have traditional fishing rights between 6 and 12
miles, as British vessels have in other member states’ coastal waters. Outside
12 miles the only non-Community countries whose vessels may fish in
Community waters are those (for example, Norway) with which the
Community has reciprocal fisheries agreements.
The CFP’s system for the conservation and management of the Community’s
fishing resources means that total allowable catches—with these decisions
based partly on independent scientific advice—are set each year in order to
conserve stocks. These catch levels are then allocated between member states
on a fixed percentage basis, taking account of traditional fishing patterns.
Activity is also regulated by a number of technical conservation measures
including minimum mesh sizes, minimum landing sizes and closed areas
designated mainly to protect young fish. Each member state is responsible
for ensuring that its fishermen abide by the various fisheries regulations and
their performances are monitored by the Community’s inspectors.
The 1983 settlement also covered the common organisation of the market
in fish and fish products, and a policy for restructuring the Community fleet
during 1987-97, designed to address the current problem of over-capacity
The measures include financial assistance for the building and mod¬
ernisation of fishing vessels.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries
are extensive and are governed by different agreements. Those of most
importance to Britain are with Norway, Greenland, the Faroe Islands and
Sweden. Annual Community quotas have also been established in inter¬
national waters in the north-west Atlantic and around Svalbard.
I he Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries,
348
Salmon and
Freshwater
Fisheries
BRI I AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
shellfish, marine pollution, fish farming and diseases. There are two
seagoing research vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland provides a similar range of research and has two
seagoing vessels. Work on the utilisation of fish is undertaken by a research
station at Torry, Aberdeen. Department of Agriculture laboratories in
Northern Ireland monitor marine and freshwater fisheries, and have a
seagoing research vessel.
Salmon and sea-trout are fished commercially in inshore waters around the
British coast. Eels and elvers are also taken commercially in both estuaries
and freshwater. Angling for salmon and sea-trout (game fishing) and for
other freshwater species (coarse fishing) is popular throughout Britain. In
England and Wales fishing is licensed by the National Rivers Authority; in
Scotland salmon fishing is administered by salmon district fishery boards;
and in Northern Ireland there are 65 public angling waters for game and
coarse Fishing, and salmon rivers are accessible to Department of Agriculture
permit holders.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2-38 million hectares (5-88 million acres) in
Britain: about 7-3 per cent of England, 13 per cent of Scotland, 12 per cent
of Wales and 5-2 per cent of Northern Ireland. The Government supports
the continued expansion of forestry in order to reduce dependence on
imports of timber and to provide employment in forestry and related
industries. . . . „ , , .... .
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 2T4 million hectares
(5-27 million acres), 41 per cent of which is managed by the Forestry
Commission and the rest by private owners. The rate of new planting in
1988-89 was 4,105 hectares (10,143 acres) by the Commission and 24,892
hectares (61,508 acres) by private woodland owners, mainly in Scotland^
Most planting is of conifers in upland areas, though the planting of
broadleaved trees is encouraged on suitable sites. An increasing proportion
of new planting is by private owners. During 1988-89 the Commission grant-
aided 2 643 hectares (6,531 acres) of new broadleaved planting under its
various schemes, an increase of 6 per cent over the previous year. Under the
Commission’s Woodland Grant Scheme grants for broadleaved planting,
including planting as a component of mixed woodland, are up to 50 per cent
higher than those offered for planting conifers.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was
estimated at 40,000 in 1988-89, including about 2,650 people engaged in
processing home-grown timber. r
British woodlands meet only 12 per cent of the nation s consumption of
wood and wood products. At present only just over hall of the Commission s
woodlands are in production. The volume of timber harvested on
Commission lands in 1988-89 totalled 3-64 million cubic metres (128-6
million cubic feet).
The Forestry
Commission
and Forestry
Policy
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain.
The Commissioners give advice on forestry matters and are responsible to
the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food and the Secretary of State for Wales. Timber production, landscape
amenity, environmental protection and employment are a 1 forestry policy
objectives. The Commission’s activities also include wildlife and flora
conservation, plant health, research, and the provision of facilities tor
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
349
Forestry
Research
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
recreation. As part of a rationalisation programme to achieve greater
efficiency and commercial effectiveness, the Commission has sold 76,000
hectares (188,000 acres) of plantation and plantable land since 1981 and has
been asked by the Government to dispose of a further 100,000 hectares
(247,000 acres) by the end of the century. The Commission is financed partly
by the Government and partly by receipts from sales of timber and other
produce and from rents.
The Countryside Commission and the Forestry Commission have
launched an initiative to create community forests on the outskirts of major
cities in England and Wales, with initial proposals for a major forest in the
midlands. 4 he Government has issued revised criteria for planting on better-
quality agricultural land in Scotland.
The Forestry Commission maintains two principal research stations, at Alice
Holt Lodge near Farnham (Surrey) and at Bush Estate near Edinburgh, for
basic and applied research into all aspects of forestry. Aid is also given for
research work in universities and other institutions. Its research programme
includes projects on silviculture in upland and lowland sites, and on the
selection and breeding of improved growing stock.
The Forestry Commission conducts an annual forest health survey which
monitors the effects of air pollution and other stress factors on a growing
range of broadleaves and conifers. It has increased research into" wildlife
conservation and farm forestry, including an evaluation of agroforestry
systems combining wide-spaced conifers and broadleaves with sheep
grazing. The Government has set up an expert scientific review group on
tree health in Britain.
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. I he state forest area
has grown steadily since 1945. By 1990, 60,600 hectares (149,680 acres) of
plantable land had been acquired, of which 59,590 hectares (147,180 acres)
were planted. I here were 15,000 hectares (37,000 acres) of privately owned
forest. Some 500 prof essional and industrial staff work in state forests.
Transport and
Communications
Major improvements in the nation’s infrastructure have resulted from the
construction of a network of motorways, the extension of fast inter-city rail
services (such as those operated by high-speed trains), and expansion
schemes at many airports. Further improvements are in progress and the
Channel Tunnel will have a significant impact on travel between Britain and
the continent of Europe when it starts operation in 1993. Transport policy
rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic growth and higher
national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of personal mobility,
while improving safety, conserving and enhancing the environment and
using energy economically. Britain is taking an active part in the European
Community’s development of a common transport policy, in the context of
the completion of the single European market by 1992.
Users’ expenditure on transport (including taxation) in Britain totalled an
estimated £86,600 million in 1988, of which £71,500 million represented
expenditure on road transport (including buses). About 95 per cent of
transport is provided by the private sector. This proportion has increased
with the privatisation of the Government’s shareholdings in a number of
publicly owned transport undertakings, including road haulage, airline
services, airports and bus operations.
Inland Transport
Ehere has been a considerable increase in passenger travel in recent years.
1 ravel in (meat Britain rose by 30 per cent between 1978 and 1989. Travel
by car and taxi rose by 42 per cent and air travel expanded rapidly. However
recently travel by motor cycle has been declining, and travel by bus and
coach and by pedal cycle has changed little. Car and taxi travel accounts for
84 per cent of passenger mileage within Great Britain, buses and coaches for
about 7 per cent, rail for 7 per cent and air less than 1 per cent.
Car ownership has also risen substantially, and 66 per cent of households
in Great Britain have the regular use of one or more cars, with 18 per cent
having the use of two or more cars. At the end of 1989 there were 24-2
mi ,on vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great Britain, of which 19-7
mi lion were cars (including over 2 million cars registered with a company
«^rnnn; 2 ^ ,0? hght g°ods vehicles’ ^4,000 other goods vehicles-
875,000 motor cycles, scooters and mopeds; and 122,000 public transport
vehicles (including taxis). '
Road haulage has a dominant position in the movement of inland freight
accounting for about 82 per cent of tonnage carried and for nearly three-
i ths of tonne-km. Railways, inland waterways, coastal shipping and
352
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ROADS
Administration
Private Finance
pipelines are important in carrying certain types of freight, particularly bulk
goods.
Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain is continuing to grow, having risen by
6 per cent in 1989 to some 390,000 million vehicle-km. In 1989 the road
network in Britain totalled some 380,400 km (236,400 miles), of which 3,000
km (1,860 miles) were trunk motorways (see Table 17.1). Although
motorways and trunk roads account for less than 5 per cent of road mileage
in Great Britain, they carry about one-third of road traffic, including over
half of heavy goods vehicle traffic. Traffic on these roads has been growing
at a much higher rate than on other roads.
Table 17.1: Road Length (as at April 1989)
km
4 runk roads
Public (including
roads motorways)
Trunk
motorways3
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
271,615
51,466
33,216
24,081
10,830
3,165
1,699
256
2,536
234
120
112
Britain
380,378
15,950
3,002
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office.
In addition, there were 68 km (42 miles) of local authority motorway in England and 24 km (15 miles) in Scotland. In
April 1990. 108 km (67 miles) of trunk motorway were under construction in England.
Responsibility for trunk road motorways and other trunk roads in Great
Britain rests in England with the Secretary of State for I ransport, in
Scotland with the Secretary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the
Secretary of State for Wales. The costs of construction, improvement and
maintenance are paid for by central government. The highway authorities
for non-trunk roads in England are the county councils, the metropolitan
district councils, the London borough councils and the Common Council of
the City of London. In Wales the authorities are the county councils, and in
Scotland the regional or islands councils. In Northern Ireland the Northern
Ireland Department of the Environment is responsible for the construction,
improvement and maintenance of public roads.
Research into road construction, traffic engineering and safety, and into
problems associated with transport, is carried out by the I ransport and Road
Research Laboratory, the research arm of the Department of Transport.
The Government is keen to encourage greater private sector involvement in
the financing of roads. Work on a privately hnanced project to provide a new
bridge across the I hames between Dartford and I hurrock should be
completed by 1991, while a private sector consortium is to build a second
Severn Bridge, costing some £270 million and expected to be completed in
1995. The Government is holding a competition for the Birmingham
northern relief road and has invited preliminary proposals for a private
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
353
sector route between Birmingham and Manchester. In April 1990 it invited
views on the suitability for private funding of six further potential schemes.
In Scotland a competition is being held for a privately financed bridge to
Other
Developments
New and improved roads have resulted in much shorter travelling times,
particularly for long-distance journeys and those between cities, and have
brought considerable benefits to industry, commerce and road haulage
operators, and increased personal mobility. The Government has a
programme to improve motorways and other trunk roads (which form a
network linking major centres of population, industrial areas and ports)
I his is intended to assist economic growth by reducing transport costs to
remove through traffic (especially lorries) from unsuitable roads in towns
and villages, and to enhance road safety.
In mid-1990, 59 national trunk road and motorway schemes were under
construction in England, costing nearly £1,400 million, while over 500
schemes were in preparation. Bypasses and relief roads account for nearly
one-third ol the programme, which also includes projects intended to
increase the traffic capacity of major through routes and to improve
junctions on heavily used roads. In 1990-91 the Department of Transport is
supporting 344 major local authority road schemes, the majority of which
are bypasses or relief roads.
Road communications in Wales are expected to benefit from the second
Severn Bridge and improvements to the M4 motorway. Other priorities in
Wales are improvements to the coast road in north Wales (including; the
construction under the Conwy estuary of the first immersed tube road
tunnel to be built in Britain) and the upgrading of roads which are important
tor industrial redevelopment. 1
ah^]?n0gramme in Scotland includes planned extensions to the M74, M8
and M80 motorways; the improvement of strategic routes beyond central
Scotland to areas such as the north east and some of the west-coast routes-
and the construction of more bypasses.
In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on improving arterial routes,
constructing more bypasses, and improving roads in the Belfast area
luun ng thC constructlon of a new cross-harbour link planned for the mid-
Licensing and
Standards
Records of drivers and vehicles are maintained by the Driver and Vehicle
Licensing Agency, an executive agency of the Department of Transport. It
holds records on 33 million drivers and 24-2 million licensed vehicles in
Great Britain. All drivers of motor vehicles, except new residents holding
certain non-British licences, are required to pass the driving test before being
granted a lull licence to drive. The minimum ages for driving are 16 for
riders of mopeds and disabled drivers of specially adapted vehicles; 17 for
drivers of cars and other passenger vehicles with nine or fewer seats
(including that of the driver), motor cycles and goods vehicles not over 3-5
tonnes permissible maximum weight; 18 for goods vehicles over 3-5 but not
ovei 7-5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats and goods
vehicles over 7-5 tonnes. In April 1990 the Agency began to issue a new
harmonised European Community driving licence.
I he Secretary of State for Transport has a statutory responsibility for
ensuring the roadworthiness of vehicles in use on the roads. The Vehicle
inspectorate, which was the first of the Government’s executive agencies is
the national testing authority. It meets this responsibility mainly through
354
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Road Safety
Traffic in
Towns
annual testing and certification of heavy goods vehicles, buses and coaches;
administration of the car and motor cycle testing scheme (under which
vehicles are tested at .private garages authorised as test stations), and other
road safety tasks, such as vehicle ‘spot checks’ and inspection of operators’
premises. In Northern Ireland private cars five or more years old are tested
at official vehicle inspection centres.
Although Great Britain has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the
world, it has a good record on road safety, with one of the lowest road
accident death rates in the European Community. In 1989 some 5,370
people were killed on the roads, about 63,200 seriously injured and 273,000
slightly injured. A number of factors, such as developments in vehicle safety
standards and improvements in infrastructure (including motorways,
bypasses and pedestrianisation of city centres), have contributed to the long¬
term decline in casualty rates.
Following a major review of road safety policy completed in 1987, the
Government is seeking to reduce road casualties by one-third by the end of
the century. To achieve this, resources are being concentrated initially on
measures which are demonstrably cost-effective in terms of casualty
reduction. Priority is given to reducing casualties among vulnerable road-
users (pedestrians, cyclists and motor cyclists), particularly in urban areas,
where some 70 per cent of road accidents occur. The other principal areas
for achieving lower casualties are improvements in highway design and
measures to combat drinking and driving; the statutory limit of breath
alcohol concentration for drivers is 35 microgrammes of alcohol in 100
millilitres of breath.
In 1989 the Government announced proposals for a major reform of road
traffic law to improve road safety, including changes in a wide range of
driving offences and a new offence of dangerous driving. Tougher measures
to deal with drinking and driving offenders are proposed, while new
technology is to be utilised to improve the detection of speeding and traffic-
light offences.
Traffic management schemes are used in many urban areas to reduce
congestion, create a better environment and improve road safety. These
schemes include, for example, one-way streets, bus lanes, facilities foi
pedestrians and cyclists, and traffic calming measures (such as road humps to
slow traffic in residential areas). Many towns have shopping precincts which
are designed for the convenience of pedestrians and from which motor
vehicles are excluded for all or part of the day. Controls over on-street
parking are enforced through excess charges and fixed penalties, supported
where appropriate by powers to remove vehicles. In parts of central London
the use of wheel clamping to immobilise illegally parked vehicles has also
been authorised.
Computerised urban traffic control systems developed by the Department
of Transport and British firms have achieved international repute and are
the most commonly used in the world. A recent enhancement, which
continuously measures and responds to the flow of traffic, is being
introduced into the majority of urban traffic control schemes.
Electronic driver information systems, which assist drivers through visual
displays in their vehicles, are being developed. A pilot scheme using one
such system, called ‘Autoguide’, is planned in the London area in 1992.
Autoguide uses roadside beacons to transmit to appropriately equipped
vehicles route information which can be updated continuously to take
account of changing traf fic conditions.
I RANSPORT AND COMMUNICA I IONS
355
ROAD
HAULAGE
Road haulage traffic by heavy goods vehicles amounted to 129,800 million
tonne-km in 1989, 4 per cent more than in 1988. There has been a move
towards larger and more efficient vehicles carrying heavier loads—about 77
per cent of the traffic, in terms of tonne-km, is carried in vehicles of over 25
tonnes gross laden weight. Much of the traffic is moved over short distances,
with 77 per cent of the tonnage being carried on hauls of 100 km (62 miles)
or less. Public haulage (private road hauliers carrying other firms’ goods)
accounts for 72 per cent of freight carried in Great Britain in terms of tonne-
km In 1989 the mam commodities handled by heavy goods vehicles were
crude minerals (392 million tonnes); food, drink and tobacco (285 million
tonnes); and building materials (188 million tonnes).
1 he Government has introduced a number of measures to alleviate the
environmental problems caused by lorries and to improve road safety These
include the provision of more relief roads and bypasses to keep lorries away
from people; new standards for vehicle sideguards, noise and spray
suppression; and more effective enforcement of regulations. Grants of up to
J per cent are available towards the cost of construction or modernisation
of privately owned rail or inland waterway facilities where significant
environmental benefus can be obtained by keeping heavy goods vehicle
traffic off unsuitable roads.
Structure of
the Industry
Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned
businesses. There were some 127,000 holders of an operator’s licence in
1989 About half the heavy goods vehicles are in fleets of ten or fewer
vehicles. The biggest operators in Great Britain are NFC pic Transport
Development Group pic, TNT Express (UK) Ltd and United Carriers
Licensing and
Other Controls
Those operating goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence. Licences" are divided into
restricted licences for firms carrying their own goods, and standard licences,
subdivided into ‘national only’ and ‘international’, for hauliers operating for
hire or reward. (In Northern Ireland operators carrying their own goods do
not require a licence.) Proof of professional competence, financial standing
and good repute is needed to obtain a standard licence. Regulations lay
down limits on the hours worked by drivers of goods vehicles, as well as
minimum rest periods. Tachographs (which automatically record speed,
distance covered driving time and stopping periods) must be fitted and used
in most goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain.
International
Road Haulage
International road haulage has grown rapidly and about 8 million tonnes
were carried in powered road vehicles to and from the continent of Europe
and the Irish Republic by British registered vehicles in 1989. Over 13
million [oac* g0°ds vehicles were conveyed by ferry to the continent in 1989
of which nearly half were unaccompanied trailers. The average length of
haul for British registered vehicles is some 1,160 km (720 miles) in each
direction, compared with 75 km (47 miles) for internal road haulage.
International road haulage is constrained by bilateral agreements with 26
other countries. Many place no restriction on the number of British lorries
entering the country concerned, although some agreements specify an
annual quota I he European Community (which also has two quotas of
permits that allow haulage or cabotage anywhere within the Community) has
agreed to fu 1 liberalisation of international road haulage within the
Community, abolishing all permits from 31 December 1992.
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Structure
Deregulation of
Bus Services
BRII AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Two major measures—the Transport Act 1980 and the Transport Act
1985—have stimulated competition in long-distance express coach services
and excursions, and in local bus services respectively.
Major changes in the structure of the passenger transport industry have
occurred as a result of the Transport Act 1985. Privatisation of the National
Bus Company (which was the largest single bus and coach operator in
Britain, operating through 72 subsidiaries in England and Wales) was
completed in 1988. Each subsidiary was sold separately, and encouragement
was given for a buy-out by the local management or employees. Under the
Transport (Scotland) Act 1989 the Scottish Bus Group, the largest operator
of bus services in Scotland, is being privatised as ten separate companies. It
has some 3,000 buses.
To promote competition further, the 1985 Act provided for the bus
operations formerly run directly by municipal authorities and by passenger
transport executives in metropolitan areas to be translerred to public
transport companies. The 50 companies provide about 30 per cent ol bus
services. The Act allows local authorities to sell their public transport
companies; by 1990 eight had been sold.
London Transport (LT) is a nationalised industry, established under the
London Regional Transport Act 1984, with its board members appointed by
the Secretary of State for Transport. Within LT the main wholly owned
operating subsidiaries are London Underground Ltd, London Buses Ltd
and Docklands Light Railway Ltd. Financial support is provided by central
government. LT is required to involve the private sector in the provision of
services where this is more efficient, and has been set objectives on safety, the
quality of services and on its financial performance.
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by
subsidiaries of the publicly owned Northern Ireland Transport Holding
Company. Citybus Ltd operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus
Ltd operates most of the services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These
companies have some 300 and 1,000 vehicles respectively.
As well as the major bus operators, there are also a large number ot small
privately owned undertakings, often operating fewer than five vehicles.
Although double-deck buses are the main type of vehicle used for urban
road passenger transport in Britain, with some 23,500 in operation, theie
has been a substantial increase in the use of minibuses in recent years. Over
600 areas are served by more than 7,000 minibuses. In addition, there are
some 49,000 other single-deck buses and coaches. Blackpool and Llandudno
have Britain’s only remaining tramway systems.
Local bus services in Great Britain (except in London) were deregulated in
1986 by the Transport Act 1985. Bus operators are now able to run services
wherever they see a commercial opportunity, and local authorities can
subsidise the provision of additional socially necessary services alter
competitive tendering. All services, whether commercial or subsidised, have
to be registered with the appropriate traffic commissioner (one for each of
the nine tralfic areas ol Great Britain) six weeks before the commence¬
ment of the service. Similar notice is required when a service is varied or
cancelled.
Deregulation led to an increase of 18 per cent in local bus mileage outside
London between 1985 and 1989, with some 84 per cent of services operated
without subsidy. In addition, there has been a substantial inciease in the
number of private operators and in the number of minibus services. I he
long-term decline in the number of passengers has shown signs ol lessening.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
357
Taxis
RAILWAYS
Organisation
Private Sector
Involvement
In 1988-89 buses or coaches carried some 4,072 million passengers on local
SCI vices outside London, a decline of 10 per cent since deregulation; the fall
m patronage in 1988-89 was, however, only 1 per cent. Deregulation also
had a noticeable effect during the 1980s on long-distance eipress coach
semces, bringing about reductions in fares, the provision of more services
and an increase in passengers.
There are about 49,000 licensed taxis in Great Britain, mainly in urban
areas, London has some 16,000. In London and a number of other cities
taxis must be purpose-built to conform to very strict requirements and
drivers must have passed a test of their knowledge of the area. Private
hire vehicles with drivers may be booked only through the operator and not
licensecT ^ m m°St °Utside London private hire vehicles are
andhnXramSh°rt ^ arrangements for the operation of taxis
RpmH t KhTe V,ehlC!eS Whlch ,ncreased their role in public transport,
estnctions by local authorities on granting taxi licences were relaxed so that
unbdblf ^ lf 3 'OCal authority is satisfied that there is no
unfulfilled demand for taxis in its area. Taxi operators are able to run
regular local services and can tender in competition with bus operators for
services subsidised by local authorities. To do this, they may apply for a
speual restneted bus operator’s licence, allowing them to run local services
without having to obtain a full bus operator’s licence. Taxis and licensed
fepame fares" S ^ ^ Shared rideS to paying
Railways were pioneered in Britain: the Stockton and Darlington Railway
opened in 1825, was the first public passenger railway in the world to be
voi ed by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four laree
andWiny|9fi2^hfn'R •',n|^pea; "T brought u"der public ownership,
1962 the British Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs
and subsidiary activities. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Rail¬
ways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of the Northern Ireland Transport Hold-
track 0mPany’ °perateS the railway service on some 320 km (200 miles) of
c British Railways Board controls most of the railway network in Great
Britain apart from the underground railway systems in London and
, asgow, the I yne and Wear Metro and a few stretches of private railway It
has five business sectors responsible for the main markets: Intercity
Network SouthEast and Provincial services being responsible for the
passenger services while the other two sectors are Railfreight and Parcel
Other subsidiary businesses are British Rail Maintenance Ltd which is
responsible for maintenance and light repair of British Rail stock- and
- ssoriTf’ WhlCh pr°V,deS consultancy services overseas on railway and
associated operations. 7
In oi-der to concemratc its resources on running the main railway business
Biitish Rail has sold a number of its subsidiary businesses, including its
British R^Fn ' TTel,erS' ^ Ud 1,5 “g^ering subsidfary,
Biitish Rail Engineering Ltd, was sold in 1989 to a consortium of its
management and employees and two private sector companies. The
Covert,mem is studying the long-term options for British Rail, including the
possibility of privatisation. ng 106
358
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Operations
Passenger
Services
In 1989-90 the Board’s turnover, including financial support and income
from other activities but excluding internal transactions, was £3,485 million,
of which £2,626 million was derived from rail passenger services and £694
million from freight services. It received grants of £501 million as com¬
pensation for the public service obligation to operate sections ol the
passenger network in the Provincial sector and Network SouthEast which
would not otherwise cover their cost. Statistics of the Board’s operations are
given in Table 17.2.
Table 17.2: Railway Operations
Passenger journeys (million)
Passenger-km (million)
Freight traffic (million tonnes)
Trainload and wagonload traffic
(million net tonne-km)
Assets (at end of period):
Locomotives
High Speed Train power units
Other coaching vehicles
Freight vehicles5
Stations (including
freight and parcels)
Route open for traffic (km)
1984-85 1987-88 1988-89 1989-90
701
29,725
68a
12,031a
2,467
197
16,433
45,174
2,524
16,803
727
33,141
144
17,466
2,270
197
14,648
28,884
2,554
16,633
764
34,321
150
18,103
2,180
197
14,258
24,922
2,596
16,598
746
33,323
143
16,742
2,095
197
13,833
21,970
2,610
16,588
Source: British Railways Board.
'Affected by a considerable decline in coal traffic as the result of a major industrial dispute m coalmining.
h in addition, a number of privately owned wagons and locomotives are operated on the railway network for customers of
British Rail. Some 13,995 freight vehicles and ten locomotives were authorised for working on the network at the end ol
March 1990.
In connection with the Government’s wish to ensure a safe, efficient and
high-quality modern railway network, new objectives for British Rail were
announced in December 1989. A high priority for safety has been set,
involving the implementation of the safety recommendations made by the
inspector who investigated a major railway accident at Clapham Junction
(south London) in December 1988. Provision for new safety expenditure of
£125 million over the three years from April 1990 has been set. The
objectives envisage further progress towards earning a commercial return
for Intercity, Railfreight and Parcels sectors; the elimination of Network
SouthEast’s grant requirement by 1992—93; and a reduction of the grant to
the Provincial sector.
British Rail has a substantial investment programme. Investment totalled
£715 million in 1989-90 and is expected to rise to £ 1,421 million in 1992-93.
Major areas of expenditure include completion of the electrification scheme
for the east-coast main line between London and Edinburgh, new rolling
stock and infrastructure improvements in Network SouthEast, and invest¬
ment in new diesel multiple-unit trains in the Provincial sector.
The passenger network (see map, p 359) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services, and
commuter services in and around the large conurbations, especially London
and south-east England. British Rail runs over 700 InterCity expresses each
Inverness
Dundee
Edinburgh
Harrogate
Bradfon
Shrewsbi
Birmingham-
Worcester
Fishguard Hereford
Swansei
Margate
Cardiff j
Bristol
Taunton
Ashfort
Dover
ilkestone
Hastings
Eastbourne
Bournemouth
Portsmouth
•lymouth
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 km
I I \ I I I I
I 1 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Main Railway Passenger Routes
Electrified Intercity
and Express routes
Other Intercity
and Express routes
Other routes
( Stirling
Glasgow —-
Berwick
Newcastle upon Tyne
Carlisle
Darlington Middlesbrough
1 \ i * Scarborough
Larne
Hull
Blackpool
Preston
Liverpool
Grimsby
Holyhead
nbridge r
Chester Harwich
Exeter
Newton Abbot Weymo
Penzance
Aberdeen
360
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Freight
Railways in
London
weekday, serving about 90 business and leisure centres. Intercity 125 trains,
travelling at maximum sustained speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h), provide
over half of Intercity train mileage and are the world’s fastest diesel trains.
They operate from London to the west of England and south Wales; to the
East Midlands; to Yorkshire, north-east England and eastern Scotland; and
on cross-country services through the West Midlands, linking south-west
England or south Wales with north-west England or north-east England and
Edinburgh.
About 27 per cent of route-mileage is electrified, including British Rail’s
busiest Intercity route, linking London, the West Midlands, the North West
and Glasgow. T he most significant electrification scheme is that for the east-
coast main line between London and Edinburgh (including the line from
Doncaster to Leeds), involving electrification of some 644 km (400 miles)
and costing £450 million at 1990-91 prices. Intercity 225 electric trains
are already in operation between King’s Cross and Doncaster and Leeds.
Electric services will be extended to Newcastle upon Tyne and Edinburgh
i rwY i / o
in 1991.
Two new types of diesel multiple-unit trains—the lightweight ‘Pacer’ and
the medium-weight ‘Sprinter’—are being introduced, while many of the
older electric multiple units used for commuting services in London and
south-east England are being replaced by new, more efficient rolling stock.
The first of a new generation of ‘Networker’ trains is due to enter service in
Kent in spring 1992 and there are plans to introduce the new trains in Essex.
Some 400 coaches have been ordered, with a further 276 approved in
principle. A diesel version has been ordered for non-electrified lines to the
west of London and should enter service at the end of 1991. Three major
new rail links to airports are planned: a new link under construction between
Stansted airport and London, a joint venture with BAA pic for a £235
million project (to be financed largely by BAA) between Heathrow airport
and Paddington (London), and a link to connect Manchester airport to the
Manchester to Wilmslow (Cheshire) line.
Over 90 per cent of rail freight traffic is of bulk commodities, most of it in
trainloads. The most significant bulk freight commodities handled are coal,
coke, iron and steel, building materials and petroleum.
I he opening of the Channel Tunnel (see p 361) presents an important
opportunity for non-bulk freight movement. Freight routes in Kent and
Sussex are being upgraded in preparation for the traffic, and new
locomotives are being purchased. Container traffic to the continent of
Europe and further afield is being developed and new container-carrying
wagons have been ordered.
London Underground Ltd operates Underground trains on 408 km (254
miles) of railway, of which about 169 km (105 miles) are underground, and
serves 273 stations, with some 460 trains operating in the peak period. Some
765 million passenger journeys were made on London Underground trains
in 1989-90. Major investment in the Underground is planned, including an
extension of the Jubilee Line to Stratford (east London) via Docklands and
the north Greenwich peninsula, while the Government is also considering
options which would involve another new line in central London.
I he Docklands Light Railway, a 12-km (7-5-mile) route with 15 stations,
began operating in 1987 and is now being upgraded. Extensions westward to
the City of London and eastward to Beckton are under construction.
Engineering studies are in progress for a new light railway network planned
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
361
Other Urban
Railways
Private
Railways
Channel
Tunnel
Eurotunnel
Services
Through Rail
Services
by London Transport and British Rail for the Croydon area of south
London.
Other urban railways in Great Britain are the Glasgow Underground and the
I yne and Wear Metro, a 56-km (35-mile) light rapid transit system with over
40 stations. The first stage of the Manchester Metrolink project, to be
designed, built and operated by the GMA Group (a private sector
consortium), will from 1991—92 link Manchester’s main railway termini and
provide improved services to Bury and Altrincham as a result of conversion
of existing British Rail services to light rapid transit. In the West Midlands
work is planned on another major light rail project, while light rapid transit
systems are also being considered in a number of other areas, including
Bristol, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Sheffield and Southampton.
There are over 70 small, privately owned passenger-carrying railways in
Great Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited
services for tourists and railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of these
railways, such as the Severn Valley Railway, is the preservation of steam
traction.
Construction work is in progress on the Channel Tunnel project to provide
twin single-track rail tunnels between Britain and France in the largest civil
engineering project in Europe to be financed by the private sector. The
project, with a total financing requirement of £8,500 million, is being
undertaken by Eurotunnel, a partnership between two companies, one
British and one French—the Channel Tunnel Group Ltd and France
Manche SA respectively. Design and construction are being carried out for
Eurotunnel by ten of the largest British and French contractors, which
together have formed a single contractor, Transmanche Link. Services are
due to start in 1993, and the Channel Tunnel is expected to bring substantial
benefits to industry and to travellers throughout Britain from the quicker
and more reliable carriage of passengers and freight.
I he I reaty between the French and British governments relating to the
fixed link (Channel funnel) contains provisions to safeguard the public
interest in matters such as safety and the environment, and also deals with
matters of national jurisdiction, providing arrangements for arbitration in
the event of disputes over interpretation. The Channel Tunnel Act 1987
ratified the Treaty, enabling implementation of the Concession Agreement
between the British and French governments and the Channel Tunnel
Group and France Manche. The agreement gives the concessionaires the
right to operate the tunnel for 55 years.
Eurotunnel will operate shuttle trains through the tunnel between the
terminals at Cheriton (near Folkestone) and Coquelles (near Calais), with the
journey taking about 35 minutes. Shuttle trains will provide a no-booking,
drive-on, drive-off service, with separate shuttles for passengers and freight.
Initially Eurotunnel is planning to run tourist shuttle services every 15
minutes and freight shuttle services every 20 minutes. As traffic grows, the
frequency of services will be increased. On the opening of the tunnel a peak
of some 200 movements a day in each direction is expected (including
through rail services).
About 50 per cent of the capacity of the Channel Tunnel has been allocated
to through rail passenger and freight services. High-speed passenger
services are planned to run at least every hour between London and Paris,
362
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INLAND
WATERWAYS
and London and Brussels. Through services to other European destinations
and from the Midlands, northern England and Scotland to the continent are
under consideration. British Rail plans to invest £1,100 million in new
passenger and freight rolling stock, track and signalling improvements,
and terminal facilities for the start of international services in 1993; over
£600 million has already been approved by the Secretary of State for
Transport.
To meet the forecast growth in demand for through rail services,
additional capacity will eventually be required between London and the
Channel Tunnel. This will be provided by the construction of a new high¬
speed rail link. British Rail is reviewing its proposals for the section of route
from the North Downs to London (Waterloo and King’s Cross) to maximise
the benefits for commuters and to improve the financial viability of the
project.
The inland waterways of Great Britain are popular for recreation, make a
valuable contribution to the environment and play an important part in land
drainage and water supply. They are also used to a limited extent for freight¬
carrying. An official survey of inland waterway freight traffic reported that
in 1988, 68 million tonnes of freight were carried on inland waterways and
estuaries, amounting to some 2,400 million tonne-km (1 -5 per cent of freight
traffic by tonne-km in Great Britain). About 50 per cent (in tonne-km) was
carried in south-east England, mainly on the River Thames. The publicly
owned British Waterways Board is responsible for some 3,200 km (2,000
miles) of waterways in Great Britain. The majority of waterways are
maintained primarily for leisure use, but about 620 km (385 miles) are
maintained as commercial waterways for private sector traffic. The Board is
taking steps to develop its business more commercially with greater
responsiveness to market needs. In 1989—90 the Board’s turnover amounted
to £24-1 million and it received a government grant of £45-6 million to
maintain its waterways to statutory standards.
Ports
There are about 80 ports of commercial significance in Great Britain, but in
addition there are many small harbours which handle small amounts of
cargo or mainly serve fishing or recreational interests. Port authorities are of
three broad types—trusts, local authorities and companies—and most
operate with statutory powers under private Acts of Parliament. Major ports
controlled by trusts include Clyde, Dover, Forth, London, Medway, Milford
Haven, and Tees and Hartlepool. Local authorities own many small ports
but also the much larger ports of Bristol and Portsmouth, and the oil ports in
Orkney and Shetland.
Associated British Ports Holdings PTC (a private sector company) owns
and operates 22 ports, including Southampton, Grimsby and Immingham,
Hull, Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. Other major ports owned by
companies include Felixstowe, Liverpool and Manchester, and a group of
ferry ports, including Harwich (Parkeston Quay) and Stranraer.
The Government has suggested that ports not already owned by
companies may wish to consider whether company status would be
advantageous. A former local authority port, Boston (Lincolnshire), was
transferred to private sector ownership at the beginning of 1990. The trust
ports of Clyde and Tees and Hartlepool have brought Bills before Par¬
liament which would provide for their conversion into companies.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
363
Port Traffic
Development
In 1989 the Dock Labour Scheme, which controlled employment in the
older major ports, was abolished. Since its abolition there have been
indications of substantial increases in productivity in ports, more flexible
working practices and higher investment.
In 1989 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 465 million
tonnes, comprising 127 million tonnes of exports, 171 million tonnes of
imports and 166 million tonnes of domestic traffic (which included offshore
traffic, landings of sea-dredged aggregates and material shipped for
dumping at sea). About 53 per cent of the traffic was in fuels, mainly
petroleum and petroleum products. Traffic through Northern Ireland ports
totalled 15 million tonnes.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table
17.3. Sullom Voe (Shetland), Milford Haven and Forth mostly handle oil,
while the main ports for non-fuel traffic are London, Tees and Hartlepool,
Grimsby and Immingham, Felixstowe and Dover. Ports on the south and
east coasts have increasingly gained traffic at the expense of those on the
west coast as the emphasis of Britain’s trade has switched towards the
continent of Europe, and with the changing patterns of shipping which have
accompanied the worldwide switch from conventional handling methods to
container and roll-on modes. Dover and Felixstowe are the main ports to
have benefited, while the growth of roll-on traffic has also favoured many
small ports (such as Ramsgate, Ipswich, Portsmouth and Great Yarmouth).
Table 17.3: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain3
million tonnes
1975 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989
London
Sullom Voe
Tees and Hartlepool
Grimsby and Immingham
Milford Haven
Southampton
Forth
Liverpool
Felixstowe
Medway
Dover
50-3 51-6 53-6
— 59-0 57-2
20- 2 30-6 30-7
22 0 29 1 320
44-9 32-4 300
25-3 25-2 25-7
8-4 29-1 28-8
23-4 10-4 10-7
41 101 10-8
21- 7 10-4 10-4
3-7 9-3 9-9
48-9 53-7 540
500 50-6 40-7
33-9 37-4 39-3
32-2 35 0 38 1
32-7 33-3 33 0
27-2 31-4 26 1
30-0 290 22-9
10- 2 19-6 20-2
13-3 15-6 16-5
11- 6 12-7 140
10-6 10-4 13-5
Source: Department of Transport.
"Belfast and Larne are the main ports in Northern Ireland and handled 7-2 million tonnes and 3-9 million tonnes
respectively in 1989.
Container and roll-on traffic in Great Britain has almost trebled since 1975
to 78 million tonnes in 1989 and now accounts for about 73 per cent of non¬
bulk traffic. The leading ports for container traffic are Felixstowe, London
and Southampton. Those for roll-on traffic are Dover (Britain’s leading
seaport in terms of the value of trade handled), Felixstowe, Portsmouth,
Grimsby and Immingham, and Harwich. Other traffics that have expanded
in recent years are minerals, vehicles and forest products.
Most recent major port developments have been at east- and south-coast
ports. For example, at Felixstowe a £42 million container terminal,
completed in 1986, raised the port’s container-handling capacity by about 50
364
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Services
Cargo Services
Passenger
Services
per cent. A £50 million extension to the terminal was completed in January
1990. Extra capacity for ferry services has recently been provided at a
number of other ports, including Dartford, Dover, Hull, Portsmouth and
Ramsgate. New facilities are being developed for bulk and containerised
cargoes on the Medway, and there are plans for bulk and roll-on cargoes on
the Humber.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the British sector of the North Sea
have been built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the Tees, at Flotta and at
Sullom Voe (one of the largest oil terminals in the world). Supply bases for
offshore oil and gas installations have been built at a number of ports,
notably Aberdeen, Great Yarmouth and Heysham.
Shipping
The tonnage of the British registered trading fleet has been declining in
recent years. In April 1990 British companies owned 801 trading vessels of
15-5 million deadweight tonnes. These included 209 vessels totalling 9-5
million deadweight tonnes used as oil, chemical or gas carriers and 576
vessels totalling 5-9 million tonnes employed as dry bulk carriers, container
ships or other types of cargo ships. The great majority of these ships are
registered in Britain or British dependent territories such as Bermuda. In
September 1990 a joint working party of the Government and the General
Council of British Shipping produced a report on the merchant shipping
industry which contained an agreed analysis and made a number of
recommendations.
About 93 per cent by weight (76 per cent by value) of Britain’s overseas trade
is carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from
Britain by sea is only about a third, compared with about one-half in the
early 1960s.
In 1989 British seaborne trade amounted to 283 million tonnes (valued at
£162,()()() million) or 780,000 million tonne-km (484,500 million tonne-
miles). British registered ships carried 21 per cent by weight and 35 per cent
by value. Tanker cargo accounted for 41 per cent of this trade by weight, but
only 6 per cent by value, and foodstuffs and manufactured goods accounted
for 84 per cent by value.
British cargo liner tonnage is dominated by a relatively small number of
large private sector groups and container consortia. Many of the deep-sea
liner services from Britain are operated by container ships. There are many
roll-on, roll-off services accommodating passengers and their cars and
commercial vehicles between Britain and the continent of Europe, and
several freight-only roll-on, roll-off services to the Irish Republic, the
continent of Europe, and to some more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with
each other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same
routes in a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and
stability of rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services.
Gonferences serve all the major trades to and from Britain.
Almost all of the 28-8 million passengers who arrived at or departed from
British ports in 1989 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the
Irish Republic. Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for
cruising and in 1989 some 67,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises
from British ports.
Traffic from the southern and south-eastern ports accounts for a
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
365
Merchant
Shipping
Legislation
Safety at Sea
substantial proportion of traffic to the continent of Europe. The main
British operators are Sealink UK Ltd and P and O. As well as roll-on, roll-off
ferries passengers are able to travel by hovercraft, which are operated by
Hoverspeed Ltd between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover and Calais, or
hydrofoil. In August 1990 Hoverspeed inaugurated a high-speed catamaran
service between Portsmouth and Cherbourg.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the
offshore islands, such as the Isle of Wight, the Orkney and Shetland islands,
and the islands off the west coast of Scotland.
The Government’s policy is one of minimum intervention and the
encouragement of free and fair competition. However, under the Merchant
Shipping Acts there are regulations, administered by the Department of
Transport, for marine safety and welfare, and for preventing and cleaning
up pollution from ships. The Acts also contain certain reserve powers for
protecting shipping and trading interests from measures adopted or
proposed by overseas governments.
The Merchant Shipping Act 1988 contains provisions to improve stan¬
dards of marine safety, update the law on ship registration and ensure that
Britain’s strategic maritime requirements are met. The Government has
made funds available for Merchant Navy officer training, the repatriation of
crews in the deep-sea trades and a Reserve of ex-seafarers willing to serve in
the Merchant Navy in an emergency. Among the measures to improve the
safety of roll-on, roll-off ferries, following the sinking of the Herald of Free
Enterprise in 1987 with the loss of 189 lives, are a new duty on shipowners to
ensure the safe operation of their vessels, while other provisions have
tightened the duties of masters and their crews. The majority of measures
introduced by Britain have been incorporated in the relevant international
maritime safety convention.
The first stage of a European Community shipping policy involved
agreement in 1986 on four regulations designed to liberalise the
Community’s international trade, establish a competitive regime for
shipping, and enable the Community to take action to combat protectionism
from other countries and to counter unfair pricing practices. Under the
second stage, now under consideration, a range of measures has been
proposed to harmonise operating conditions and strengthen the
competitiveness of Community members’ merchant fleets.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Transport, is
responsible for co-ordinating civil maritime search and rescue operations
around the coastline of Britain. In a maritime emergency the Coastguard
calls on and co-ordinates the appropriate facilities, such as lifeboats of the
Royal National Lifeboat Institution (a voluntary body), and Ministry of
Defence aircraft, helicopters and ships, as well as merchant shipping,
commercial aircraft and ferries. The Coastguard has three long-range civil
helicopters for search and rescue work. In 1989 the Coastguard Service co¬
ordinated action in nearly 6,800 incidents (including cliff rescues), in which
11,500 people were assisted.
I he lighthouse authorities are: for England and Wales the Corporation of
Trinity House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland
the Commissioners of Irish Lights. They control about 370 lighthouses, and
many minor lights and buoys. Responsibility for pilotage rests with harbour
authorities under the Pilotage Act 1987.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the Convention on the
366
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea 1972. The most
important scheme affecting British waters is in the Dover Strait, the world’s
busiest seaway. Britain and France jointly operate the Channel Navigation
Information Service, which provides navigational information and also
monitors the movement of vessels in the strait.
Civil Aviation
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to
meet the increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel.
Airlines are re-equipping their fleets with the most modern aircraft, many
airports are being modernised and expanded, and investment is helping to
improve air traffic control capacity.
The Secretary of State for Transport is responsible for international matters,
including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into
Britain by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of
international aviation bodies. Other responsibilities include airports policy,
amenity matters (such as aircraft noise), aviation security policy and
investigation of accidents.
The Government’s civil aviation policy aims to maintain high standards of
safety, to encourage a sound and competitive multi-airline industry in
Britain, and to promote competition in international and internal services.
In its negotiations with other countries on bilateral air service agreements it
is proposing the adoption of more liberal measures. New agreements with an
increasing number of other countries are resulting in greater competition,
leading to increased traffic and lower fares. The Government has taken the
lead in encouraging airline competition within the European Community, as
a first step towards meeting the Community’s objective that by 1992 air
transport should be part of a single internal market. As a result, airlines have
greater freedom in setting fares and determining the number and capacity
of services provided.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body,
responsible for the economic and safety regulation of the industry and,
jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the provision of air navigation
services. Members of the CAA board are appointed by the Secretary of State
for Transport.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 the CAA’s primary objectives are to
ensure that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all substantial
categories of public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high
standard of safety and to further the reasonable interests of air transport
users.
Total capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to 18,723
million available tonne-km in 1989: 13,427 million tonne-km on scheduled
services and 5,296 million tonne-km on non-scheduled services. The airlines
carry 35-2 million passengers a year on scheduled services and 24-4 million
on charter flights. In 1989 some 75-4 million passengers travelled by air
(international terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 5 per cent more than
in 1988.
In 1989 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some
£21,317 million and the proportions carried by air amounted to 21 per cent
of the value of exports and 18 per cent of imports. Air freight is important
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
367
Structure
of the Airline
Industry
British Airways
Other Airlines
Helicopters
and Other
Aerial Work
for the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially where
speed of movement is essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal and
pharmaceutical products, clothing, leather and skins, and scientific
instruments are major categories in which a relatively high proportion of
exports is sent by air.
Major changes in the structure of the airline industry have occurred. With
the sale by the Government of its shares in British Airways in 1987, the civil
airline industry is entirely in the private sector. In 1988 British Airways
acquired control of British Caledonian Group Pic, the holding company for
a group of which British Caledonian Airways (then the second largest British
scheduled airline) was the principal subsidiary.
British Airways Pic is one of the world’s leading airlines. In terms of
international scheduled services it is the largest in the world. During
1989—90 British Airways’ turnover was £4,838 million (including £4,715
million from airline operations), and the British Airways group carried 25-2
million passengers on scheduled and charter flights.
The British Airways scheduled route network serves over 160 destinations
in some 75 countries. Its main operating base is London’s Heathrow airport,
but services from Gatwick and regional centres such as Manchester and
Birmingham have been expanding. Scheduled Concorde supersonic services
are operated from London (Heathrow) to New York, Washington, Miami
and Toronto, crossing the Atlantic in about half the time taken by subsonic
aircraft. In March 1990 British Airways had a fleet of 224 aircraft, the largest
fleet in Western Europe, comprising 7 Concordes, 47 Boeing 747s
(including 8 of 21 747-400s ordered), 8 McDonnell-Douglas DC 10s, 17
Lockheed TriStars, 36 Boeing 757s, 7 Airbus A320s, 47 Boeing 737s, 4
Boeing 767s (with a further 13 on order), 34 BAG One-Elevens, 8 British
Aerospace Advanced Turboprops and 8 British Aerospace 748s. Orders for
58 aircraft have been placed and the fleet is expected to increase to 250 by
March 1994.
About 570 aircraft are operated by other airlines. Dan-Air Services is a major
operator of both scheduled and charter services, and had a fleet of 50
aircraft at the end of 1989. British Midland and Air UK are both major
domestic airlines and also operate a number of international and charter
services. Air Europe has greatly expanded its scheduled services to Europe
(which include some former British Caledonian routes) and is also a major
charter operator. It operates 21 aircraft. Virgin Atlantic began scheduled
services between Gatwick and New York (Newark) in 1984 and is also
extending its services to other routes.
Britannia Airways carried over 6 million passengers in 1989 and is one of
the largest charter operators in the world. It has charter flights from 16
airports to 80 destinations in Europe and elsewhere, mostly operated for its
associated company Thomson Holidays. It has 40 aircraft.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on
the large-scale operations connected with the exploitation of Britain’s
offshore oil and gas resources. The two main helicopter operators in Britain
are Bristow Helicopters and British International Helicopters, with 57 and
26 helicopters respectively. Light aircraft and helicopters are also involved in
other activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue services, crop¬
spraying, and aerial survey and photography.
368
Air Safety
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Airports
Ownership and
Control
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The CAA is responsible for both technical and operational safety. Its Safety
Regulation Group deals with the development and application of safety
requirements for commercial and private aviation operations, flight crew
and ground engineer licensing and training, aerodromes, and fire and
rescue services.
Every company operating aircraft used for commercial purposes must
possess an Air Operator’s Certificate, which is granted by the CAA when it is
satisfied that the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its
aircraft. The CAA’s flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline
pilots) and airworthiness surveyors check that satisfactory standards are
maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft and every
licensed ground engineer must hold the appropriate official licence issued by
the CAA. Except for those with acceptable military or other qualify¬
ing experience, all applicants for a first professional licence must have
undertaken a full-time course of instruction which has been approved by
the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS), jointly
operated by the CAA and the Ministry of Defence. At 24 civil aerodromes,
including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides the
navigation services necessary for aircraft taking off and landing, and
integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace.
Britain is one of 11 members of Eurocontrol, a European air traffic control
body. In recent years Britain has put forward a number of initiatives,
including the Central Flow Management Unit, which will be fully
operational in 1993, and an initiative agreed in April 1990 to increase
airspace capacity by integrating air traffic control systems and optimising the
air traffic route network. For Britain the CAA has a substantial annual
investment programme of about £100 million, which will include the
construction of a new air traffic control centre for England and Wales.
Of the 141 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-fifth handle more
than 100,000 passengers a year each. Twelve handle over 1 million
passengers a year each and these are shown in fable 17.4. In 1989 Britain’s
civil airports handled a total of 100-6 million passengers (98-9 million
terminal passengers and nearly 1-7 million in transit), and IT million tonnes
of freight. Heathrow airport is the world’s busiest airport for international
travel and is Britain’s most important airport for passengers and air freight,
handling 39-9 million passengers (including transit passengers) and 686,200
tonnes of freight in 1989. Gatwick is the world’s second busiest international
airport.
Eight airports—Heathrow, Catwick and Stansted in south-east England,
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland, and
Southampton—are owned and operated by BAA pic, the private sector
successor company to the British Airports Authority. Together they handle
about 70 per cent of air passengers and 85 per cent of air cargo traffic in
Britain. I he Government’s shares in BAA pic were sold in 1987.
Many of the other public airports are controlled by local authorities. In
early 1990, 16 major local authority airports were operating as Companies
Act companies. The Government is encouraging the introduction of private
capital into the new companies and in May 1990 British Aerospace acquired
a 76 per cent stake in Liverpool airport.
Development
TRANSPORT AN I) COMMUNICATIONS
369
Table 17.4: Passenger Traffic at Britain’s Main Airports
million passengers
1979
1984
1987
1988
1989
London (Heathrow)
London (Gatwick)
Manchester
Cilasgow
Birmingham
Luton
Edinburgh
Belfast (Aldergrove)
Aberdeen
Newcastle upon Tyne
East Midlands
London (Stansted)
28-0
8-7
3-5
2-4
L6
2-2
1-2
1 -4
1-3
0-9
0-6
0-3
29-2
140
6-0
2-7
1-7
1-8
1-5
1-6
1-8
M
M
0-5
34-7
19-4
8-6
3-4
2-6
2-6
1-8
21
1-5
1-3
1-3
0-7
37-5
20-7
9-5
3-6
2-8
2-8
21
2-2
L6
1-4
1-3
10
39-6
211
101
3-9
3-3
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
Sonne: Civil Aviation Authority.
Noli': Statistic s relate to let initial passengers only and exc lude those in transit.
Under the Airports Act 1986 the CAA has responsibility for the economic
regulation of major airport companies. These powers enable the CAA to
take appropriate steps to remedy practices considered to be against the
public interest, in particular any abuse of an airport’s monopoly position.
All airports used for public transport and training flights must be licensed
by the CAA. Stringent requirements, such as the provision of adequate fire¬
fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable physical characteristics and
visual aids, must be satisfied before a licence is granted. Strict aviation
security measures are in force, and the Aviation and Maritime Security Act
1990 provides for greater powers to enforce security requirements.
The Covernmenfs policy is to promote a strong and competitive British
airline industry by providing airport capacity where it is needed and by
making effective use of existing capacity, including regional airports.
A fourth major terminal at Heathrow was opened in 1986 and the first
phase of a second major terminal at Gatwick was completed in 1988. Under
major expansion plans at Stansted, a new terminal will open in March 1991,
with a capacity on completion of the first phase of the project of 8 million
passengers a year. Outline planning permission has been granted for further
expansion to cater for 15 million passengers a year.
Under major expansion plans at Manchester, the first phase of a second
terminal is under construction and is expected to open in 1993, increasing
capacity by one-half to 18 million passengers a year. A second terminal is also
under construction at Birmingham, for completion in 1991, increasing
capacity to 6 million passengers a year. Construction of a new airport at
Sheffield is planned to start in 1992. Facilities are also being improved at
other regional airports.
Communications
The telecommunications services sector is one of the most rapidly growing in
the economy. Major changes occurred in the 1980s with the privatisation of
British Telecom (formerly a public corporation) and the abolition of its
monopoly on the main telecommunications services with the entry into
370
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Licensing
Office of
Telecommuni¬
cations
British Telecom
operation of a second major telecommunications carrier, Mercury
Communications. The British Telecommunications Act 1981 and the
Telecommunications Act 1984 were the main Acts implementing the
Government’s policy of establishing a more competitive industry which is
more responsive to consumer demand. The Government intends to start a
review of the ‘duopoly’ policy in November 1990.
The 1984 Act instituted new arrangements requiring those running tele¬
communications systems (including British Telecom) to be licensed by the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
There has been a wide range of other liberalisation measures, the most
recent being a new version of the branch systems general licence issued
in 1989, which covers most private domestic and business use of tele¬
communications. It sets out the arrangements by which private users may
connect their systems (including payphones) to the public systems, install
their own wiring and take advantage of private lines leased from the public
operators. The licence included further significant liberalisation and
simplified regulatory procedures. For inland private circuits leased from the
public telecommunications operators simple resale was permitted, while
other changes allowed greater flexibility in installing, maintaining and using
call routing apparatus. The licence also covers the licensing of value added
and data services, previously covered by a separate class licence. Other areas
in which competition has been increased include mobile communications
(see p 373), specialised satellite services, the supply of telephone apparatus
and the provision of public payphones.
The Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL), a non-ministerial government
department established under the Telecommunications Act 1984, is the
independent regulatory body for the telecommunications industry. It is
headed by the Director General of Telecommunications, among whose
functions are to ensure that licensees comply with the conditions of their
licences; to promote effective competition in the telecommunications
industry; to provide advice to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry
on telecommunications matters; and to investigate complaints. The Director
General also has a duty to promote the interests of consumers in respect of
prices, quality and variety in telecommunications services.
Under the Telecommunications Act 1984 British Telecom was reconstituted
as a public limited company and a majority of the ordinary voting shares
were sold to private investors in 1984. It has over 1-2 million registered
shareholders and 95 per cent ol its 230,000 eligible employees are also
shareholders.
British Telecom operates around 19-3 million residential lines and 5-7
million business lines. It runs the world’s sixth largest public tele¬
communications network, including 110,000 telex connections, 90,000
public payphones, and a wide range of specialised voice, data, text and visual
services. The inland telephone and telex networks are fully automatic.
International services are also highly developed, and international direct
dialling is available from any telephone line in Britain to 200 countries,
representing 99 per cent of the world’s telephones. Automatic telex service is
available to 2 million customers in over 200 countries.
In 1989—90 the company made a pre-tax profit of £2,692 million on a
record turnover of £12,315 million. Expenditure on capital equipment and
other assets totalled £3,115 million, of which £952 million went on
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
371
modernising exchanges with digital equipment. About £230 million was
spent on research and development.
Network British Telecom is investing some £2,600 million a year in the modernisation
Modernisation and expansion of its network to meet the increasing demand for basic
telephone services and for more specialised services. The company has about
1 million km (625,000 miles) of optical fibre laid in its network in Britain,
accounting for two-thirds of its trunk network, a higher proportion than any
other world operator. There are more than 3,000 digital exchanges serving a
total of 10 million lines, and three-quarters of its customers are served by
modern local exchanges of various types. The combination of digital
exchange switching and digital transmission techniques, using optical fibre
cable and microwave radio links, is substantially improving the quality of
telephone services for residential and business customers, as well as making
possible a wider range of services through the company’s main network. An
Integrated Services Digital Network for business customers became available
in April 1990.
General
Services
International
Services
British Telecom provides numerous services, including a free facility for
emergency calls to the police, fire, ambulance, coastguard, lifeboat and air-
sea rescue services; a free directory inquiries service; and various chargeable
operator-connected services, such as transfer charge and alarm calls. The
operator-handled Freefone service and automatic ‘LinkLine’ facilities enable
callers to contact organisations anywhere in Britain, either free or at local call
rates. Timeline (formerly known as the Speaking Clock) gives callers the
time. British Telecom also provides a number of Callstream services, which
allow callers to obtain information by paying a premium call rate. Other
premium-rate services are offered by independent service providers using
the British Telecom network. In 1988 the company opened a £70 million
optical fibre flexible access system, for intensive voice and data traffic, to
serve the financial organisations of the City of London.
Under a public payphone service modernisation programme, costing
some £160 million, all its public payphones have been equipped with push¬
button equipment and the majority of red kiosks replaced by more modern
facilities. A number of cashless call developments are being carried out,
including the Phonecard service, using prepaid encoded cards; Phonecard
payphones account for 17,000 of the total of 91,000 payphones. There are
about 300,000 rented payphones on premises to which the public has access
and these are also being upgraded with modern push-button equipment.
Prestel, British Telecom’s videotex service, and Telecom Gold (an
electronic mail and information service) form part of the company’s data
services division, Tymnet. Prestel was the first service of its kind to enable a
wide variety of computer-stored information to be called up on a special
television receiver via the telephone. Some 100,000 terminals are attached to
Prestel, 57 per cent in businesses and 43 per cent in homes. Through its
‘Gateway’ links with other databases, a wide range of other services, such as
home shopping and banking services and holiday booking and reservation
facilities, is available; there is also a link with a cable television network.
There has been rapid growth in British Telecom’s mobile communications
services, including its paging service, which, with 450,000 customers, is the
largest of its kind in the world.
British Telecom International is the company’s division handling inter¬
national networks and services. It is the second largest shareholder in
the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (of which
372
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mercury
119 countries are members) and in the International Maritime Satellite
Organisation, with interests in a number of other consortia.
A substantial proportion of the intercontinental telephone traffic to or
from Britain is carried by satellite. British Telecom operates satellite earth
stations at Goonhilly Downs (Cornwall), Madley (near Hereford), London
Docklands and Aberdeen. The Docklands earth station has six 13-m (43-ft)
dish aerials and five smaller aerials. Using the latest digital techniques, it
handles advanced business data and videoconferencing services to the
continent of Europe and North America as well as for 23 cable television
channels. British Telecom’s range of digital transmission services includes a
number available overseas, including ‘Satstream’ private circuit digital links
covering North America and Western Europe using small-dish aerials, and
an ‘International Kilostream’ private circuit service available to the United
States, Australia and most major business centres in Asia and the rest of
Europe.
Digital transmission techniques have been introduced for services to the
United States, Japan, Hong Kong and Australia via the Madley station. The
London-Tokyo link, which was set up in 1986, includes the first all-digital
telephone link between two continents, giving faster connections and clearer
speech.
Extensive direct-dial maritime satellite services are available for vessels
worldwide, and limited in-flight operator-controlled telephone call facilities
are available via Portishead radio station near Bristol.
Recent improvements in submarine cable design (including the use of
optical fibre technology) have helped to increase capacity and reduce
pressure on satellite systems. The world’s first international undersea optical
fibre cable, between Britain and Belgium, began operating in 1986. The first
transatlantic optical fibre cable (TAT 8) entered service in 1988, with 8,000
circuits and a capacity of 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls. A further high-
capacity transatlantic optical fibre cable (TAT 9), which will cost about
£250 million and be able to carry about 75,000 telephone calls
simultaneously, is expected to be in operation by 1991.
British Telecom’s overseas consultancy service, Telconsult, is engaged on
over 250 projects in more than 60 countries.
Mercury Communications Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Cable and
Wireless pic, operates under licence as the competing fixed telecom¬
munications carrier in Britain, enabling the company to offer a wide range of
services, both nationally and internationally. Its wholly digital trunk
network, comprising some 2,600 km (1,600 miles) of optical fibre cables and
2,000 km (1,200 miles) of digital microwave links, is centred on Birmingham
and links over 75 towns and cities, including Edinburgh, Hull, Brighton and
Cardiff.
National and international switched telephone services for business
customers began in 1986, and services for small businesses and residential
customers are now established. Mercury also provides an extensive range of
enhanced services, including national and international telex and packet
data services, electronic messaging and nationwide radiopaging, as well as a
range of associated equipment used at customers’ premises. Mercury’s
‘Centrex’ service, the first in Europe, provides business customers with all
the advanced facilities (such as inward direct dialling and call forwarding)
available on a modern switchboard from equipment located at Mercury’s
public exchanges, so that customers do not have to purchase their own
system. In 1988 Mercury introduced its first public payphone service, in
London, and this is being extended.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
373
International services are provided by two satellite communications
centres in London’s Docklands and Oxfordshire, serving North America,
Europe, the Middle East, the Far East and Australia. Mercury has been de¬
veloping new optical fibre submarine cable links, and agreements have been
reached with the majority of European telecommunications authorities
to provide Mercury with direct links with Europe. Mercury is the British
operator involved in the first private transatlantic optical fibre cable (see
p 374).
The Government has taken a number of measures to encourage the
expansion of mobile radio telecommunications services. It has licensed Racal-
Vodafone Ltd (part of the Racal Electronics Group) and Telecom Securicor
Cellular Radio Ltd (a joint venture between British Telecom and Securicor)
to run competing national cellular radio telephone systems. Considerable
investment has been made in establishing their networks to provide in¬
creased capacity for the growing number of cellular radio telephone users,
estimated at over 1 million in mid-1990.
In 1989 the Government announced an increase in the number of
channels available for cellular radio and the issue of licences for ‘Telepoint’
systems, which allow subscribers to make outgoing telephone calls from
public places and other locations where Telepoint base stations have been
established, using their own portable digital cordless handsets. Services are
provided by four companies under licence: Ferranti; BYPS; Phonepoint;
and Mercury Callpoint.
Britain will be the first country to offer personal communications network
(PGN) services, which would allow the same telephone to be used at home, at
work and in a mobile capacity. In 1989 the Government allocated licences to
three operators—Mercury PGN Ltd, Microtel Communications Ltd and
Unitel Ltd—to run PCNs in the frequency range L7 to 1-9 gigahertz. The
first service is expected to start in late 1992.
Two national operators (GEC National One and Band 3 Radio Ltd) have
been licensed to offer a nationwide trunked mobile radio service, while a
number of licences have been awarded for London and regional services.
The Department of Trade and Industry has licensed over 40 companies
which have been awarded franchises by the Gable Authority to run local
broadband cable telecommunications systems. These systems may carry
television and, in conjunction with British Telecom or Mercury
Communications, a range of telecommunications services. At present they
mainly provide television programmes, but some are already offering
interactive services, including local voice telephony.
Home banking services, accessed by multi-frequency telephone, are
expanding. They are being developed by a variety of banks, for example, the
TSB through its Speedlink service.
Cable and Wireless pic provides or manages a varied range of tele¬
communications activities, mostly overseas in over 40 countries. Its main
business is the provision and operation of public telecommunications
services in 37 countries and territories under franchises granted by the
governments concerned. It also provides and manages telecommunications
services and facilities for public and private sector customers, and undertakes
consultancy work. It owns, operates or has been a consultant on over 40
satellite earth stations, and has a fleet of nine cableships and two submersible
vehicle systems for laying and maintaining submarine telecommunications
cables. The company’s strategic objective is the construction of a broadband
374
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
digital network linking major world economic and financial centres: London,
New York, Tokyo and Hong Kong. The first leg of the ‘Global Digital
Highway’, the private transatlantic optical fibre cable linking Britain, the
Irish Republic, the United States and Bermuda, entered service in 1989, and
the North Pacific Cable, the first direct cable between the United States and
Japan, is scheduled for completion by the end of 1990.
Postal Services The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first
to issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The
Royal Mail provides deliveries to 24 million addresses and handles over 58
million letters and parcels each working day (over 14,000 million items a
year). Mail is collected from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post
offices and large postal users. The Post Office has a monopoly on the
conveyance of letters, but under the British Telecommunications Act 1981
the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has the power to suspend the
monopoly in certain areas or for certain categories of mail and to license
others to provide competing services. The Secretary of State has suspended
the monopoly on letters subject to a minimum fee of £1, and has issued
general licences enabling mail to be transferred between document ex¬
changes and allowing charitable organisations to carry Christmas and New
Year cards.
All of the Royal Mail’s 80 sorting offices are equipped with mechanical
handling equipment and have mainly taken over the work of hundreds of
sorting offices handling letters manually. Each address in Britain has a
postcode and the British system is the most sophisticated in the world,
allowing mechanised sorting down to part of a street on a postman’s round
and, in some cases, to an individual address. The Post Office has reorganised
its parcels operations, and in February 1990 announced investment of £80
million in the service, which has been renamed Royal Mail Parcelforce. A
programme of modernisation includes the establishment of 150 local
collection and delivery depots throughout Britain.
As well as postal and Girobank services, post offices handle a wide range of
transactions. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as an agent
for government departments and local authorities. The Post Office is
introducing new technology into its counter services to reduce costs and raise
productivity, while providing an improved range of services to customers.
There are 20,900 post offices, of which some 1,300 are operated directly by
the Post Office. The remainder are operated on an agency basis by sub¬
postmasters.
Post Office The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-
Specialist Services door delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and provides
an international service to over 160 countries. ‘Datapost Sameday’ provides a
rapid delivery within or between more than 100 cities and towns in Britain
and between London and Amsterdam, Paris and Dublin. ‘The Royal Mail
Facsimile Service’, the world’s first international public facsimile
transmission service sending letters and other documents electronically,
provides high-speed mail links between more than 100 post offices in Britain
as well as to and from some 40 other countries. The Philatelic Bureau in
Edinburgh handles about one-third of the Post Office’s philatelic business,
much of it involving sales to overseas collectors or dealers. The British Postal
Gonsultancy Service offers advice and assistance on all aspects of postal
business to overseas postal administrations, and nearly 40 countries have
used its services since 1965.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
375
Private Courier
and Express
Service Operators
Private sector couriers and express operators are able to handle time-
sensitive door-to-door deliveries, subject to a minimum fee of £1. The
courier/express service industry has grown rapidly, by about 20 per cent a
year, and the revenue created by the carriage of these items handled is
estimated at over £1,500 million a year. Britain is one of the main providers
ol monitored express deliveries in Europe, with London an important centre
for air courier/express traffic.
18 Employment
TRENDS IN
THE LABOUR
MARKET
Employment in Britian has risen substantially since the mid-1980s, with the
workforce in employment having increased by 3-5 million between March
1983 and December 1989, when it totalled a record 27-1 million. This was a
larger rise than in any other European country. It has been accompanied by
a considerable decline in unemployment, which fell for nearly four years
after the peak of mid-1986. This represented the longest period of falling
unemployment since the second world war.
The Government has taken a number of steps to improve the operation of
the labour market, with the aim of creating an economic climate in which
business can flourish and create more jobs. These include increasing the
flexibility of the labour market, removing burdens on employers (including
regulatory barriers which hinder recruitment) and encouraging better
training. However, it has expressed concern about the operation of the
European Community’s draft Social Charter, covering various aspects of
employment. The Government has indicated its willingness to accept some
of the proposed regulations, such as on health and safety, but opposes a
number of other proposals which it believes would add to labour costs and
discourage employment.
The total workforce in June 1989 was 28-6 million, of whom over 22-7
million (nearly 12 million men and almost 10-8 million women) were classed
as employees in employment (see Table 18.1). Major trends have included
the growth in the proportion of the workforce accounted for by women,
as more married women have sought work, especially in part-time
employment; and a substantial increase in self-employment. Between 1979
and 1989 the number of self-employed people is estimated to have risen by
70 per cent to 3-2 million, representing 11 -3 per cent of the workforce.
Table 18.1: Manpower in Britain 1979-89
Thousands (as at June), seasonally adjusted
1979 1984 1985 1986 ^987 1988 1989
Employees in
employment'
Self employed
Unemployed6
Armed forces
Work-related
government
training
programmes'
Workforcef/
23,145
1,906
1,215
314
26,580
21,228
2,496
3,083
326
175
27,309
21,414
2,610
3,213
326
176
27,739
21,379
2,627
3,318
322
226
27,871
21,575
2,860
2,992
319
311
28,057
22,265
2,986
2,425
316
343
28,334
22,740
3,241
1,813
308
462
28,564
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development
Part-time workers are counted as full units.
’ Figures are adjusted for discontinuities and exclude school-leavers.
‘ Not seasonally adjusted.
'' Comprises employees in employment, the self-employed, the armed forces, participants in work-related government
training programmes and the unemployed (including school-leavers).
378
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Patterns of
Employment
There have been substantial changes in the nature and location of em¬
ployment, with a marked shift, as in other industrialised countries, from
manufacturing to service industries. Between 1955 and 1989 the proportion
of employees in employment engaged in service industries rose from 42 per
cent to 69 per cent as higher living standards and technological de¬
velopments stimulated the growth of many service industries. During the
period 1980 to 1989 the number of employees in service industries rose by 2
million (14 per cent) to 15-7 million (see Table 18.2). Employment in most
service industries, with some exceptions such as transport, has grown
considerably. The largest rise in this period was in the banking, finance and
insurance sector (by 58 per cent to 2-7 million), while there was also a
substantial increase in hotels and catering (16 per cent). Manufacturing
industry accounted for 43 per cent of employees in employment in 1955, but
by 1989 the proportion had fallen to 23 per cent. Nearly all manufacturing
industries experienced a decline in employment as markets for manu¬
factured goods changed and as new technology brought greater efficiency.
Table 18.2: Employees in Employment
Industry or service
(1980 Standard Industrial
Classification)
Thousands (as at June)
Per cent
1980 1984 1988 1989 1989
Primary sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Services
Wholesale distribution
and repairs
Retail distribution
Hotels and catering
Transport
Postal services and
communications
Banking, finance and
insurance
Public administration
Education
Health
Other services
1,099 956 800 771
373 340 313 300
727 616 487 471
6,937 5,409 5,221 5,233
1,243 1,037 1,044 1,062
13,712 13,836 15,206 15,679
1,132
2,177
972
1,049
437
1,695
1,667
1,642
1,258
1,682
1,132
2,054
1,010
908
1,145
2,162
1,083
889
432 437
1,969
1,602
1,602
1,298
1,829
2,475
1,677
1,756
1,438
2,145
1,172
2,256
1,123
910
451
2,675
1,650
1,797
1,484
2,161
Total
3- 4
I- 3
21
230
4- 7
68-9
5- 2
9-9
4-9
40
2 0
II- 8
7-3
7-9
6- 5
9-5
22,991 21,238 22,272 22,745 100 0
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development.
''Ii'flun^m sectors of manufacturing industry included 797,<M)(> in mechanical engineering
641*,000 in office machinery, electrical engineering and instruments; 572,000 ,n I^kE drndt ai.d MW n
textiles leather footwear and clothing; 497,000 in paper products, printing and publishing, 471,(MM) in timber, wooden
furniture, rubber and plastics; 326,000 in chemicals and man-made fibres; and 271,000 m motor vehicles and parts
Note: Dif ferences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
EMPLOYMENT
379
U nemploy ment
TRAINING
Government
Policy
Training
Agency
Training and
Enterprise
Councils
Unemployment reached its peak in June 1986 when, on a seasonally
adjusted basis (excluding school-leavers), it totalled over 3-1 million, 11 -2 per
cent of the workforce. Subsequently it declined significantly, and in the first
seven months of 1990 it was about 1-6 million (5-7 per cent of the work¬
force), one of the lowest rates in the European Community. Unemployment
fell in all regions, with reductions being greatest in some of the regions with
above-average unemployment (such as the North, Scotland and Wales).
There was a fall of 24 per cent in long-term unemployment (those
unemployed for a year or more) to 514,000 in the year to July 1990.
Unemployment remains high in some areas, particularly those with the
greatest dependence on traditional manufacturing industries and in inner
cities.
A wide-ranging survey of training in Great Britain, conducted by the
Training Agency, has indicated that a substantial amount of training is
undertaken. It found that about 350 million days of training were
undertaken by trainees and students in 1986-87, equivalent to about 7 per
cent of the number of days worked by all employees in 1987. The total
accounting costs of training in Great Britain, including the implicit cost to
trainees of earnings foregone while in training, were about £33,000 million
in 1986-87, representing 8 per cent of gross domestic product. Employers’
net costs were estimated at some £18,000 million. The health sector provided
most training in terms of the number of days per employee, followed by
education and central government.
In 1988 the Government set out its new framework for training and
enterprise, designed to contribute more effectively to Britain’s international
competitiveness. Features of the new framework are a greater role for
employers in the organisation and finance of training, with this responsibility
being devolved as much as possible to local areas; training and vocational
education designed to contribute to business success and economic growth;
and recognised national standards of competence to cover all sectors and
occupations, with training available so that people can secure qualifications
based on these standards. In December 1989 the Government set a range of
training objectives for the 1990s relating to training activity and
qualifications under the new National Vocational Qualification (see p 382).
The Training Agency operates within the Department of Employment
group. Its purpose is to promote training and encourage enterprise. It
develops and delivers the Government’s training and vocational education
programmes. It also aims to develop effective arrangements for training and
vocational education which will contribute to business success and economic
growth, and to reducing unemployment.
Its responsibilities are discharged through a network of ten operational
offices, together with 57 area offices. The latter contract with external
training managers, who arrange and deliver training.
Developments are in progress to replace the area offices by privately run
local training organisations; in England and Wales there will be 82 such
organisations, known as Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs).
Training and Enterprise Councils are business-led community partnerships
bringing together at local level people interested in training and enterprise.
TECs are being set up to make training and enterprise activities more
relevant to the needs of employers and individuals locally. Their in¬
troduction reflects the Government’s commitment to encourage the public
380
National
Training
Task Force
Industry
Training
Organisations
Employment
Training
Business
Growth
Training
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sector and the private sector to work together. It also reflects the
Government’s aim to ensure that the private sector has a leading role in
training and enterprise programmes. TECs will be allowed considerable
flexibility in their contracts with the Government to adapt programmes to
meet local needs.
TECs are consulting widely with individuals and organisations, including
representatives from education and the voluntary sector. Many are including
representatives from these sectors on their boards.
TECs will have executive responsibility for annual expenditure of about
£2,500 million. Individual TEC budgets will range from about £5 million to
£40 million a year. Funding of TECs will be performance-related and based
on their output. They will be accountable through contracts related to
agreed corporate and business plans.
In 1989 the National Training Task Force was established, with 15 members
appointed for four years. Members were selected for their commitment to
training rather than as representatives of interest groups, although members
are drawn from a wide spectrum including employers, trade unions, the
voluntary sector, local authorities and education. Its most important job is to
assist in the establishment and development of I ECs. In addition, it is
helping to promote to employers the importance of investing in the skills of
their workforce.
Industry Training Organisations (ITOs) have a major role in developing
occupational standards and reviewing future skill requirements for their
sectors. The Government’s preference is for them to be employer-led
voluntary bodies. Accordingly, the system of statutory training boards is
being phased out. In December 1989 the Government announced voluntary
arrangements to replace most of the remaining seven boards, which cover
about 25 per cent of the civilian workforce. There are over 100 independent
ITOs, many of which supersede former statutory boards, and they cover
sectors employing about 45 per cent of the civilian workforce. 4 he National
Council of Industry Training Organisations, a voluntary body set up to
represent the interests of independent 11 Os, aims to improve the
ef f ectiveness of these bodies, for example, by encouraging good practice.
Employment Training was launched in 1988 to bring together a range of
training programmes. 4 he scheme is designed to provide a flexible and
individually tailored training programme of up to 12 months, especially for
the longer-term unemployed. An individual s training needs are identified
by training agents and an agreed action plan is drawn up. Training is
delivered by training managers under contract with the Training Agency.
For 1990-91 Employment Training has a budget of £1,200 million to
provide training opportunities for up to 450,000 trainees.
Entry to the programme is through a variety of routes, including a Restart
interview or by application at a jobcentre. The emphasis of the programme is
on high-quality training. Accordingly, training agents and managers are
required to gain approved status as a demonstration of the quality of the
training provider. Trainees receive a training allowance of £10 a week more
than their benefit entitlement, and they also receive help towards fares and
some other expenses.
In 1989 the Government introduced Business Growth Training, designed to
encourage companies to improve their business performance through moie
effective training which is closely linked to their business plans. There is a
EMPLOYMENT
381
Enterprise
Allowance
Scheme
Youth
Training
Education
Initiatives
range of flexible programmes designed to help mainly small- to medium-size
businesses to improve their planning, and to develop the business skills of
owner-managers. In addition, the programmes are designed to develop in
management teams a more strategic approach to managing change and
to training the workforce in the skills required for firms to compete
successfully, for example, there are one-day seminars for owner-managers
in marketing, accounting and general management, and other programmes
to help them to manage the growth of their businesses. Training is available
for self-employed people setting up in business. 1 he Government
contributes about £55 million a year to these programmes. TECs are taking
over the lunning and development of business and enterprise training to
meet the future needs of local employers.
The Enterprise Allowance Scheme helps unemployed people wishing to
start their own business, but who would be deterred by the prospect of losing
benefit once they began. Entrants, who must have access to at least £1,000 to
invest in the business, receive an allowance of £40 a week for a year when
they start the business. Over 500,000 new businesses have been set up since
the scheme began in 1982. Surveys have shown that 76 per cent are still
trading 18 months after starting operations.
The Youth Training Scheme (YTS) was introduced in Great Britain in 1983
and was expanded in 1986 to offer two years of training for 16-year-old
school-leavers and one year for 17-year-old school-leavers. Over 2 million
young people were trained on the YTS.
Youth Training, which succeeded the YTS in 1990, is designed to give all
young people the opportunity to achieve a vocational qualification or a credit
towards a qualification. It puts more emphasis on raising the level of
qualifications of new entrants to the workforce and concentrates on results
such as acquiring vocational qualifications rather than on time spent in
training. It aims to increase the relevance to work of training provided and to
improve the employment prospects of young people.
The I taining Credits Scheme, announced by the Government in March
1990, is a new initiative in youth training. It represents an entitlement to
train to approved standards for young people who have left full-time
education to join the labour market. It is expected that 11 pilot credits
schemes will be in place to run from April 1991.
The Government is promoting closer links between the education system
and industry and commerce. The Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative, administered in Great Britain by the Department of Employment
in co-operation with local education authorities, is intended to ensure that
the education of 14- to 18-year-olds provides them with learning
opportunities which will equip them for working life. 4 his is implemented by
requiring the school curriculum to relate to the working environment, and
through improving skills and qualifications, particularly in science,
technology and modern languages. The scheme also provides work
experience and work shadowing placements; encourages young people to be
more enterprising; and provides counselling, guidance and opportunities to
progress to higher levels of achievement. The scheme aims by mid-1993 to
include all students aged 14 to 18 in maintained schools and colleges. Some
3,000 schools or colleges are involved in the initiative, with over 500,000
students participating.
In January 1990 the Government announced an extension of its
‘Compacts’ initiative (launched in 1988) in designated inner city areas.
Vocational
Qualifications
Other
Training
Measures
Scotland
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Compacts are local agreements between employers, local education
authorities and training providers in which young people, supported by
their school or college, work to achieve agreed targets, and employers
undertake to provide further training or jobs for those attaining such targets.
By August 1990, 38 compacts were in operation, with over 300 schools
participating, covering nearly 55,000 young people. Compacts will
eventually be run by the TECs.
Under the Enterprise and Education Initiative, all pupils have the
opportunity to gain at least two weeks of suitable work experience before
leaving school, and teachers have the opportunity to obtain business
experience. The Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative is designed to
ensure that students acquire the aptitudes and competence required by
industry in the 1990s.
The National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) was set up in
1986 to reform and rationalise the vocational qualifications system in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. It aims to make qualifications more
accessible and more relevant by basing them on standards of competence set
by industry, and to establish a coherent framework—the National Vocational
Qualification—based on defined levels of achievement to which
qualifications in all sectors can be assigned or accredited. The aim is to have
the framework for levels I to IV (from the most basic level to the
management supervisory level) fully operational by the end of 1992.
Eventually it is expected to cover all occupational levels up to and including
the professions. Scotland has not been covered by the NCVQ as it already
had its own modular system, but in 1989 the Government announced that a
system of Scottish Vocational Qualifications would be introduced, which
would be compatible with the framework in Great Britain.
Open learning opportunities have been increased by the creation of the
Open College, an independent company which promotes the acquisition of
skills through the method of open learning. Over 60,000 people have taken
its courses since 1987. Further funds were announced in 1989. a maximum
of £12 million for its commercial activities over the three years to 1992, and a
further £6 million for its broadcasting activities. The Government’s aim is for
the College to be self-financing by March 1992.
In 1988 the Department of Employment, in partnership with three major
banks, made career development loans available nationally following a pilot
initiative. The loans help individuals to pay for vocational training by
offering deferred payments on loans until up to three months after the
training period, with interest on loans being paid by the Department.
Under the Enterprise and New Towns (Scotland) Act 1990 two new
bodies—Scottish Enterprise for the lowlands of Scotland, and Highlands and
Islands Enterprise for the highlands and islands area will be created. They
will assume responsibility for the functions of economic development and
training currently exercised by the Scottish Development Agency, the
Highlands and Islands Development Board and the Training Agency in
Scotland. Two-thirds of the members of their boards will have a background
in business or industry. The new bodies will exercise a strong strategic role.
Their main duties will be to stimulate self-sustaining economic development,
to maintain and safeguard employment, to enhance employment skills, and
to promote industrial efficiency and international competitiveness.
Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise will contract
much of their work out to a network of local enterprise companies (led by the
KMl’LOYMKNT
Northern
Ireland
EMPLOYMENT
SERVICES
Counselling
383
private sector). The network is almost complete, with prospective companies
throughout Scotland developing business plans upon which operating
contracts will be based. I he companies will be similar to the TECs, but with
wider economic functions.
The Training and Employment Agency was established in April 1990 as an
executive agency within the Department of Economic Development for
Northern Ii eland. It is responsible lor the training and employment services
previously administered by the Department’s labour market group as well as
for the functions of the majority of the industrial training boards, which are
being encouraged to become non-statutory training organisations. The
Agency aims to maximise the contribution of employment and training
services towards strengthening the Northern Ireland economy. It works
closely with industry, particularly in the identification of training needs. The
Agency is responsible for helping to ensure that training needs are met, for
encouraging investment in training by industry, and for stimulating the
development of training within the private sector.
Northern Ireland has its own training schemes. Major changes in the
Youth Training Programme (in which some 9,000 young people are
participating) were implemented in April 1990 to enhance the quality of
training and increase its relevance to young people and employers. Training
will form an increasingly important element of the Action for Community
Employment scheme, which provides temporary employment of up to a year
for long-term unemployed adults. The Vocational Education Programme is
designed to stimulate the development of a more vocationally based
curriculum in schools.
I he main priorities of the Employment Service, which became an executive
agency of the Department of Employment in April 1990, are to provide help
for people unemployed for over six months and those with disabilities or
disadvantages, and to maintain the accurate and prompt payment of benefit
t° unemployed people, while ensuring that payment is made only to those
entitled. I he Employment Service has two main ways of helping the
unemployed to find work: by placing people directly into jobs or by offering
guidance and counselling so that people can find the best route to return to
employment, for example, by training.
I he jobcentre network handles about one-third of vacancies in the
economy, and 81 per cent of the 1-85 million people whom it placed in jobs
in 1989—90 were unemployed.
The counselling services of the Employment Service have been developed to
tackle the loss of contact with the labour market experienced by the long¬
term unemployed and to regenerate their motivation to seek work. Client
advisers in unemployment benefit offices interview every newly unemployed
person and offer advice on the financial help and on the jobs and training
opportunities available.
If a person’s unemployment lasts for six months or longer, he or she is
invited to an interview with a Restart counsellor every six months to discuss
problems which may be hindering the search for employment, with the aim
of agreeing a course of action to help in returning to work. T his could
include direct placement in a job, enrolment on a training programme or a
Restart course (a five-day course designed to rebuild self-confidence and
motivation, and including help with job-hunting techniques), a place in a
Jobclub (where participants are given training sessions in job-hunting skills
and then have access to a resource centre where facilities are available to help
Other
Functions
Incentives
to Work
Careers Service
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining
and Joint
Consultation
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on intensive jobsearch), or help towards self-employment through the
Enterprise Allowance Scheme (see p 381).
A further group of counsellors, claimant advisers, work closely with the
Restart counsellors and concentrate on giving the unemployed advice on
benefits, especially those which can be claimed while in employment.
The Employment Service also aims to help people with disabilities to find
work. All Employment Service programmes make provision for people with
disabilities. Disablement Resettlement Officers offer practical help and
counselling, and a wide range of programmes, such as one offering sheltered
employment opportunities, is available. In 1989—90 an estimated 81,000
people with disabilities were helped by these special programmes.
The Employment Service plays a full role within the Government’s inner
city initiative, modifying its national schemes to meet the special needs and
circumstances of its inner city users.
The Government has taken action to improve incentives to work, such as
raising personal tax allowances and reducing the standard rate of income tax
to 25 per cent, while improving benefits for people in work. These measures,
together with reforms in the social security system implemented in 1988,
have helped to ensure that people are better off in work than remaining
unemployed.
The Jobstart Allowance of £20 a week is available for up to six months to
eligible long-term unemployed applicants who accept a full-time job with
gross pay of less than £90 a week. Its purpose is to encourage long-term
unemployed people, particularly those on high levels of benefit, to take jobs
which they might not otherwise have considered.
Under the Employment and Training Act 1973 local education authorities
must provide a careers service for people attending educational institutions
other than universities (which normally have their own careers service) and
an employment service for those leaving them. The careers services in Wales
and Scotland are the responsibility of the respective Secretaries of State,
while in Northern Ireland responsibility rests with the I raining and
Employment Agency.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly
on a voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of
employees and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and
on freely conducted negotiations at all levels.
In many industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for
the conduct of industrial relations have traditionally been settled by
negotiation and agreement between employers or employers associations
and trade unions. For collective bargaining and other purposes trade unions
are widely recognised, especially in the public sector (including nationalised
industries) and in large firms and establishments. Agreements may be
industry-wide, as has generally been the case in the public sector, but they
are often supplemented by local agreements in companies or factoi ies (plant
bargaining). Individual companies may have their own agreements, either
for the whole company or for each plant.
In some industries, companies and factories, negotiations are conducted
by meetings held when necessary, while in others joint negotiating councils
or committees have been established on a permanent basis. Joint committees
are fairly widespread, especially in large firms. I he scope of the various
EMPLOYMENT
385
Developments
Trade Unions
bodies (from national joint industrial councils for whole industries to works
councils and committees in individual workplaces) varies widely. It can cover
such additional matters as production plans, training, education, welfare and
safety. Day-to-day negotiations on various aspects of pay (such as bonuses or
performance pay) are normally handled at plant level. Arrangements for
collective bargaining normally suffice to settle all questions which are raised,
but there is often provision for matters which cannot be settled in this way to
be referred to independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment
Protection Act 1975, as amended by the Employment Act 1980, makes
provision for information needed for collective bargaining purposes to be
disclosed by employers to trade unions, subject to certain safeguards.
In recent years there have been a number of developments which have
affected Britain s industrial relations system. An important labour market
development has been the continuing growth in part-time, temporary and
sub-contracting employment. Together with the growth of self employment,
this has encouraged greater labour market flexibility. Many employers have
sought greater flexibility through a closer relationship between pay and
peiformance, particularly through performance-related pay schemes (such
as merit pay). In many sectors job demarcation (for example, between
manual, technical and clerical skills) has been relaxed.
Other developments have included the introduction of new technology
and related organisational changes. There has been a trend away from
national bargaining machinery towards bargaining at a more local level; the
proportion of the workforce covered by multi-employer national agreements
declined from 60 per cent in 1978 to 35 per cent in 1989. The Government
has favoured moves away from national pay bargaining towards systems
where pay increases are dependent primarily on performance, merit,
company profitability, and demand and supply in the local labour market.
Areas in which national industry-wide pay bargaining has recently been
ended include merchant shipping, the printing of national newspapers,
commercial broadcasting and the London clearing banks. Where industry¬
wide bargaining remains important, employers often seek a degree of
flexibility to permit modifications to national agreements. Another recent
feature has been the development of‘new style’ agreements, often associated
with overseas-owned (particularly Japanese) companies, although they are
also found in British-owned firms. These agreements often involve the
recognition of a single union for all of a company’s employees (particularly
for companies recognising unions for the first time), ‘single status’ (involving
the elimination of the traditional distinction between managers, supervisors
and other employees), a greater emphasis on employee participation, and
flexibility in working practices.
Trade unions have members in nearly all occupations. As well as negotiating
pay and other terms and conditions of employment with employers, they
provide benefits and services such as educational facilities, legal advice and
aid in work-related cases. Trade unions vary widely in the composition of
their membership, and may be organised either by occupation (for example,
they may recruit clerical staff or managers wherever employed) or by
industry, while some are based on a combination of both.
There has been a decline in trade union membership, and by the end of
1988 total union membership was about 10-4 million, of whom 80 per cent
were in the 23 largest unions. The decline reflects the moves away from
manufacturing and public services (both of which have a relatively high level
of membership).
386
BRI'l AIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trades Union
Congress
The number of unions has also fallen, reflecting an increase in merger
activity and the absorption by larger unions of small unions and of long-
established craft unions. For example, in 1989 the General, Municipal,
Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union (the third largest union) merged with
the Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff and
was renamed the GMB. Several other unions are discussing possible
mergers. At the end of 1989 there were 342 trade unions on the list
maintained by the Certification Officer. To be eligible for entry on the list a
trade union must show that it consists wholly or mainly of workers and that
its principal purposes include the regulation of relations between workers
and employers or between workers and employers’ associations.
Six unions had over 500,000 members at the end of 1988: the Transport
and General Workers’ Union (T3 million), the Amalgamated Engineering
Union (794,000), the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades
Union (790,000), the National and Local Government Officers’ Association
(755,000), the Manufacturing, Science and Finance Union (653,000) and the
National Union of Public Employees (635,000).
Trade union organisation varies widely, but the central governing body
usually consists of a national executive council or committee, elected by a
secret ballot of the individual members and responsible to the conference of
delegates from local branches, normally held annually. Many unions also
have regional and district organisations. At the level of the individual
member there are local branches, covering one or more workplaces. The
organising of members in individual places of work and the negotiation
of local pay agreements with management at the workplace may be done by
full-time district officials of the union or, in many cases, by elected work¬
place representatives (sometimes called ‘shop stewards’). Where two or
more unions have members in the same workplace, representatives’ or
shop stewards’ committees may be formed to discuss matters of common
concern.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades
Union Congress (TUG), founded in 1868. Its affiliated membership
comprises 77 trade unions which together represent 8-4 million people, or
some 81 per cent of all trade unionists in Britain. It has more members than
any other trade union centre in Western Europe. The TUC’s objectives are
to promote the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the
economic and social conditions of working people. It exercises power
through influence rather than through sanctions. The TUG deals with all
general questions which concern trade unions, both nationally and
internationally, and it provides a forum in which affiliated unions can
collectively determine policy. There are eight TUG regional councils for
England and a Wales Trades Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern
to trade unionists. A General Council represents the TUG between annual
meetings by carrying out Congress decisions, watching economic and social
developments, providing educational and advisory services to unions, and
presenting in national debate the trade union viewpoint on economic, social
and industrial issues. The TUG organises extensive education services
relating to many aspects of trade unionism and other subjects, such as health
and safety. In recent years several unions have extended considerably their
range of services, particularly financial services. In 1988 the TUG agreed on
the establishment of a major initial package of member services available to
all its constituent unions. 4 he decision on whether to provide a particular
service rests with individual unions.
EMPLOYMENT
387
Scotland and
Northern Ireland
Legal
Framework
Legal Immunities
Closed Shop
I he TUG plays an active part in international trade union activity,
through its affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions and the European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates
the British workers’ delegation to the annual International Labour Con¬
ference.
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the
Scottish Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in
constitution and function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are
represented by the Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of
Trade Unions (ICT U). Most trade unionists in Northern Ireland are
members of organisations affiliated to the ICTU, while the majority also
belong to unions based in Great Britain which are also affiliated to the TUC.
I he Northern Ireland Committee of the ICTU enjoys a high degree of
autonomy.
Major changes to trade union legislation in Great Britain have been
introduced by the Government through four main Acts—the Employment
Acts 1980 and 1982, the Trade Union Act 1984 and the Employment Act
1988—with the intention of obtaining a better balance between trade unions
and employers with regard to rights and responsibilities within industrial
relations and increasing democracy in trade unions. Similar legislation
applies or is being enacted in Northern Ireland. The Employment Bill, now
before Parliament, provides for the implementation of the Government’s
proposals for further reform of industrial relations on the closed shop (see
below), secondary industrial action and unofficial action.
For most of the twentieth century trade unions, their officials and members
enjoyed immunity from legal action when they organised certain industrial
activity which might otherwise have been actionable by law. However, the
Employment Act 1980 removed civil law immunity from those organising
certain forms of secondary action (such as ‘sympathetic’ strikes) and limited
lawful picketing to peaceful picketing at the picket’s own workplace. The
1982 Act rescinds the trade unions’ almost complete immunity from all civil
actions by bringing their position into line with that of their individual
officials and members. T rade unions now have immunity only for organising
industrial action in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful trade dispute
The Trade Union Act 1984 removed legal immunity from trade unions
which call a strike without first holding a properly conducted secret ballot of
members concerned and securing a majority vote for this action.
I he Employment Bill includes provisions which would remove the
immunity for acts in contemplation or furtherance of trade disputes when
there had been secondary action (the definition of which would be modified
to cover action among those working or performing services under contract)
other than in the course of peaceful picketing. The Bill would also amend
the 1982 Act so that when unions organise industrial action they would
be liable for the actions of all their officials (including workplace
representatives). r
The Employment Act 1988 provided for the removal of the remaining
statutory suppoit lor the closed shop (where there is an agreement between
an employer and one or more unions that union membership is a condition
of employment). I he Act made it unlawful to organise or threaten industrial
action to establish or maintain any sort of closed shop practice. Dismissal of
388
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Elections
Members' Rights
Political Funds
Employers’
Organisations
an employee for non-membership of a union is now unfair in all
circumstances.
However, the Government has been particularly concerned about the
operation of the pre-entry closed shop, where, in order to obtain
employment, an individual must belong to, or be willing to join, a union. It
believes that this can raise labour costs significantly and have adverse effects
on profitability and jobs. About 1-3 million people were estimated to be in
pre-entry closed shops in 1989. Accordingly, the Employment Bill would
make it unlawful to refuse to employ someone on grounds of trade union
membership or non-membership. Anyone refused employment on such
grounds would be able to complain to an industrial tribunal.
Provisions governing trade union elections were included in the Trade
Union Act 1984 and extended from 1989 under the Employment Act 1988.
All trade union general secretaries, presidents and those participating in
decisions taken by principal executive committees (including non-voting
members), subject to certain exemptions, are required to be elected by a
secret ballot of the members at least once every five years. Elections for all
those covered by the statutory election requirement or for political funds
must be conducted by post and ballots must be independently scrutinised.
Trade unions are also required to compile and maintain a register of
members’ names and addresses.
Trade union legislation has also given members various other statutory
rights. For example, under the Employment Act 1988 a union member has
the right to restrain his or her trade union from inducing the member and
others to take any kind of industrial action unless the action is supported by a
properly conducted secret ballot. He or she also has the right not to be
disciplined unjustifiably by the union if, for example, he or she chooses to go
to work or cross a picket line rather than take industrial action. Other rights
include the right of members to inspect their union’s accounting records and
the right for ‘check-off arrangements (the automatic deduction of union
subscriptions) to be stopped if members inform their employer that they are
leaving the union.
To help trade union members in enforcing their statutory rights, the 1988
Act established a Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members.
The Commissioner is empowered to grant assistance to a union member
contemplating or taking court proceedings against his or her union where
such proceedings are necessary to enforce certain statutory rights.
A trade union is legally permitted to engage in party political activity
provided that a majority of its membership has voted in favour in a ballot
and that all such activity is financed by a separate contribution which any
individual member can opt out of paying without prejudicing his or her
ordinary benefits and rights. At the end of 1989, 56 unions maintained a
political fund. The Trade Union Act 1984 requires trade unions with
political funds to ballot their members at regular intervals to decide whether
the funds should be retained.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers organisations, some
of which are wholly concerned with labour matters, although others are also
concerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary aims
of such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of
employment; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient use
of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may arise.
EMPLOYMENT
389
Confederation of
British Industry
Terms and
Conditions of
Employment
Earnings
Combined employers’ organisations and trade associations may also
represent to the Government members’ points of view as manufacturers or
traders on commercial matters.
Employers organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis, lor example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation.
A few are purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry or,
lor example, with small businesses; most are national and are concerned with
the whole of an industry. In some of the main industries there are local or
regional organisations combined into national federations. In others, within
which different firms are engaged in making different principal products,
there is a complex structure with national and regional federations for parts
«f an industry as well as for the industry as a whole. At the end of 1989, 139
listed and 176 unlisted employers’ associations were known to the
(Certification Officer. Those which are national organisations negotiate the
national collective agreements for their industry with the trade unions
concerned; most of these national organisations belong to the Confederation
of British Industry.
I he Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central employers’
organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some 250,000
businesses which together employ about half the working population. It aims
primarily to ensure that Government, national and international institutions
and the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of business.
Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private
sector and nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which includes
manufacturing, agriculture, construction, distribution, mining, finance,
retailing and insurance. Most national employers’ organisations, trade
associations and some chambers of commerce are members. Policy is
determined by a council of 400 members, and there is a permanent staff of
295; there are 13 regional offices and an office in Brussels. The CBI is the
British member of the Union of Industries of the European Community.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates are frequently
determined locally, with less importance attached to national agreements.
Higher rates are usually paid for overtime and shift work, and weekly
earnings may be further increased by incentive bonus schemes or other
performance-related arrangements.
According to the latest available information from the Department of
Employment s New Earnings Survey, the average weekly earnings (including
overtime payments) in April 1989 of full-time employees on adult rates were
£239-70 (£269-50 for men and £182-30 for women). Earnings were higher
for non-manual employees (£264-90) than for manual employees (£203-20).
Some 53 per cent of manual employees and 21 per cent of non-manual
employees received overtime payments. Women’s earnings are markedly
lower than those of men, partly because on average they work shorter hours,
with less overtime paid at premium rates, and partly because they tend to be
concentrated in the less well-paid jobs. In the year to June 1990 the
underlying average increase in earnings was about 10 per cent.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is
normally by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual
increments. Many of the top posts in leading commercial and industrial
companies carry salaries which are performance-related, and the majority
are between £100,000 and £300,000 a year before tax, reflecting increasing
competition for top management. Senior management salaries are generally
390
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employee Share
Schemes
Other Benefits
Hours of Work
Holidays
with Pay
Office of
Manpower
Economics
in the range of £40,000 to £100,000 a year, while middle management
salaries typically fall between £20,000 and £40,000 a year.
There has been a move towards performance-related pay, which has been
encouraged by the Government (see p 385). Since 1987 income tax relief has
been available for employees receiving profit-related pay under schemes
registered by the Inland Revenue. By April 1990, 1,175 schemes had been
registered, covering over 232,000 employees.
The Government has taken a number of steps to encourage direct ownership
by employees of shares in the businesses for which they work. The number
of profit-sharing and savings-related share option schemes, which must be
open to all eligible employees in a company, has risen from 30 in 1979 to
over 1,780 in 1990, benefiting over 2 million employees.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers.
Many employees are also covered by occupational sick-pay schemes which
are additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to
provide private medical treatment. Such benefits are more usual among
clerical and professional employees than among manual workers. The
provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment is usual in large
undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops
which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted
luncheon voucher schemes. Company cars are provided for directors and
employees in a wide variety of circumstances. Other fringe benefits available
include life assurance, telephone allowances and low-interest loans.
The basic working week in Great Britain is in the range 37-5 to 40 hours for
manual work and 35 to 38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually
worked. While the basic working week has been gradually shortening, the
general trend in actual hours worked has been rising since 1981. In April
1989 the average actual hours worked for full-time employees was 42-3 for
men, compared with 37-6 for women. Men and women in non-manual
occupations generally work less overtime than manual employees.
In general, there are no limits on hours worked by adults except in a few
occupations (such as for drivers of goods vehicles and public service
vehicles). Restrictions on working hours for women and for school-leavers
aged under 18 were repealed by the Sex Discrimination Act 1986 and the
Employment Act 1989.
There are no general statutory entitlements to holidays, and holiday
entitlements are frequently determined by collective agreements. These
generally provide for at least four weeks’ paid holiday a year, and nearly all
manual employees covered by national collective agreements have
entitlements of four weeks or more, with nearly 25 per cent having five
weeks or more. Non-manual workers tend to have longer holidays than
manual workers. Holiday entitlements may also be dependent upon length
of service.
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory
organisation responsible for servicing independent review bodies which
advise on the pay of various public-sector groups. These are the Top Salaries
Review Body, the Armed Forces’ Pay Review Body, the Doctors’ and
Dentists’ Review Body, and the Review Body for Nurses and other National
Forestry
Mixed woodland at Glenmore
Forest Park, near Inverness,
Scotland. The Forestry
Commission is encouraging
mixed and broadleaved
planting through its Woodland
Grant scheme.
Millions of trees in Britain were
destroyed in gales in 1987 and
1990. Scientists at Osney
Laboratory at Oxford University
are investigating ways of reducing
the damage by experimenting with
simulated forests in wind tunnels.
Computer Applications
Software developed by the Faculty of
Music at Oxford University with
support from the British Technology
Group enables musicians to use a
standard personal computer to
produce a musical score ready for
printing. As the music is ‘played’ in
on the keyboard, it can be heard and
it also appears on the screen in
notation.
Rolls-Royce pic is using computers
for the initial testing of the Trent,
the world’s most powerful turbofan
engine. The scanning laser Doppler
test shown here enables the engineer
to visualise any vibration in the
turbine blades.
Rheology, the study
of the viscosity of
materials, has
become increasingly
important in many
industries. Carri-med
has developed an
advanced rheometer
that combines a
simple mechanical
drive and highly
sophisticated
microprocessor
techniques.
Computer sculptor
William Latham has
developed a new
form of computer
art. He creates on the
screen three-
dimensional forms
that can be rotated
and viewed from any
point, and lit using
multiple light sources.
Transport
t iflS
The new Class 60 locomotive
has just come into service
with British Rail. Its main
task is to haul heavy freight
trains.
Plessey’s ‘Watchman’ radars have
been installed in the air traffic
control room at Stansted airport,
near London. The Civil Aviation
Authority has embarked on an
ambitious investment programme
to enable London’s airports to
cope with the growth in forecast
demand.
EMPLOYMENT
391
Wages Councils
Employment
Protection
Equal
Opportunities
Health Service professions. The Office also provides services for the
Pharmacists’ Review Panel, the Police Negotiating Board and the Civil
Service Arbitration Tribunal. It is responsible for research into pay and
associated matters as requested by the Government.
Wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for 2-5 million workers aged 21
and over, primarily in service industries such as retailing, catering and
hairdressing. There are 26 councils in Great Britain, each consisting of equal
numbers of representatives of employers and employees in the relevant
industry and up to five independent members. The Wages Act 1986
empowers each council to fix a minimum hourly rate, an overtime rate and a
limit on the amount an employer can charge for accommodation provided.
However, the Government has doubts on whether a statutory system is
relevant for pay determination in the 1990s, and following a consultation
exercise it announced in March 1990 that it would keep the system under
review.
In Northern Ireland nine wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for
some 36,000 workers.
Employment protection legislation provides a number of safeguards for
employees. For example, most employees are entitled to receive from their
employers written information on their terms and conditions of
employment, while minimum periods of notice when employment is to be
terminated are laid down for both employers and employees. Employees
with a minimum period of service of two years are entitled to lump-sum
redundancy payments if their jobs cease to exist (for example, because of
technological improvements or a fall in demand) and their employers cannot
offer suitable alternative work. The cost is partly met from a fund subscribed
to by both sides of industry. Protection against unfair dismissal is provided by
machinery under which an employee who has been in continuous
employment, normally for two years or more, may complain to an industrial
tribunal against an employer for unfair dismissal, and, if successful, obtain
reinstatement, re-engagement or compensation. Most employed women
who become pregnant and have completed two years continuous
employment have the right to return to their former job, or its equivalent,
after maternity absence. Legislation forbids any employment of children
under 13 years of age, and employment in any industrial undertaking of
children who have not reached the statutory minimum school-leaving age,
with some exceptions for family undertakings.
The Government is keeping under review the legislation affecting terms
and conditions of employment. Its aim is to ensure that the obligations
placed on employers do not involve significant costs which discourage
recruitment. The Employment Act 1989 contained a number of provisions
designed to reduce burdens on employers. For example, employers with
fewer than 20 employees have become exempt from the requirement to
provide employees with a separate note of disciplinary rules in the written
statement of their main terms and conditions of employment.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it unlawful to discriminate on grounds
of colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national
origin, in employment, training and related matters. The Department of
Employment operates a nationwide Race Relations Employment Advisory
Service which operates from five main areas of ethnic minority settlement.
Its objective is to promote the Government’s policies aimed at eliminating
racial discrimination in employment and promoting fair treatment and
392
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland
Advisory,
Conciliation
and Arbitration
Service
equality of opportunity in employment. Advisers provide employers with
advice and practical help in developing and implementing effective equal
opportunity strategies, including awareness training for senior managers
and personnel staff, and the introduction of ethnic monitoring.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes it unlawful to discriminate in
employment, training and related matters in Great Britain on the grounds of
sex or against married people. The employment provisions were amended
by the Sex Discrimination Act 1986 to bring legislation into line with a
European Community directive on equal treatment. In addition, the
Employment Act 1989 contains provisions to promote equality of
opportunity in employment and vocational training, and to meet European
Community obligations by repealing most legislation that discriminated in
employment between women and men. The Equal Pay Act 1970, as
amended in 1984, requires that a woman doing the same or broadly similar
work to a man, or work which has an equal value, should receive equal pay
and conditions of employment.
Practical advice to employers and others on the best arrangements for
implementing equal opportunities policies in Great Britain is given in codes
of practice from the Commission for Racial Equality and from the Equal
Opportunities Commission.
Similar legislation to that in Great Britain on equal pay and sex
discrimination applies in Northern Ireland, but there is no legislation on
race relations. The Fair Employment (Northern Ireland) Act 1989 is
designed to strengthen an earlier Act of 1976 which made unlawful
discrimination in employment on grounds of religious belief or political
opinion. Under the Act two new bodies have been established. A Fair
Employment Commission has succeeded the Fair Employment Agency and
has the task of promoting equality of opportunity and investigating
employment practices, with powers to issue legally enforceable directions. A
Fair Employment Tribunal adjudicates on individual complaints of religious
or political discrimination and enforces the Commission’s directions. The
Act also requires all major employers to provide equality of opportunity by
annual monitoring of workforces and periodic reviewing of employment
practices to see if ‘affirmative action’ is required to rectify under¬
representation of either the Protestant or Roman Catholic community.
Indirect discrimination has also been made illegal.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) is an in¬
dependent statutory body with the general duty of promoting the
improvement of industrial relations. ACAS is directed by a council consisting
of a full-time chairman and employer, trade union and independent
members experienced in industrial relations. The Service conciliates in
industrial disputes in both the public and private sectors. ACAS assistance
was sought in nearly 1,200 disputes in 1989. In addition, there were 167
further requests for ACAS to provide arbitration. It may do this either by
appointing single arbitrators or boards of arbitration or by referring cases to
the Central Arbitration Committee (see below). Although ACAS has prime
responsibility for helping to resolve disputes, and has also set up major
committees of inquiry, the Secretary of State for Employment retains powers
to appoint a court of inquiry or committee of investigation into a dispute.
However, these are rarely used.
ACAS gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and employment
policies to employers, managers, trade unions, employee representatives and
individuals. It handled nearly 350,000 inquiries in 1989. Specialist staff
EMPLOYMENT
393
Central
Arbitration
Committee
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
made nearly 7,300 advisory visits. ACAS also carries particular responsibility
for attempting conciliation on complaints of infringement of individual
employee rights. These include individual complaints of unfair dismissal;
complaints under the Equal Pay Act 1970, including claims for equal pay for
work of equal value; and complaints on employment matters under the Sex
Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986 and the Race Relations Act 1976. There
were over 48,800 individual conciliation cases in 1989. Its Work Research
Unit aims to encourage industry and commerce to adopt measures that can
lead to improvements in the quality of working life and so to improvements
in economic performance.
In Northern Ireland the Labour Relations Agency, an independent
statutory body, provides services similar to those provided by ACAS in Great
Britain.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent standing arbitration
body. It provides boards of arbitration for the settlement of trade disputes
referred to it with the consent of the parties concerned. It also adjudicates on
claims made under the disclosure of information provisions of the
Employment Protection Act 1975.
Employers have a duty in civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of
their employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a
safe system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each
other and also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health,
safety and welfare of people at work and to provide for the protection of the
public whose health and safety might be affected by work activities. The Act
places general duties on everyone concerned with work activities, including
employers, the self-employed, employees, manufacturers and suppliers.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation and
regulations. Earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on,
for example, occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged
in particular activities. It covers such matters as the fencing of machinery,
precautions against the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases,
precautions against fire, the safe condition of premises, and cleanliness,
lighting, temperature and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act,
but the remainder continues in force pending its progressive replacement by
regulations and codes of practice. Regulations made under the Act govern
the establishment of first-aid facilities, the control of work with lead and the
control of major accident hazards in industry. Each set of regulations is
supported by either an approved code of practice or other guidance
material. Further steps were taken in 1989 with the introduction of
regulations which provide a comprehensive approach to the control of
exposure to virtually all substances hazardous to health in all types of work
and workplace. I hey represent the most significant change in health and
safety legislation since the 1974 Act. In 1990 regulations on electricity at
work, pressure systems and noise at work came into force. The last
implemented a European Community directive. Consideration is being
given to the implementation of other health and safety directives by 1992.
A basic principle underlying the 1974 Act is that employers, in con¬
sultation with their employees, should have the responsibility of working out
health and safety arrangements, within the broad obligations of the law, to
suit their own workplaces. Employers with five or more employees must
draw up a written policy for safety and health, and must inform their
The Health
and Safety
Commission
The Health
and Safety
Executive
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
employees of the policy and of the arrangements for its implementation. In
workplaces where negotiations take place with a trade union, the union may
appoint safety representatives to be the employees’ official channel for
representation and consultation over safety matters.
Recent statistics indicate a reduction in the rate of major and other
reported injuries to employees, although a high rate of injuries remains in
certain industries, such as construction.
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the 1974 Act and
accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for Employment,
has responsibility for developing policies, including guidance, codes of
practice, or proposals for regulations. In the case of proposals for changes in
legislation, the Commission consults those who would be affected and makes
recommendations to the Secretary of State concerned. The Commission has
an independent chairman, three members appointed after consultation with
employers’ organisations, three after consultation with the trade unions, two
after consultation with local authority associations and one representing the
public interest.
The Health and Safety Commission has seven subject advisory
committees: on toxic substances, dangerous substances, dangerous patho¬
gens, genetic manipulation, the safety of nuclear installations, the safe
transport of radioactive materials and medical matters. There are also 11
industry advisory committees: for agriculture, ceramics, construction,
education, foundries, health services, oil, paper and board, printing, railways
and rubber.
The 1974 Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities, including the
Factory Inspectorate, which also deals with a large number of activities
outside factories, such as hospitals and educational establishments. There
are also inspectorates for mines, agriculture, quarries, nuclear installations
and explosives. The Executive also includes the Health Policy Division, the
Technology Division and the Research and Laboratory Services Division.
The inspectors, who have powers of entry and enforcement, seek
compliance with health and safety legislation in individual workplaces and
give advice. The Employment Medical Advisory Service provides a
nationwide service of advice on the medical aspects of employment problems
to employers, employees, trade unions, doctors and others.
I he Technology Division provides technical advice on industrial health
and safety matters. The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides
scientific and medical support and testing services. It carries out research
both in its own laboratories and through universities and other institutions
on a contract basis, often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include
explosion risks, fires, protective equipment, methods for monitoring
airborne contaminants, occupational medicine and hygiene, and the safety
of engineering systems.
In some premises, mostly offices, shops, warehouses, restaurants and
hotels, health and safety legislation is enforced by inspectors appointed by
local authorities, working under guidance from the Health and Safety
Commission. Some other official bodies work under agency agreement with
the Commission, for example, the Department of Energy (concerned with
health and safety in the oil industry) and the Railway Inspectorate. The
latter, which is concerned with worker safety on the railways, will be
transferred from the Department of Transport to the Health and Safety
Executive in late 1990.
EMPLOYMENT
395
Northern
Ireland
In Northern Ireland the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding
to the Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical
Advisory Service were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order
1978. The general requirements of the Northern Ireland health and safety
legislation are broadly similar to those for Great Britain. They are enforced
mainly by the Department of Economic Development through its Health
and Safety Inspectorate.
19 Public Finance
Public finance is concerned with taxation, expenditure and borrowing (or
debt repayment) by central and local government, management of the public
sector’s assets and liabilities and the financing of public corporations. Central
government raises money from individuals and companies by direct and
indirect taxation and from National Insurance contributions. It spends
money on goods and services, such as health and defence, and in payments
to people, such as social security and pensions. Local government receives
substantial grants from central government and raises revenue mainly
through the community charge and rates (local property taxes, which may be
levied on domestic and business properties). Domestic rates were abolished
in 1989 in Scotland and in 1990 in England and Wales and replaced by the
community charge (see pp 406-7); they continue in Northern Ireland.
Business rates apply throughout Britain. Local government provides services
such as education, police and fire services, and refuse collection. The
diagram (see p 404) shows the relative importance of the various items of
receipts (including borrowing) and expenditure for general government.
The government department responsible for broad control of public
finance and expenditure is HM Treasury. The Bank of England (the central
bank) advises the Government on financial matters, executes monetary
policy and acts as banker to the Government.
PUBLIC The three main definitions of public expenditure are general government
EXPENDITURE expenditure, the planning total and Supply expenditure.
General government expenditure is the spending of central and local
government, excluding transfers between them such as central government
grants to local authorities. It is the key public spending aggregate and is used
in the medium-term financial strategy (see below), where public spending is
set in the context of macroeconomic policy. It is more appropriate than the
other measures for making international comparisons as it is usually less
affected by institutional differences.
The planning total is used by the Government for the purposes of
planning and control. The Government seeks to achieve its wider medium-
term objective (expressed in terms of general government expenditure) by
controlling spending within this total. The planning total covers central
government’s own expenditure, the support it provides or approves for local
authority expenditure, the financing requirements of public corporations
(including nationalised industries), privatisation proceeds and a reserve to
cover unanticipated expenditure.
Supply expenditure is financed out of money voted by Parliament in the
Supply Estimates (see below). Supply expenditure—practically all of which
appears in the planning total—covers most of central government’s own
spending (the main exception being expenditure financed from the National
Insurance Fund) and central government support for local authority
expenditure.
398
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Planning
Cycle
The background to the present Government’s planning of public
expenditure is the medium-term financial strategy, introduced in 1980. The
Government’s aim is to preserve a firm financial framework in order to
maintain downward pressure on inflation with the ultimate goal of price
stability, and to ensure the continuation of the conditions for sustainable
growth. With commitments also to reduce taxation and curb the role of the
State, the Government therefore sought to reduce public expenditure as a
proportion of national output as well. By 1990 non-North Sea taxes,
National Insurance contributions and the community charge amounted to
around 37 per cent of non-North Sea gross domestic product. General
government expenditure (excluding privatisation proceeds) as a proportion
of gross domestic product fell from over 46 per cent in the early 1980s to 39
per cent by 1989—90, and the Government expects this level to continue for
the following three years.
Table 19.1 gives projections for government expenditure and receipts and
public sector debt repayment for the years up to 1993—94.
Table 19.1: Projected Public Expenditure, Receipts and Debt Repayment
£ thousand million
1990-91 1991-92 1992-93 1993-94
General government expenditure 213 225 238 250
of which: public expenditure
planning total 179 192 203 215
General government receipts 219 229 240 253
of which: taxes 170 177 186 196
National Insurance
and other contributions 36 38 40 43
Fiscal adjustments3 — 12 3
Market and overseas debt repayment
of public corporations 10 0 0
Public sector debt repayment (PSDR)
PSDR as percentage of
gross domestic product
1-25
0-5
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1990-91.
“These imply lower taxes or higher expenditure than assumed in the figures for general government expenditure and
receipts.
Each year the Government conducts a review of its expenditure plans for the
forthcoming three years (the ‘public expenditure survey’) and publishes the
resulting totals, together with any changes in National Insurance, in the
Autumn Statement in November. Details of these plans are published early
in the following year. In the years up to 1990 this detailed information was
presented in the annual public expenditure White Paper. From 1991 it will
be given in a series of departmental reports. The detailed summary analyses
which were given in the White Paper will be published in a supplement to
the Autumn Statement.
The Government’s updating of the medium-term financial strategy and
consequent plans for the public finances over the following year, including
PUBLIC FINANCE
399
Public
Expenditure
Totals
Reserve
any tax changes, are set out in the Financial Statement and Budget Report,
published with the Budget around the end of the Financial year (31 March).
Details of the tax changes are included in the Finance Bill, which is presented
to Parliament shortly after the Budget and becomes law during the summer.
Public expenditure totals are analysed in Table 19.2. The largest
departmental programmes are those of the Department of Social Security
(38 per cent of central government’s own expenditure), the Department of
Health and the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (16 per cent) and
the Ministry of Defence (15 per cent).
About half of local authority spending is financed by grants from central
government. The rest is met from the community charge and rates,
surpluses on trading, rents and borrowing. Education accounts for over one-
third of local authority spending; law and order, housing and other
environmental services, personal social services and transport account for
most of the remainder.
Table 19.2: Planned Public Expenditure Totals
£ thousand million
1990-91 1991-92 1992-93
Central government’s
own expenditure
Central government support for
local authorities
Financing requirements for
public corporations
Privatisation proceeds
Reserve
137-8
41-8
1-4
-5-8
30
145-3
43-7
2-3
-5-0
6-0
152-3
44-8
2-3
-5-0
9-0
Planning total
179-0
192-3
203-4
Local authority self-financed
expenditure
Central government debt interest
Other adjustments
13-3
17-0
3-4
14- 0
15- 5
3-5
15-0
15-0
4-5
General government expenditure
212-7
225-0
238-0
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1990-91.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve for each year of the
plans to cover all additions to departmental spending, whether arising from
policy changes, new initiatives or revisions to the estimated costs of demand-
led programmes. For the current year the reserve is used as a control
mechanism. The reserve has been set at higher levels for each of the next two
years but some will normally be allocated to departments as spending
forecasts are made firmer within the public expenditure planning total. The
balance will be retained for contingencies which might arise during the
current year.
400
Cash Limits
The Estimates
Examination
and Audit of
Public
Expenditure
Comptroller and
Auditor General
Public Accounts
Committee
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Some 40 per cent of general government expenditure is subject to control by
cash limits (external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries).
Another 40 per cent consists of demand-led services (for example, social
security benefits); once policy and rates of payment have been determined,
expenditure in the short run depends on the number of eligible recipients.
The remaining 20 per cent is current expenditure of local authorities, which
central government does not directly control; however, the major part of the
contribution by central government to such expenditure, rate support or
revenue support grant, is subject to cash limits.
Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised during the year. There is,
however, a limited facility for carrying forward underspending on the capital
and running costs components of cash limits. If any overspending of cash
limits occurs, a corresponding deduction is normally made from the limits
for the following year.
The annual public expenditure survey conducted by HM Treasury provides
the basis for the Estimates which each government department submits to
HM Treasury in December, giving details of its cash requirements for the
financial year beginning in the following April. After Treasury approval,
these Supply Estimates are presented to Parliament in March, usually at the
same time as the Budget (see p 401). Parliament approves them in July as
part of the Annual Appropriation Act, expenditure between 1 April and this
date being covered by Votes on Account approved before the start of the
financial year.
Supplementary Estimates may also be presented to Parliament during the
course of the year. If any Supply Estimate is overspent, the Public Accounts
Committee (see below) may investigate fully before Parliament is asked to
approve any Excess Vote to balance the account. In each parliamentary
session, up to three ‘Estimates days’ are available for debates on the Supply
Estimates, following scrutiny by select committees of the House of
Commons.
Examination of public expenditure is carried out by select committees of the
House of Commons, which study in detail the activities of particular
government departments and require the attendance of ministers and
officials for cross-examination. The audit of the Government’s spending
which follows up the control inherent in parliamentary approval of the
Estimates is exercised through the functions of the Comptroller and Auditor
General and the Public Accounts Committee.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, an officer of the House of Commons
appointed by the Crown, has two distinct functions. The duty of Comptroller
General is to ensure that all revenue and other public money payable to the
Consolidated Fund and the National Loans Fund (see p 401) is duly paid and
that all payments out of these funds are authorised by statute. The duty of
Auditor General is to certify the accounts of all government departments
and those of a wide range of other public sector bodies; to examine revenue
accounts and inventories; and to report the results of his examinations to
Parliament. The Comptroller and Auditor General also has wide statutory
powers to carry out, and report to Parliament on, examinations of economy,
efficiency and effectiveness in the use of resources by those bodies audited or
to which the Comptroller and Auditor General has right of access.
The Public Accounts Committee considers the accounts of government
departments and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s reports on them
PUBLIC FINANCE
401
Central
Government
Financial Funds
THE BUDGET
MAIN SOURCES
OF REVENUE
and on departments’ use of their resources. The Committee takes evidence
from the official heads of departments and relevant public sector bodies and
submits to Parliament reports which carry considerable weight; its re¬
commendations are taken very seriously by the departments and organ¬
isations that it examines. The Government’s formal reply to the reports
is presented to Parliament by HM Treasury in the form of Treasury minutes,
and the reports and minutes are usually debated annually in the Commons.
The Government’s sterling expenditure is largely met out of the
Consolidated Fund, an account at the Bank of England into which tax
receipts and other revenues are paid. This is also known as the Exchequer.
Any excess of expenditure over receipts is met by the National Loans Fund,
which is another official sterling account at the Bank of England and is the
repository for funds borrowed by the Government. The National Insurance
Fund, into which contributions are paid by employers and employed people,
is used mainly to pay for social security benefits; a small proportion of
National Insurance contributions is paid direct to the Consolidated Fund in
order to help finance the National Health Service.
The Budget, which usually takes place in March, sets out the Government’s
proposals for changes in taxation and is the main occasion for an annual
review of economic policy. The proposals are announced to the House of
Commons by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Budget statement and
are published in the Financial Statement and Budget Report. This report
also contains a review of recent developments in the economy, together with
an economic forecast, and sets out the fiscal and monetary framework within
which economic policy operates. This is the medium-term financial strategy
(see p 398).
The Budget statement is followed by the moving of a set of Budget
resolutions in which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions are the
foundation of the Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed
consideration by Parliament. Some of the resolutions give temporary effect,
under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968, to certain of the tax
proposals in the Budget. This enables the Government to collect certain
taxes provisionally, at the levels provided by the Budget proposals, pending
enactment of the Finance Bill.
The bulk of the tax proposals are concerned with changes in the level or
coverage of taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the abolition of existing
ones, and changes in the administrative machinery. These changes are made
not only with regard to the revenue required but also with regard to their
effect on the way the economy performs.
For two taxes—income tax and corporation tax—annual Ways and Means
resolutions followed by Finance Bill clauses are required to maintain their
existence, since they are annual rather than permanent taxes. Thus, a
Budget and a Finance Bill are necessary at or about the beginning of each
financial year. Following completion of its parliamentary stages, the Finance
Bill becomes an Act, usually around the end of July. Tax changes can be
made at other times, however, either by specific legislation or by the use of
the regulator, which permits limited changes between Budgets in value
added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and the main excise duties (by up to 10 per
cent).
The main sources of revenue are: taxes on income (including profits), which
include personal income tax, corporation tax and petroleum revenue tax;
taxes on capital, which comprise inheritance tax and capital gains tax; and
402
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
taxes on expenditure, which include value added tax (VAT) and customs
and excise duties. Other sources of revenue are National Insurance
contributions, which give entitlement to a range of benefits, and the
community charge and business rates.
Taxes on individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a
proportionately greater amount of tax. Thresholds and rate bands for
income tax, inheritance tax and capital gains tax are raised automatically
each year in line with the rise in retail prices over the previous calendar year
unless Parliament decides otherwise. The Inland Revenue assesses and
collects the taxes on income, profits and capital and also stamp duty. HM
Customs and Excise collects the most important taxes on expenditure (VAT,
most duties and car tax). Vehicle excise duty is the responsibility of the
Department of Transport and National Insurance contributions that of the
Department of Social Security (although the latter are generally collected by
the Inland Revenue). The community charge and business rates are
collected by local authorities.
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. For
1990-91 the basic rate of 25 per cent applies to the first £20,700 of taxable
income. A rate of 40 per cent applies to income above this level. These rates
apply to total income, including both earned and investment income.
A number of personal allowances and reliefs reduce the amount of a
person’s taxable income compared with gross income. Since April 1990 there
has been a system of independent taxation for husbands and wives. All
taxpayers, irrespective of sex or marital status, are entitled to a personal
allowance against income from all sources. Married women pay their own tax
on the basis of their own income. In addition, there is a married couple’s
allowance, which goes to the husband in the first instance. However, if his
income is not high enough to use it in full, he can transfer the unused
portion to his wife, to set against her income. The current values of the main
allowances are £3,005 for the personal allowance and £1,720 for the married
couple’s allowance.
Assuming only the basic personal allowances, a single person or married
woman with an income of £12,000 in 1990-91 pays £2,249 in income tax,
while a married man with the same income pays £1,819. The amount of tax
payable by a single person or married woman varies from, for example, £999
on an annual income of £7,000 to £23,693 on one of £70,000. Among the
most important of the reliefs is that for mortgage interest payments on
borrowing for house purchase up to the statutory limit of £30,000. Relief at
the basic rate is usually given ‘at source’ (that is, repayments which the
borrower makes to the lender are reduced to take account of tax at the basic
rate and the tax refund is then passed directly by the tax authorities to the
building society or bank making the loan rather than to the individual
taxpayer). Another relief is that under the Business Expansion Scheme,
whereby certain investors in trading companies without a stock market
quotation (usually small companies) are able to obtain relief on up to
£40,000 invested in any one year.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay-As-You-
Earn (PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the
Inland Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling employees to keep as up to
date as possible with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain
(although some forms of income—such as certain social security ben¬
efits—are exempt) and on all income arising abroad of people resident in
Britain. Interest on certain British government securities belonging to
PUBLIC FINANCE
403
Corporation Tax
Petroleum
Revenue Tax
Taxes on
Capital
Inheritance Tax
Capital Gains Tax
people not ordinarily resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into
agreements with many countries to provide relief from double taxation;
where such agreements are not in force unilateral relief is often allowed.
British residents working abroad for the whole year benefit from 100 per
cent tax relief.
The rates of company tax in Britain are lower than in most other in¬
dustrialised countries. Companies pay corporation tax on their income after
deduction of certain allowances and any capital gains. A company which
distributes profits to its shareholders is required to make an advance
payment of corporation tax to the Inland Revenue. In general, this payment
is set against a company’s liability to corporation tax on its income and capital
gains. The recipient of the distribution (if resident in Britain) is entitled to a
tax credit, which satisfies his or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The main rate of corporation tax is 35 per cent, with a reduced rate of 25
per cent for small companies (those with profits below £200,000 in a year).
Marginal relief between the main rate and the small companies’ rate is
allowed for companies with profits between £200,000 and £1 million.
Expenditure on plant and machinery qualifies for annual allowances of 25
per cent. These are given on a ‘reducing balance’ basis, which is to say that 25
per cent of the total cost may be offset in the first year, 25 per cent of the
remaining 75 per cent in the second year and so on. Special arrangements
exist for plant and machinery treated as a short-life asset. There is a 100 per
cent allowance for expenditure on scientific research. Annual allowances are
given for capital expenditure on the construction of industrial and certain
other buildings based on a 25-year life (that is, 4 per cent of the cost per year
for 25 years). If taxable profits are insufficient to absorb the available
allowances, the excess can be carried forward and set against future profits
for an indefinite period.
Petroleum revenue tax (deductible in computing profits for corporation tax)
is charged on profits from the production, as opposed to the refining or
other forms of processing, of oil and gas under licence in Britain and on its
Continental Shelf. The rate of tax is 75 per cent. Each licensee of an oilfield
is charged on the profits from that field after deduction of certain allowances
and reliefs which, among other things, encourage exploration, appraisal and
future field development. The tax is computed at half-yearly intervals and
the bulk of it is collected in monthly instalments.
Inheritance tax applies to transfers of personal wealth made on, or up to
seven years before, the donor’s death. Subject to certain exemptions and
reliefs, the first £128,000 of the cumulative total of chargeable transfers is
not liable to tax; higher amounts are taxed at a single rate of 40 per cent. A
tapered system of relief reduces the tax on transfers made between three and
seven years before the donor’s death. Relief ranges from 20 per cent of the
tax payable on transfers made between three and four years prior to death to
80 per cent on those made between six and seven years prior to death.
There are several exemptions. All transfers to a spouse living in Britain are
exempt while gifts and bequests to charities, political parties and heritage
bodies are also normally exempt. Business property qualifies for relief of up
to 50 per cent.
Capital gains realised on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax
or, in the case of companies, to corporation tax. Individuals are exempt from
tax in respect of total net gains of up to £5,000 in any one year and most
Planned Receipts and Expenditure
of General Government 1990-91
Pence in every pound
Receipts
Expenditure
Income tax
Corporation tax
Capital gains tax 1
Inheritance tax 1
Value added tax
Community charge and
local authority rates
Duties on petrol, alcoholic
drinks and tobacco
Petroleum revenue tax
and oil royalties
1
National insurance and
other contributions
Interest and dividends
Gross trading surpluses
and rent
1
Other duties, taxes,
levies and royalties
Other receipts
1
General government
borrowing requirement
1
—rrT-"g^
^Orn in
Defence
Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
Trade and Industry
Employment
Transport
Environment - housing
Environment - other
environmental services
Environment -
local government
Home Office and
legal departments
Education and Science
Health
Social Security
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Chancellor of the
Exchequer’s departments
Other departments
Local authority
self-financed
expenditure
Reserve
Central government
debt interest
Accounting adjustments
Privatisation proceeds
Total 100 100 Total
Cash totals £212,700 million
Sources: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1990-91 and The Government’s Expenditure Plans
1990-91 to 1992-93.
Note: Differences between totals and the sum of their component parts are due to rounding.
PUBLIC FINANCE
405
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added Tax
Customs Duties
Excise Duties
trusts on gains of up to £2,500. Gains are treated as the taxpayer’s top slice of
income, being charged at the individual’s higher income tax rate or the
company’s higher corporation tax rate.
Only gains arising since March 1982 are subject to tax and the effects of
inflation are allowed for when measuring gains. The tax on certain types of
gift and certain deemed disposals of assets may be deferred until the assets
are sold. Some assets, including the principal private residence, movable
possessions worth less than £6,000 (and any movable possessions with a
predictable life of less than 50 years except those on which the expenditure
qualifies for a capital allowance), private motor cars, and National Savings
Certificates and Bonds are normally exempt. Gains on government securities
and certain corporate bonds are exempt from the tax, as are gains on shares
owned under the Personal Equity Plan (designed to encourage wider share
ownership).
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly based tax, chargeable at 15 per cent. It is
collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and
services by taxable persons (generally those whose business has a turnover of
more than £25,400 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. When a
taxable person purchases taxable goods or services, the supplier charges
VAT (the taxable person’s input tax). When the taxable person supplies
taxable goods or services to customers, then they in turn are charged VAT
(the taxable person’s output tax). The difference between the output tax and
the input tax is paid to, or repaid by, HM Customs and Excise.
Certain goods and services are relieved from VAT, either by charging at a
zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax to a customer but reclaims
any input tax paid to suppliers) or by exemption (a taxable person does not
charge a customer any output tax and is not entitled to deduct or reclaim the
input tax). Zero-rating applies to exports and to most food; books,
newspapers and periodicals; fuel (except for petrol and other fuels for road
use) and power for domestic users; construction of new residential buildings;
certain international services; public transport fares; caravans and
houseboats; young children’s clothing and footwear; drugs and medicines
supplied on prescription; specified aids for handicapped people; and certain
supplies by or to charities. Exemption applies to land (including rents),
insurance, postal services, betting, gaming (other than by gaming machines
and lotteries), finance, education, health, burial and cremation, and supplies
by trade unions and professional bodies to their members.
Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs
Tariff of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods
which qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export
procedures are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy and
Community levies are chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products
from non-Community countries. Under the single European market
programme, all remaining barriers to the free movement within the
European Community of goods, services, capital and people will be
abolished by the end of 1992.
Hydrocarbon oils used as road fuel bear higher rates of duty than those used
for other purposes. Kerosene, most lubricating oils and other oils used for
certain industrial processes are free of duty. There are duties on spirits, beer,
wine, made-wine, cider and perry, based on alcoholic strength and volume.
Spirits used for scientific, medical, research and industrial processes are
generally free of duty. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge per
406
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
OTHER
REVENUE
National
Insurance
Contributions
The Community
Charge and
National Non¬
domestic Rate
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1,000 cigarettes and partly on a percentage of retail price. Duty on other
tobacco products is based on weight. Duties are charged on off-course
betting, pool betting, gaming in casinos, bingo and gaming machines. The
rates vary with the particular form of gambling. Duty is charged either as a
percentage of gross or net stakes or, in the case of gaming machines, as a
fixed amount per machine according to the cost of playing it and its prize
level.
Vehicle excise duty on a private motor car or light van is £100 a year; for
motor cycles it is £10, £20 or £40 a year according to engine capacity. The
duty on goods vehicles is levied on the basis of gross weight and, if over 12
tonnes, according to the number of axles; the duty is designed to ensure that
such vehicles cover at least their road costs through the tax paid (licence duty
and fuel duty). The duty on taxis and buses varies according to seating
capacity.
Cars, motor cycles, scooters, mopeds and some motor caravans, whether
British made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent of the
wholesale value (motor caravans are charged at 10 per cent of 60 per cent of
the wholesale value). VAT is charged on the price including car tax.
Certain kinds of transfer are subject to stamp duty. These include purchases
of houses (1 per cent on the total price if this exceeds £30,000) and
instruments such as declarations of trust (usually 50p). Stamp duty is also
charged on transfers of stocks and shares other than government stocks
(broadly 0-5 per cent of the value of the transaction). However, the
Government announced in 1990 that this would be abolished in late
1991—92. Transfers by gift and transfers to charities are exempt.
There are four classes of National Insurance contribution: Class 1—paid by
employees and their employers; Class 2—paid by the self-employed; Class
3—paid voluntarily for pension purposes; and Class 4—paid by the self-
employed on their taxable profits over a set lower limit, currently £5,450 a
year, and up to a set upper limit, currently £18,200 a year (in addition to
their Class 2 contribution).
Employees with earnings no higher than £46 a week do not pay Class 1
contributions. Contributions on earnings above this threshold are at the rate
of 2 per cent of the first £46 of total earnings and 9 per cent of the balance,
up to the upper earnings limit of £350 a week. Employers’ contributions are
subject to the same threshold. On earnings above the threshold,
contributions rise in stages from 5 per cent of total earnings up to a
maximum of 10-45 per cent when earnings are £175 or more a week; there is
no upper earnings limit.
Class 2 and Class 3 contributions are at a flat rate—£4-55 and £4-45 a week
respectively. The self-employed may claim exemption from payment of
Class 2 contributions if their profits are expected to be below £2,600 for the
1990—91 tax year.
Class 4 contributions are payable at the rate of 6-3 per cent.
The system of local authority finance in Great Britain (but not Northern
Ireland) has been reformed. The new system was introduced in Scotland in
April 1989 and in England and Wales in April 1990. It aims to increase the
responsiveness and accountability of councils to their electorates, replacing
domestic rates with a community charge, reforming the system of central
government grants to local authorities and (in England and Wales) es¬
tablishing a national non-domestic rate. The community charge is set at a
PUBLIC FINANCE
407
FINANCIAL
CONTROL
Net Public
Sector Debt
level reflecting spending decisions reached by a council, for which it has to
account to its electors. It is payable by almost all resident adults. The national
non-domestic rate is set by central government (although collected by local
authorities). It is paid into a national pool and then redistributed to local
authorities.
Control of the public sector finances is a central part of the Government’s
medium-term financial strategy. Since 1987-88 the public sector has been in
surplus, so that the Government has repaid debt. In 1989-90 the public
sector debt repayment (PSDR) amounted to some £8,000 million, equal to
around 1-5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). Even without
privatisation proceeds these amounts represent substantial surpluses. The
intention is for a return to balance by 1992-93. The Government sees
balanced public finances as a firm buttress for monetary policy in the defeat
of inflation. They also ensure that public debt and debt interest fall steadily
in relation to GDP. 7
The major government debt instrument is known as gilt-edged stock as
there is no risk of default. Gilt-edged stock is marketable and is widely
traded. Individuals may also make transactions through post offices in stocks
included on the National Savings Stock Register. Pension funds and life
insurance companies have the largest holdings. The Bank of England on
behalf of the Government issues both conventional and indexed stock (on
which principal and interest are linked to the movement in the retail prices
index). r
With there being a sizeable PSDR, the Bank has in recent years been
purchasing gilt-edged stock rather than making new issues. One method of
doing so is by reverse auctions. The first reverse auction was held in 1989.
An important additional source of government finance is the range of
National Savings products, which are non-marketable and are designed to
attract personal savings. The chief products are Income Bonds, National
avings Certificates (which may be index-linked), the Investment Account
and Capital Bonds.
Other central government debt instruments are Treasury bills and
certificates of tax deposit. Sterling Treasury bills are sold at a weekly tender;
the majority have a maturity of three months. The Government has also
issued bills denominated and payable in European Currency Units (ECUs)
since 1988. The proceeds have been added to the official foreign exchange
reserves as opposed to being used to finance public expenditure. Certificates
of tax deposit may be purchased by individuals or corporate bodies to be
tendered in settlement of a range of taxes and are non-marketable.
The bulk of public corporations’ borrowing is met by central government
although their temporary borrowing needs are met largely from the market’
usually under Treasury guarantee. That part of local authority borrowing
met by central government is supplied by authorisation of Parliament
through the Public Works Loan Board from the National Loans Fund. (The
Board remains an independent body even though it is merged for
administrative purposes with the former National Debt Office, forming the
National Investment and Loans Office.) The local authorities may also
borrow directly from the market, both short-term and long-term, through a
range of instruments. Some public corporations and local authorities also
borrow on occasion, under special statutory power and with Treasury
consent, in foreign currencies. 7
Public sector debt repayment (or borrowing) each year represents a
subtraction from (or an addition to) the net debt of the public sector. This
408
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
debt is the consolidated debt of the public sector less its holdings of liquid
assets. At the end of March 1989 consolidated debt amounted to nearly
£201,000 million. Central government accounted for nearly 95 per cent,
local authorities for almost 4 per cent and public corporations for 2 per cent.
With consolidated liquid assets amounting to £42,000 million, net public
sector debt was £158,000 million. Central government accounted for 74 per
cent of consolidated liquid assets, local authorities for 20 per cent and public
corporations for 6 per cent.
20 Banking and
Financial Institutions
Development
of Financial
Services
Supervision
Britain is a major financial centre providing a wide range of specialised
services. Historically the industry was located in the famous ‘Square Mile’ in
the City of London. This remains broadly the case, even though the markets
for financial and related services have grown and diversified greatly. ‘The
City’ refers to a collection of markets and institutions in and around the
Square Mile. This area has the greatest concentration of banks in the world
(responsible for about a fifth of total international bank lending), the world’s
biggest insurance industry (with about one-fifth of the international market)
and one of the world’s largest stock exchanges. It is also the principal
international centre for transactions in a large number of commodities.
Banking, finance, insurance, business services and leasing accounted for
14 per cent of Britain’s total output in 1989, a share which has risen sharply
over the past decade. Banking, finance and insurance accounted for 41 per¬
cent of employment in March 1990. The net identified overseas earnings of
British financial institutions in 1989 were £6,184 million.
The increase in the rate of international movements of capital in the 1960s
and 1970s mainly took the form of increased bank lending and foreign
exchange trading. London became the international centre of this activity,
particularly in the eurocurrency markets (see p 421), and the number of
overseas banks represented in London is larger than in any other financial
centre. In the last decade, with increasing international competition in
financial services and with developments in technology, there has been a
rapid growth in the international markets for securities. London has again
played an important role, especially in the market for eurobonds, in a variety
of currencies (see p 421). I * * * * * 7
I hree Acts have helped Britain’s financial services industry to respond to the
new competitive climate, while at the same time maintaining adequate
safeguards for the investing public: the Financial Services Act 1986, the
Building Societies Act 1986 (see p 414) and the Banking Act 1987 (see
p411). I hey have also enabled the implementation in Britain of certain
European Community (EC) directives on banking and building societies,
investment services and securities transactions.
Under the Financial Services Act a new supervisory framework has been
built up. Investment businesses (those effecting transactions in, managing or
giving advice on investments) require authorisation and have to obey rules of
conduct based on principles set out in the legislation. Supervision is in the
hands of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), which is empowered to
recognise self-regulating organisations (SROs) provided that they offer
investors protection equivalent to that provided by the SIB. The SROs are
practitioner-based bodies^ Most investment businesses have opted to achieve
authorisation by obtaining membership of an SRO. The SROs are the
Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers (AFBD); the Financial Inter¬
mediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA),
410
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Assets of Selected Groups of Financial Institutions,
1983 and 1988
£
£ ’000
'000 million
Sources: Central Statistical Office, Bank of England
which covers firms such as insurance brokers; the Investment Man¬
agement Regulatory Organisation (IMRO), for concerns such as merchant
banks and pension fund managers with mainly corporate clients; the Life
Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation (LAUTRO), and The
Securities Association (TSA), whose members include the member firms of
The International Stock Exchange.
In each Act there is provision for improved co-operation and information¬
sharing between supervisors in different financial sectors. The Bank of
England, the Building Societies Commission (see p 415), the Department of
Trade and Industry, the SIB and the SROs have statutory responsibility for
financial supervision in the sectors to which these Acts apply. There are
strengthened government powers to investigate insider dealing (dealing
carried out on the basis of privileged access to relevant information), and a
separate department, the Serious Fraud Office, to deal with cases of serious
or complex fraud. The Government is helping to extend international co¬
operation in investigating suspected breaches of rules or requirements in the
field of investment business: agreements about exchange of information are
in place with the United States and Japan.
Changes within the financial services sector as a whole have been eroding
traditional distinctions between financial institutions, with single firms
providing a broader range of services, both in domestic and international
markets.
THE BANK OF The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and
ENGLAND Royal Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
411
BANKSAND
BUILDING
SOCIETIES
the Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main
functions are to execute monetary policy, to act as banker to the
Government, to act as a note-issuing authority and to exercise prudential
supervision over, and to provide banking facilities for, the banking system.
As agent for the Government, the Bank of England is responsible for
arranging government borrowing or repayment of debt and for managing
the National Debt. It also manages the Exchange Equalisation Account (see
below) and maintains the register of holdings of government securities on
behalf of the Treasury. More generally, the Bank has a responsibility for
overseeing the soundness of the financial system as a whole.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales to issue
banknotes. The note issue is no longer backed by gold but by government
and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland banks have limited
rights to issue notes. These issues, apart from a small amount specified by
legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings of Bank of
England notes. Responsibility for the provision of coin lies with the Royal
UIOO 3 gOVernment trading fund which became an executive agency in April
The Bank is able to influence money-market conditions through its
dealings with the discount houses (see p 416), which developed in the
nineteenth century as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses
hold mainly Treasury, local authority and commercial bills, and negotiable
certificates of deposit financed by short-term loans from the banks. If on a
particular day there is a shortage ol cash in the banking system as a result, for
example, of large tax payments, the Bank relieves the shortage either by
buying bills Irom the discount houses or by lending directly to them. This
permits the banks to replenish their cash balances at the Bank by recalling
some of their short-term loans to the discount houses. The terms on which
the Bank’s dealings with the discount houses take place allow the authorities
to set and maintain interest rates at the level they consider appropriate.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986, the Bank is responsible for the
supervision of the main wholesale markets in London for money, foreign
exchange and gold bullion. (The markets are wholesale in the sense that
the participants are professional operators dealing in substantial amounts of
money.)
Under the Banking Act 1987, deposit-taking organisations require
authorisation from the Bank of England (unless they are specifically
exempted) and are subject to the Bank of England’s supervision. The Act
created a Board of Banking Supervision and increased the Bank’s powers to
modify the conduct of banking institutions, to investigate cases of illegal
deposit-taking, to block bank mergers and takeovers on prudential grounds
and to require information from banks. The Act also enables information to
be shared, in strictly controlled ways, among supervisors in different
financial services, and permits auditors to make reports to the Bank of
England about a bank if the circumstances justify it.
On behalf of the Treasury, the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold foreign
exchange, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs, which are claims’ on the
International Monetary Fund) and European Currency Units (ECUs). Usimj
the resources of the EEA, the Bank may intervene in the foreign exchange
markets to check undue fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling.
In addition to banks, which are authorised under the Banking Act 1987 and
are supervised by the Bank of England, the chief institutions which offer
banking services are the building societies and the National Savings Bank.
412
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Retail Banks
Banks and building societies are broadly covered by the definition of ‘credit
institutions’ used in EC banking legislation. The First Banking Directive,
adopted in 1977, established the principle of non-discrimination for credit
institutions in one member state wishing to operate elsewhere in the
Community. The Second Banking Directive, which comes into operation at
the beginning of 1993, will complete the single European market in banking
by establishing mutual recognition of home country authorisation for credit
institutions. ,
A useful distinction is that between ‘retail’ banking and ‘wholesale
banking. Retail banking is primarily for personal customers and small
businesses. Its main services are cash deposit and withdrawal facilities, and
systems for transferring funds, notably by cheque. Competition between the
banks and the building societies in the provision of money transmission
services to individuals has increased during the last two decades and is
expected to increase further (see p 414). Building societies can now also offer
money transmission services to companies. Wholesale business involves the
taking of large deposits at higher rates of interest, the deployment of funds
in money-market instruments (see p 420) and the making of large loans and
investments. Nearly all the banks in Britain engage in some wholesale
activities and some, such as the merchant and overseas banks, centre their
business on them. Many such wholesale dealings are conducted on the inter¬
bank market, that is, between banks themselves.
In May 1990 there were 546 institutions authorised under the Banking
Act 1987, including retail banks, merchant banks, branches of overseas
banks, discount houses and banking subsidiaries of both banking and non¬
banking institutions from Britain and overseas. Of these, 340 were members
of the British Bankers’ Association.
The major retail banks are those with a significant branch network, offering
a full range of financial services to both individuals and companies. They
provide current accounts including, generally, interest-bearing current
accounts; deposit accounts; and various kinds of loan arrangements,
together with a full range of money transmission facilities increasingly
featuring plastic card technology.
The dominant banks in England and Wales are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland,
National Westminster and the I SB Group; and in Scotland the Bank of
Scotland and The Royal Bank of Scotland. Together with the Standard
Chartered Bank (see p 416), these make up the Committee of London and
Scottish Bankers, which represents its members to the Government. Other
important retail banks are the Clydesdale Bank, the Co-operative Bank, the
Yorkshire Bank and Girobank, which was previously a subsidiary of the Post
Office but which was offered for sale to the private sector and in 1990
became a subsidiary of the Alliance and Leicester Building Society. Northern
Ireland is served by branch networks of five banks.
With the growth of the financial services sector since the 1970s, and a
relaxation of restrictions on competition among financial institutions, the
major banks have diversified their services. They have lent more money for
house purchases, and have established or acquired substantial interests in
finance houses, leasing and factoring companies, merchant banks, securities
dealers, insurance companies, unit trust companies and estate agencies.
The banks provide loan facilities to industrial companies and, since the
1970s, have provided more medium- and long-term loans than they did
formerly. They have also become important providers of finance for small
firms. They have supported a loan guarantee scheme under which 70 per
cent of the value of loans to small companies is guaranteed by the
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
413
Deposits and
Assets
Branches and
Accounts
Payment Systems
and Services
Government, and some banks have set up special subsidiaries to provide
equity finance for companies (see p 419).
Most retail banks also conduct international operations, which account for
a substantial proportion of their business. In addition to maintaining
overseas subsidiaries, they are active in eurocurrency markets (see p 421).
The total liabilities/assets of the retail banks amounted to £410,000 million at
the end of March 1990. Of the liabilities, 68 per cent was sterling deposits, 16
per cent other currency deposits, and the remainder items in suspense or
transmission, and capital and other funds. Of the £278,000 million of
sterling deposits, sight deposits (which can be withdrawn on demand)
constituted about 40 per cent and time deposits (which can be withdrawn
only on some period of notice) some 60 per cent. I he banks’ main liquid
assets consist of money at call (mainly short-term loans to discount houses),
their holdings of Treasury and some other bills, short-dated British
government securities and balances at the Bank of England. They also hold a
proportion of their assets as portfolio investments (mainly longer-dated
British government securities) or trade investments.
At the beginning of 1990 the retail banks in Great Britain, including Abbey
National (see p 415), operated through some 14,200 branches and sub¬
branches. National Westminster had the largest number (2,997), followed by
Barclays (2,645), Lloyds (2,184), Midland (2,042), TSB (1,538), and The
Royal Bank of Scotland (842). Some 85 per cent of adults in Britain have a
current account and over one-third a deposit account.
The main inter-bank payment clearing systems are administered by three
separate companies operating under an umbrella organisation, the
Association for Payment Clearing Services. One company covers bulk paper
clearings (cheques and credit transfers). A second covers high-value
clearings for same-day settlement, comprising the electronic nationwide
service CHAPS (Clearing House Automated Payment System) and the paper
Town Clearing, which operates only in the City of London. A third covers
the bulk electronic clearing, Bankers Automated Clearing Services (BAGS),
which includes standing orders and direct debits. Membership of each of
these clearing companies is open to any bank or financial institution that
meets the criteria for appropriate supervision and volume of transactions.
All the major retail banks have substantial networks of automated teller
machines or cash dispensers with, in all, about 13,000 machines at the
beginning of 1990. I hese give customers access to cash and other services up
to 24 hours a day. Many banks and building societies offer home banking
services to their customers whereby they can use telephone or screen-based
access devices to obtain account information, make transfers and pay bills.
The banks and major building societies also offer their customers cheque
guarantee cards which entitle holders to reciprocal encashment facilities up
to> §enerally> £50 a day. The cards will also guarantee transactions with
retailers up to the same amount. Some cards have limits of £100 or £250.
Uniform eurocheques supported by a eurocheque card are available from all
major banks. These standard-format, high-security cheques may be used
to obtain cash or make payments in Britain, elsewhere in Europe and in a
few other overseas countries. The cheques are made out in the currency of
the country in which they are being used, with a guarantee limit of
approximately £100 per cheque.
Credit cards associated with major retail banks are also a popular means of
payment. The earliest, Barclaycard, was launched in 1966 and is part of the
414
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Building
Societies
Visa world system. At the beginning of 1990 Visa cards were issued by 30
financial institutions in Britain, with a total of some 16-5 million cards on
issue. In addition, there were 121 million cards on issue affiliated to the
Mastercard worldwide system, most of which carried the Access label. Each
type of card has over 300,000 outlets. The major banks now all issue cards
under both international systems and for some cards there is an annual lee.
Some of the major retail stores issue their own cards, which operate like
credit cards.
A charge card, like a credit card, enables the holder to make retail
payments, but there is either no credit limit or a very high limit, and the
balance must be settled in full on receipt of a monthly statement. An annual
fee is generally payable. The main examples are American Express, Diners
Club and bank gold cards. Charge cards are generally available only to
higher-income customers.
Debit cards, which allow payments to be deducted directly from the
purchaser’s bank account, have been introduced by Barclays (Connect),
Lloyds (Visa payment card), TSB (Bankcard), and a joint venture of
Midland, National Westminster and The Royal Bank of Scotland (Switch).
The Bank of Scotland and the Yorkshire Bank have joined Switch. Unlike
other cards, Switch operates only through EFTPOS terminals.
‘EFTPOS’ (electronic funds transfer at point of sale) is a system which
enables shoppers to pay for goods using a debit or credit card to transfer
funds electronically via terminals in retail premises. Several major EFTPOS
schemes are well established, with altogether more than 60,000 terminals, a
number that is growing quickly.
Building societies are mutual institutions, owned by their savers and
borrowers. They raise short-term deposits from savers, who are generally
able to withdraw their money on demand or at short notice. The societies
provide long-term loans, mostly at variable rates of interest, against the
security of property—usually private dwellings purchased for owner-
occupation.
Building societies are the major lenders for house purchase in Britain and
are the principal repository for the personal sector’s liquid assets (although
banks’ shares have increased in both areas since 1985). Some 60 per cent of
adults have building society savings accounts. Competition among the
building societies and between building societies and other financial
institutions has increased in the last decade. A variety of savings schemes has
been established, and a growing number of societies provide current account
facilities such as cheque books and automated teller machines. In 1990 there
were some 2,750 building society automated teller machines, about 20 per
cent of the total. Nine building societies issue credit cards (see p 413).
At the end of 1989 there were 126 registered societies, of which 107 were
members of The Building Societies Association, with assets totalling
£187,000 million; about £44,000 million was advanced in new mortgages in
the course of the year. The three largest societies (the Halifax, Nationwide
Anglia and Woolwich) account for nearly 50 per cent of the total assets of all
societies and the 20 largest for some 90 per cent.
The Building Societies Act 1986 allows the societies to provide a wider
range of services. Up to 17-5 per cent of a society’s commercial assets may be
used for purposes other than loans on first mortgage of owner-occupied
houses, including up to 7-5 per cent in other types of asset such as unsecured
loans. These limits will increase to 25 per cent and 15 per cent respectively in
1993. Directly or through subsidiaries, societies may now offer services with¬
in the general areas of banking, investment, insurance, trusteeship,
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
415
National
Savings Bank
Merchant
Banks
Overseas
Banks
British
Overseas Banks
executorship and estate agency. Societies may also operate throughout the
European Community. However, their main business will continue to be the
provision of financial and housing-related services.
The 1986 Act established the Building Societies Commission to carry out
the prudential supervision of building societies. It also made provision for a
society to seek the approval of its members to convert into a public limited
company. In this event the society becomes an authorised institution under
the Banking Act 1987 (see p 411) and is then supervised by the Bank of
England. The Abbey National pursued this course and no longer contributes
to building society statistics.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders is a trade body established in 1989 for
all mortgage lending institutions, including building societies, insurance
companies, finance houses and banks.
The National Savings Bank is run by the Department for National Savings,
based in Glasgow, and provides a system for depositing and withdrawing
savings at 20,000 post offices around the country or by post.
There are about 20 million accounts. Ordinary Accounts earn interest at a
rate which depends on the balance maintained; the first £70 of annual
interest is tax free. Investment Accounts earn a higher, variable rate of
interest, which is taxable. At the end of August 1990 the sum of the two
accounts totalled £9,900 million. Other National Savings instruments
include tax-free Savings Certificates, which either pay a fixed rate of interest
alone or a (lower) fixed rate of interest combined with index-linking;
Premium Bonds, where interest is paid in the form of prizes chosen by
lottery; and taxable Income and Capital Bonds.
All National Savings interest is paid without deduction of tax at source and
some instruments encourage savers to leave their savings untouched for five
years. The National Savings Bank does not offer lending facilities. At the end
i,"0 the t0tal amount of money invested in National Savings was
£o5,800 million, and this forms a part of government borrowing.
Merchant banks have traditionally been concerned primarily with the
accepting (or guaranteeing) of commercial bills and with the sponsoring of
capital issues on behalf of their customers. Today they have a widely
diversified and complex range of activities, with important roles in
international finance and the short-term capital markets; the provision of
expert advice and financial services to British industrial companies
especially where mergers, takeovers and other forms of corporate
reorganisation are involved; and in the management of investment holdings
including trusts, pensions and other funds. A number of merchant banks
have become part of financial conglomerates, offering an even wider range
ot financial services than hitherto. The four largest retail banks all have
merchant banking subsidiaries. The British branches of some overseas banks
also engage in merchant banking.
A total of 288 overseas banks were represented in Britain in January 1990
Of these, 44 were from the United States and 29 from Japan. They provide a
comprehensive banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the
financing of trade not only between Britain and other countries but also
between third-party countries. Citibank of the United States is expanding its
activities in the retail banking market in Britain and has joined the high-
value clearing system (see p 413).
A number of banks have their head offices in Britain but operate mainly
abroad, often specialising in particular regions such as Latin America or East
416
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Discount
Houses
INSURANCE
Long-term
Insurance
Asia through extensive branch networks. The major bank in this sector is
Standard Chartered.
The discount houses, of which there are nine, are specialised institutions
unique in their function and central position in the British monetary system.
They act as financial intermediaries between the Bank of England and the
rest of the banking sector, promoting an orderly flow of short-term funds
between the authorities and the banks, and lending to the Government by
guaranteeing to tender for the whole of the weekly offer of Treasury bills
(which are instruments to raise funds over a period of up to six months). In
return for acting as intermediaries, the discount houses have privileged daily
access to the Bank of England, which acts as ‘lender of last resort’. Assets of
the discount houses consist mainly of Treasury and commercial bills,
negotiable certificates of deposit and short-term loans. Their liabilities
consist mainly of short-term deposits.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It falls broadly into two parts: long¬
term life insurance, where contracts may be for periods of many years; and
general insurance, including accident and short-term life insurance, where
contracts are for a year or less. The London market is the world’s leading
centre for insurance and for the placement of international reinsurance. It
has been estimated that it handles some 20 per cent of general insurance
business placed on the international market.
In addition to the British companies and Lloyd’s, a large number of
overseas companies are represented, with which many British companies
have formed close relationships. Some British companies confine their
activities to domestic business but most large companies undertaking general
business transact a substantial amount overseas through branches and
agencies or affiliated local companies.
Insurance companies carrying on business in Britain are supervised by the
Department of Trade and Industry under the Insurance Companies Act
1982. Marketing of life insurance is regulated by the Securities and
Investments Board (see p 409). EC directives cover reinsurance, compulsory
motor insurance, freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers,
Community co-insurance and insurance intermediaries. A directive reg¬
ulating cross-frontier trade in non-life insurance services came into force in
June 1990, and agreement has been reached on a directive on cross-frontier
trade in life insurance services.
Some 830 companies are authorised to carry on one or more classes of
insurance business in Britain, of which 7 per cent are European Community
companies with their head office outside Britain, and a further 10 per cent
are companies established outside the Community. The total invested assets
of these companies amounted to £238,000 million at the beginning of 1990.
Some 450 companies belong to the Association of British Insurers (ABI).
These account for 90 per cent of British insurance business and 97 per cent
of life business. Some companies are mutual institutions, owned by their
policy holders. Insurance is also available from some friendly so¬
cieties—mutual institutions administered by trustees.
Long-term insurance is handled by some 270 companies. As well as
providing life cover, long-term insurance is a vehicle for saving and
investment by individuals, premiums being invested in securities and other
assets. The net long-term insurance premium income of ABI member
companies in 1989 was some £29,000 million.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
417
General
Insurance
Lloyd's
Institute of
London
Underwriters
Insurance
Brokers
INVESTMENT
FUNDS
Pension Funds
General insurance business is undertaken by insurance companies and by
Lloyd’s. It covers fire, accident, general liability, short-term life, motor,
marine, aviation and transport. Total ABI member company premiums in
1989 were some £25,000 million, of which £8,000 million was for motor
insurance and £1,600 million for marine, aviation and transport insurance.
The bulk of business in the latter categories was written through the Institute
of London Underwriters (see below).
Lloyd s, the origins of which go back to the seventeenth century, is an
incorporated society of private insurers in London. Although its activities
were originally confined to the conduct of marine insurance, a very
considerable worldwide market for the transaction of other classes of
insurance business (such as aviation and motor) has been built up.
Lloyd s is not a company but a market for insurance administered by
the Council of Lloyd’s. Business is carried out for individual elected
underwriting members, or ‘names’, who must show sufficient available
wealth and lodge a deposit. Insurance is transacted for them with unlimited
liability, in competition with each other and with insurance companies At
the beginning of 1990 there were 27,800 members, grouped into 401
syndicates. Each syndicate is managed by an underwriting agent responsible
for appointing a professional underwriter to accept insurance risks and settle
claims on the syndicate members’ behalf. Insurance may only be placed
through accredited Lloyd s brokers, who negotiate with Lloyd’s syndicates on
behalf of the insured.
The net premium income of Lloyd’s in 1989 was some £4,200 million, of
which around £500 million was for motor insurance and around £1,500
million was for marine, aviation and transport insurance.
The Institute of London Underwriters was formed in 1884, originally as a
trade association for marine underwriters. It now provides a market where
insurance companies transact marine, commercial transport and aviation
business. The Institute issues combined policies in its own name which are
underwritten by the companies which form its membership. The premium
income processed by the Institute in 1989 was some £1,600 million. About
half of its 116 member companies are branches or subsidiaries of overseas
companies.
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are a valuable part of the
company market and an essential part of the Lloyd’s market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange
of contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting
as London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers
(Registration) Act 1977 provides for the voluntary registration and
regulation of insurance brokers by the Insurance Brokers Registration
Council. Only those so registered can use the title ‘insurance broker’. In
August 1990 some 17,000 individuals were registered with the Council
through 1,493 partnerships or sole traderships and 3,161 limited companies.’
Virtually all occupational pension schemes are based on trust funds
managed so as to protect the interests of the members. Pension contributions
are invested either directly in the securities and other investment markets or
through intermediaries such as insurance companies. The funds are a
dominant force in securities markets. The Government has introduced
egislation to allow people more choice in opting out of occupational pension
schemes and setting up personal pension arrangements. Some 10-5 million
418
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Investment and
Unit Trusts
COMPANY
FINANCING
INSTITUTIONS
Finance Houses
Leasing
Companies
people belong to occupational pension schemes and about 3-5 million to
personal pension schemes. The market value of assets held directly by
pension funds rose fpom £2,000 million in 1957 to some £215,000 million
at the beginning of 1989, when 13 per cent was in British government
securities and 69 per cent in company securities.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors in securities to spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are
companies which observe certain requirements of The International Stock
Exchange and the tax authorities, and invest in securities for the benefit of
their shareholders. The total assets of the 164 members of the Association of
Investment Trust Companies at the beginning of 1990 amounted to some
£19,400 million.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell
units to the public and also repurchase them on demand. The sums held
must be invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are met partly
by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a
periodic service charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 409) unit trusts are
authorised and regulated by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI),
most of whose powers are delegated to the SIB (see p 409). At present
authorised unit trusts may hold their assets in a wide variety of securities and
money market funds. Arrangements to allow them to invest in futures and
options (see pp 420 and 421), and property have been proposed by the DTI.
Most existing authorised unit trusts qualify for certification under
the terms of the EC UCITS (Undertaking for Collective Investment in
Transferable Securities) directive. The SIB is responsible for issuing UCITS
certificates to schemes based in Britain and for receiving notifications from
UCITS schemes based in other member states.
In March 1990 there were 4-9 million unit trust holdings, with a total value
of some £56,000 million.
There are many specialised financial institutions meeting the needs of
specific groups of borrowers which are not adequately covered by other
institutions. They are to be found in both the public and the private sectors.
Some of the latter were set up with official support, but with financing from
banks and other financial institutions. They may offer loan finance or equity
capital.
The main private sector institutions are described below. Among public
sector agencies are the British Technology Group, the Scottish and Welsh
Development Agencies, the Industrial Development Board in Northern
Ireland, the Co-operative Development Agency and ECGD (the Export
Credits Guarantee Department), Britain’s official export credit insurer.
Finance houses are major providers of instalment credit facilities for the
personal sector and of both loan and leasing finance (see below) to the
corporate sector. Forty-six firms constitute the Finance Houses Association
(FHA); at the beginning of 1990 loan and leasing credit outstanding to the
members of the FHA was some £40,000 million. Many of the finance houses
are owned by banks, and most are institutions authorised under the Banking
Act 1987.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance grew quickly
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
419
Factoring
Companies
Venture
Capital
Companies
FINANCIAL
MARKETS
The
International
Stock Exchange
in importance in the 1970s, partly because the leasing companies were able
to take advantage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose
tax position would otherwise have made this impossible. In 1989 the 72
members of the Equipment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain
valued at some £13,600 million, which represented 27 per cent of all in¬
vestment in plant and machinery.
Factoring comprises a range of financial services which provide growing
companies with a flexible source of finance in exchange for the outstanding
invoices due to them. Since the early 1960s factoring has developed as a
major financial service, covering international activities as well as domestic
trade. In 1989 member companies of the Association of British Factors and
Discounters handled business of £11,600 million (representing about 90 per
cent of all factoring business in Britain) and some 7,500 companies made use
of the Association’s services.
Venture capital companies meet the need for medium- and long-term capital
when such funds are not easily or directly available from traditional sources
such as the stock market or the banks.
There are over 120 British venture capital companies which take equity
stakes in small and medium-sized firms. Many of these companies are
subsidiaries of other financial institutions, including banks, insurance
companies and pension funds. The 124 full members of the British Venture
Capital Association invested a total of over £1,600 million in Britain,
elsewhere in Europe, and in the United States in 1989, an increase of 18 per
cent on the previous year. (Approximately 25 per cent of this amount
represented the venture capital element of 3i investment.)
Formerly Investors in Industry, 3i supports investment programmes over
a whole range of industries. During the year ended 31 March 1990 the
corporation invested £597 million. Within the last few years it has become
increasingly prominent in financing management ‘buy-outs’, which involve
the purchase of businesses from their owners by the management and other
staff. The shares in 3i are owned by the Bank of England (15 per cent) and
six of the major retail banks.
The City of London has a wide range of organised financial markets. They
include The International Stock Exchange, the foreign exchange market,
the options and financial futures market, the eurobond and eurocurrency
markets, the Lloyd’s insurance market (see p 417), and the bullion and
commodity markets.
The International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and the Republic
of Ireland has its main administrative centre in London. There are also
centres in Belfast, Birmingham, Dublin, Glasgow and Manchester.
The Exchange has changed radically in recent years. Its rules on
membership were altered to allow corporate ownership of member firms;
the system under which dealers charged fixed minimum scales of
commission to investors was abolished in favour of negotiated commissions;
dealers were permitted to trade in securities both on their own behalf, as
principals, and on behalf of clients, as agents, these two roles formerly
having been kept distinct; and a screen-based dealing system came into
operation, which has been so successful that the trading floor has been closed
(except for dealing in traded options). These changes were popularly known
as ‘Big Bang’.
The International Stock Exchange is one of the largest in the world in
420
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Listing Changes
The Money
Markets
terms of the number and variety of securities listed. Its turnover of equities
in 1989 accounted for some 10 per cent of equity trading worldwide. Some
7,700 securities are quoted; at the end of June 1990 these had a market value
of £2,100,000 million. More than 5,000 securities of companies are quoted,
including those of a growing number of leading overseas companies, with a
value of some £1,800,000 million. The remainder is made up of British
and overseas government and corporation stocks as well as eurobonds
(see p 421).
In recent years the largest market for new issues has been that for
companies’ securities, including issues of shares resulting from the
Government’s privatisation programme. Trading in British government
securities (‘gilt-edged stocks’) in the first three months of 1990 accounted for
about 60 per cent of transactions by value (excluding traded options). New
issues are made on the Government’s behalf by the Bank of England when
required.
The Exchange’s London Traded Options Market enables investors not
only to buy options to purchase or sell shares in the future at pre-fixed
prices, but also to trade in the options themselves. There is trading in around
70 equity options of prominent British and overseas companies and in stock
index options. The Market is due to merge with the London International
Financial Futures Exchange (see p 421) before the end of 1990.
The International Stock Exchange altered its rules in 1990 to conform to
EC directives on listing particulars, prospectuses and mutual recognition.
The major effect of the EC directive on Mutual Recognition of Listing
Particulars is that, subject to certain limitations, each member state is
required to recognise listing particulars accepted in another member state.
In order to put British companies on an equal footing with those in other EC
countries the Exchange reduced the minimum trading record requirement
for full listing from five years to three. At the same time the corresponding
requirement for the Unlisted Securities Market, on which the securities of
smaller companies are quoted, was reduced from three years to two. The
Third Market, which previously provided a structure for dealing in the
securities of companies which did not qualify for the Unlisted Securities
Market, is to be phased out at the end of 1990. A majority of Third Market
companies are expected to join the Unlisted Securities Market.
The London money markets channel wholesale funds (mainly short-term)
from lenders to borrowers. They consist of a series of integrated groups of
financial institutions conducting negotiations primarily by telephone, telex
and automated dealing systems, there being no physical market-place.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 409), the Bank of England is
responsible for regulating some market participants and has developed a
code of conduct which is observed by all market participants. The discount
houses (see p 416) play an important role. The main financial instruments
dealt in are bills (issued by the Treasury, local authorities or companies),
certificates of deposit (CDs, large-denomination transferable deposits) and
short-term deposits. The bill markets and the markets in which the discount
houses borrow from the rest of the banking system are often referred to as
the ‘traditional’ markets. Newer markets, known as ‘parallel’ markets,
emerged in the 1960s, and include the inter-bank market and the market in
CDs. Since a large proportion of the latter is held by banks, the CD market is
effectively an extension of the inter-bank market.
Capital markets have been undergoing continuous transformation since
the 1960s (see p 409). In the 1980s a trend towards the ‘securitisation of debt’
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
421
The
Euromarkets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
Financial
Futures
developed: that is to say, major borrowers increasingly raised funds by
issuing securities instead of seeking bank loans. In 1986 large companies
were permitted to develop a sterling commercial paper market: this
consisted initially of issues of short-term debt denominated in sterling with a
maturity of up to one year. Since 1989 the sterling commercial paper and the
short-term corporate bond markets have been consolidated. The range of
issuers has been broadened since 1986 to include, for example, banks and
building societies, certain unquoted companies and overseas public sector
bodies. The market now provides a way for such bodies to issue short-term
debt of up to five years’ maturity and to borrow directly from the money
market by issuing short-term debt of up to five years’ maturity.
The eurocurrency market enables banks to deal in deposits and loans
denominated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank
is situated. Transactions can thus be carried out in eurodollars, euro-
deutschmarks, euroyen and so on. London and Tokyo are the main world
centres for this business.
The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring funds
from lenders to borrowers but over a longer period by means of bonds issued
in currencies other than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both
markets tend to be in large denominations. The markets developed in the
late 1950s following the restoration of convertibility between the major
currencies, partly in order to avoid incurring the costs of exchange control
and other regulations. The participants in the markets include multinational
corporations, non-bank financial institutions, and governments, as well as
the international banking community.
In the 1980s there has been considerable growth in the euro-commercial
paper market. As with the establishment of the sterling commercial paper
market (see above) this represents a further movement towards the
securitisation of debt.
The foreign exchange market has no physical centre, but consists of
telephone links between the participants, which include banks, other
financial institutions and several firms of foreign exchange brokers which act
as intermediaries between the banks. It provides those engaged in
international trade and investment with foreign currencies for their
transactions. The banks are in close contact with financial centres abroad and
are able to quote buying and selling rates for both spot and forward delivery
in a wide range of currencies and maturities. The forward market enables
traders and dealers who, at a given date in the future, wish to receive or
make a specific foreign currency payment, to contract in advance to sell or
buy the foreign currency involved for sterling at a fixed exchange rate. A
Bank of England survey in April 1989 showed that average daily turnover on
London’s foreign exchange market was about £110,000 million, making it
the largest such market in the world.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE) trades on
the floor of the Royal Exchange building. About 200 banks, other financial
institutions, brokers and individual traders are members of the market.
Futures markets allow parties that could be affected by movements in prices
interest rates or exchange rates to reduce their vulnerability or to speculate
on the possibility of making a gain. Financial futures contracts are legally
binding documents for the purchase or sale of a fixed amount of a financial
commodity, at a price agreed in the present, on a specified future date. They
racihtate the transfer of risk from those who do not wish to bear it to those
The London
Bullion Market
Commodity,
Shipping and
Freight
Markets
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
who are prepared to bear it. LIFFE has the widest range of financial futures
and options products of any exchange in the world. In August 1990 the
average number of futures and futures options contracts traded daily was
about 150,000, with a turnover of some £32,500 million. LIFFE is due to
merge with the London Traded Options Market (see p 420) before the end
of 1990.
Over 60 banks, securities and trading companies comprise the London gold
and silver markets which, like the foreign exchange market, trade by
telephone and telex links. Five of the members meet twice daily to establish a
London fixing price for gold which provides a reference point for worldwide
dealings. The silver fixing is held once a day and has three participants.
Although much interest centres upon the fixings, active dealing takes place
throughout the day. London and Zurich are the main world centres for gold
dealings.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London
relate to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The
need for close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance
services often determined the location of these markets in the City of
London. There are also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and
barley), rubber, soya bean meal, sugar, pigmeat, non-ferrous metals
(aluminium, copper, lead, nickel, silver and zinc), potatoes, gas oil (heating
oil) and crude petroleum oil. The markets are collaborating in the
development of new arrangements to safeguard participants.
In ship brokerage, London’s Baltic Exchange is responsible for a
substantial proportion of the world’s tramp fixtures. A freight futures
market is in operation there. All Britain’s agricultural futures markets are
operated from the Baltic Exchange and physical commodity trading is also
carried out there.
21 Overseas T rade
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the British economy for
hundreds of years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when
the rapid growth of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by
Britain’s development as an international trading centre. Today, although
small in area and accounting for only about 1 per cent of the world’s
population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation in the world, and, as a
member of the European Community, part of the world’s largest trading
bloc, which accounts for about one-third of all trade.
Exports of goods and services in 1989 were equivalent to over one-quarter
of gross domestic product (GDP). Britain is a major supplier of machinery,
vehicles, aerospace products, electrical and electronic equipment and
chemicals, and a significant oil exporter. It relies upon imports for about one-
third of total consumption of foodstuffs, and for many of the basic materials
needed for its industries. Trade in invisibles is also of great significance to
the economy: in 1989 overseas earnings from services were equivalent to
nearly one-third of those from total visible exports.
VISIBLE TRADE In 1989 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £92,800 million and
its imports of goods at some £116,600 million on a balance-of-payments basis
(see Table 21.1). Between 1988 and 1989 exports rose by 4-9 per cent in
terms of volume and by 7-8 per cent in terms of unit value, leading to an
increase in the total value of exports of almost 15 per cent. Import volume
rose by 7-6 per cent, unit value rose by 6-9 per cent and total value also rose
by nearly 15 per cent.
Table 21.1: Exports and Imports 1986—89 (balance-of-payments basis)
1986
1987
1988
1989
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b.a 72,656
Imports f.o.b.3 82,141
Volume index (1985 = 100)
Exports 104-2
Imports 107-4
Unit value index (1985 = 100)
Exports 90-2
Imports 95.3
Terms of trade (1985 = 100)* 94-6
79,446 80,776 92,792
90,669 101,854 116,632
109-7
115-3
93-8
97-8
95-9
111-8
131-0
93-9
96- 7
97- 1
117-3
140-9
101-2
103-4
97-9
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
beer^paid"by the sdler' ^ ^ ^ aCCrUing Up t0 the time °f pladng the S00^ on board the exporting vessel having
‘Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
424
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commodity
Composition
Britain has traditionally been an exporter of manufactured goods (both semi¬
manufactures and finished manufactures) and an importer of food and basic
materials. In 1970 manufactures accounted for 85 per cent of exports. The
proportion fell sharply in the early 1980s—to around 67 per cent by the
middle of the decade—as fuels increased their share; it has since risen, to 81
per cent in 1989. The share of finished manufactures in total imports rose
from 25 per cent in 1970 to 52 per cent in 1989. Machinery and transport
equipment account for a little over one-third of exports and a similar
proportion of imports. Export sectors that have declined in relative
importance include textiles and vehicles. Textiles accounted for 5 per cent of
total exports in 1970 but only 2 per cent in 1989; the corresponding figures
for vehicles were 11 per cent and 6 per cent. Over the same period, the share
of food, beverages and tobacco in total imports fell from 22 per cent to 9 per
cent and that of basic materials from 15 per cent to 5 per cent.
Table 21.2: Commodity Composition of Trade 1989;
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (c.i.f.)4
£ million percent £ million percent
Non-manufactures 15,067 16T 24,147 200
Food, beverages and tobacco 6,555 7 0 11,430 9-5
Basic materials 2,348 2-5 6,482 5-4
Fuels 6,164 6-6 6,235 5-2
Manufactures 76,291 81-5 95,075 78-7
Semi-manufactures 26,860 28-7 32,171 26-6
of which: Chemicals 12,350 13-2 10,441 8-6
Textiles 2,205 2-4 3,770 3 1
Iron and steel 2,894 3 1 2,795 2-3
Non-ferrous metals 1,968 2 1 3,070 2-5
Metal manufactures 1,787 1-9 2,483 2T
Other 5,656 60 9,612 80
Finished manufactures 49,431 52-8 62,904 52T
of which: Machinery 26,687 28-5 30,387 25-2
Road vehicles 6,071 6-5 13,003 10-8
Clothing and
footwear 1,672 1-8 4,515 3-7
Scientific instruments
and photographic
apparatus 3,928 4-2 3,994 3-3
Other 11,073 11-8 11,005 9 1
Miscellaneous 2,287 2*4 1,565 T3
Total
93,646
1000 120,789
1000
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
an overseas trade statistics basis. (This differs from a balance of payments basis because, for imports, it includes the
cost of insurance and freight and, for both exports and imports, includes returned goods.)
*c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is, including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in the delivery of
goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these expenses represent earnings by companies resident in
Britain and are more appropriate to the invisibles account.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE
425
Geographical
Distribution
Since the mid-1970s North Sea oil has made a significant contribution to
Britain’s overseas trade both in terms of exports and in terms of import
substitution. In 1989 exports of fuels in volume terms were over three and a
half times their 1975 level; imports were about two-thirds their 1975 level.
Over this period the share of fuels in exports changed from 4 per cent to 7
per cent and in imports from 18 per cent to 5 per cent. North Sea oil
production has now passed its peak of the mid-1980s, when exports of fuels
had accounted for over 20 per cent of total exports. The surplus on trade in
oil fell sharply between 1988 and 1989, due in part to the effect of accidents
on North Sea oil installations, but still amounted to nearly £1,500 million.
Since the early 1960s Britain’s imports of semi-manufactures have
exceeded those of basic materials; they are now almost five times as high.
This reflects the increasing tendency for producing countries to carry out
the processing of primary products up to the semi-finished and, on
occasions, the finished stage. The fall in the share of food imports (from
around 35 per cent of total imports in the 1950s to 8 per cent in 1989) is a
result both of the increasing extent to which food demand has been met
from domestic agriculture and the decline in the proportion of total
expenditure devoted to food.
Britain s overseas trade is mainly—and increasingly—with other developed
countries. In 1970 these accounted for 73 per cent of exports and a similar
proportion of imports; by 1989 the shares were 80 per cent and 86 per cent
respectively. In 1970 non-oil developing countries accounted for 17 percent
of Britain’s exports and for 15 per cent of Britain’s imports; by 1989 both
proportions had fallen to 10 per cent. In 1972 (the year before Britain joined
the European Community) around one-third of Britain’s trade was with the
other 11 countries which now make up the Community. The proportion is
now about one-half, and is expected to increase with the completion of the
single European market in 1992 (see p 428). Trade with other
Commonwealth countries has declined in importance.
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1989
426
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
European Community countries accounted for seven of the top ten export
markets and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain in 1989
(see Table 21.3). Since 1981 the United States has been Britain’s largest
single market and the Federal Republic of Germany Britain’s largest single
supplier. In 1989 the United States accounted for 13 per cent of Britain’s
exports while the Federal Republic of Germany supplied almost 17 per cent
of Britain’s imports. There have been a number of changes in the trends of
Britain’s overseas trade in recent years. The increase in wealth of the oil¬
exporting countries during the 1970s led to a sharp increase in their imports
from all sources and by the early 1980s they were taking some 12 per cent of
Britain’s exports. There was then a fall in the capacity of these countries to
absorb imports (partly because of a reduction in the price of oil) so that, by
1989, their share of Britain’s exports had fallen to 6 per cent. In 1973 the oil¬
exporting countries supplied 10 per cent of Britain’s imports but, with
Britain achieving self-sufficiency in oil, the proportion had fallen below 2
per cent by 1989. Japan now accounts for nearly 6 per cent of Britain’s
imports, almost twice the proportion of ten years previously.
Table 21.3: Britain’s Main Markets and Suppliers 1989a
Value Share
(£ million) (per cent)
Main markets
United States 12,099 12-9
Federal Republic of Germany 11,111 11-9
France 9,462 10T
Netherlands 6,515 70
Belgium/Luxembourg 4,873 5-2
Irish Republic 4,715 5 0
Italy 4,631 4-9
Spain 3,138 3-4
Saudi Arabia 2,433 2-6
Sweden 2,350 2-5
Main suppliers
Federal Republic of Germany 20,005 16-6
United States 12,889 10-7
France 10,785 8-9
Netherlands 9,586 7-9
Japan 7,108 5-9
Italy 6,702 5-5
Belgium/Luxembourg 5,701 4-7
Irish Republic 4,279 3-5
Switzerland 4,126 3-4
Sweden 3,748 3T
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
'On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b.; imports c.i.f.
Transactions on invisible trade fall into three main groups: services (receipts
and payments arising from services, as distinct from goods, supplied to and
received from overseas residents); interest, profits and dividends (income
OVERSEAS TRADE
427
arising from outward and inward investment, loans and other capital
transactions); and transfers between Britain and other countries.
Invisible trade is of fundamental importance to Britain’s economy;
overseas earnings from invisibles amounted to £109,000 million in
1989—over one-half of Britain’s total overseas earnings. Britain’s share of
world invisible trade is some 14 per cent and earnings are second only to
those of the United States. In 1989 Britain’s invisibles surplus was the largest
in the world, according to figures from the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD). Services have been in surplus for over
20 years, while interest, profits and dividends have rarely been in deficit;
transfers, however, have almost always been in deficit. For invisible trade as a
whole, the deficit of general government is more than offset by the
substantial surplus of the private sector (including public corporations), to
give an overall surplus. General government transactions are relatively
unimportant in either the services or the interest, profits and dividends
accounts but they form the greater part of the transfers account. In 1989 the
private sector had a surplus of over £11,000 million on invisible trade while
government had a deficit of £7,000 million. The British Invisible Exports
Council, which is financed almost entirely by contributions from the private
sector, promotes measures to encourage invisible trade.
Table 21.4: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1989
£ million
Credits
Debits
Balance
Private sector and public corporations 104,057
Services 29,655
of which: Sea transport 3,870
Civil aviation 3,758
Travel 6,877
Financial and
other services 15,150
Interest, profits and dividends 72,652
Transfers 1,750
General government 4,540
Services 449
Interest, profits and dividends 1,948
Transfers 2,143
National accounts statistical
adjustment 500
92,830
23,197
3,840
4,261
9,290
5,806
67,583
2,050
11,553
2,698
2,435
6,420
11,227
6,458
30
-503
-2,413
9,344
5,069
-300
-7,013
-2,249
-487
-4,277
500
Total invisible transactions
109,098 104,384
4,714
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1990 Edition.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Earnings from private sector services rose in value by almost 9 per cent in
1989 to £29,700 million; debits, at £23,200 million, were nearly 11 per cent
higher than a year previously, but the surplus was about 2 per cent more
than in 1988. The deficits on civil aviation and travel were outweighed by the
surplus on financial and other services.
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
Single
European
Market
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
European
Community
Agreements
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The surplus on private sector interest, profits and dividends was £5,100
million in 1989—somewhat lower than in 1988. Earnings on portfolio
investment (investment in overseas securities) and on direct investment
overseas remained high—at £7,000 million and £17,100 million
respectively—reflecting in part the substantial volume of overseas in¬
vestment following the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and changes
in the method of foreign currency lending by banks located in Britain.
The deficit on private sector transfers in 1989 was £300 million, while that
on government transfers was £4,300 million, mainly as a result of
contributions and subscriptions to the European Community and other
international organisations, and bilateral aid.
Britain remains committed to the open multilateral trading system and to
the further liberalisation of world trade. To this end it has taken a leading
part in the activities of such organisations as the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the International Monetary Fund, the OECD
and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and has
given full support to the new round of multilateral trade negotiations (see
below). Since joining the European Community in 1973, Britain has
conducted its external commercial policy through the Community. The
Community’s common customs tariff is, at a trade-weighted average of 2-5
per cent, at a low level, similar to the tariffs of most major non-Community
industrialised countries.
Britain strongly supports the drive to complete the single European market
by the end of 1992. The single market programme is designed to eliminate
the remaining trade barriers within the Community and is expected to
provide substantial opportunities for business and benefits for consumers.
The single European market programme was launched in 1985 and, by
August 1990, 184 out of a proposed 282 measures had been adopted
or agreed in principle. By March 1990, Britain had turned more single
market measures into national legislation than any other member of the
Community.
Tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade have been considerably reduced in
the seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations completed since 1947
under the auspices of GATT, the most recent one completed being the
Tokyo Round (1973—79). Britain participates in these negotiations as a
member of the European Community.
The eighth round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations (the Uruguay
Round) was launched in September 1986. The negotiations are expected to
conclude in December 1990. The Uruguay Round is the most ambitious and
wide-ranging round of trade negotiations ever, covering 15 areas. Its main
concerns are to bring trade in agriculture and textiles fully within the GATT
system; to achieve further reductions in tariff and non-tariff barriers; to
extend GATT disciplines to the new areas of intellectual property,
investment and services; and to strengthen the GATT system, so that it can
deal more effectively with trade distortions and disputes.
Britain applies the common customs tariff to all countries neither belonging
to, nor having any special arrangement with, the European Community.
There is duty-free trade between those member states that joined before
1986. Portugal and Spain joined at the beginning of that year. Their trade
with the rest of the Community is in a transitional stage: tariffs on industrial
OVERSEAS TRADE
429
CONTROLS ON
TRADE
Import
Controls
products are due to be phased out by the start of 1993, but those on certain
agricultural products will be dismantled over a longer period.
The Community has reciprocal agreements with the European Free Trade
Association (EFI A) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and Switzerland), which allow for industrial products to be traded free of
duty. Following the Luxembourg Declaration of 1984, the Community and
EFTA are working towards closer economic co-operation. In 1989
Community and EFTA ministers agreed on further action to this end and to
remove remaining non-tariff barriers to trade, with the aim of creating a
European Economic Area encompassing the Community and EFTA.
The Community also has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with
Cyprus, Israel, Malta and I urkey and non-reciprocal agreements with
Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan, the Occupied Territories,
Lebanon, Syria and Yugoslavia and, under the fourth Lome Convention, a
group of 68 African, Caribbean and Pacific developing countries. The Lome
Convention gives these countries free access (subject to certain safeguards) to
the Community for industrial goods and most agricultural products.
Fariff preference is also given to developing countries (under the
Generalised Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands, and the overseas
dependencies and territories of member states.
The Community also has economic co-operation agreements with a
number of Latin American countries, with the People’s Republic of China
and with the six members of the Association of South East Asian Nations.
Following the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Central
and Eastern European countries and the Community, the Community
negotiated trade, commercial and economic co-operation agreements with
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Poland and the Soviet Union. These
agreements cover trade concessions and co-operation in areas such as
energy, agriculture, transport and the environment. A similar agreement
with Romania is expected to be concluded in late 1990. The next stage, as
economic and political reform is consolidated, will be the development of
closer association agreements with individual Eastern and Central European
countries.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods may
be imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of
export control.
In accordance with its international obligations under GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all
quantitative import restrictions imposed on economic grounds. The few
remaining quantitative restrictions mainly affect textile goods (in view of the
rapid contraction of the domestic textile industry). They stem primarily from
the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA), under which there exists a series of
agreements covering international trade in textiles, designed to balance the
interests of both exporting and importing countries. The present MFA is
due to expire in 1991 and it is intended that new arrangements should be
governed by GATT.
A small number of quantitative restrictions are also maintained against
non-GATT countries. Britain, in accordance with European Community
directives, operates a ban on the import from North Korea and South Africa
of certain iron and steel products and from South Africa of gold coins.
Quantitative restrictions have been removed from imports of goods of
Community origin. However, there are exceptions: Britain continues to
apply internationally recognised restrictions on non-economic grounds on
430
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Export
Controls
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
Export
Promotion
Services
imports from all countries of products such as firearms, ammunition and
nuclear materials. Other government departments apply similar non¬
economic restrictions on goods such as meat and poultry; animals, birds,
bees, fish and plants and some of their derivatives; controlled drugs;
explosives; fireworks; certain offensive weapons; certain citizens’ band
radios; indecent or obscene articles and products derived from endangered
species.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government
control or direction except for presentation and declaration to HM Customs
and Excise on export for the purpose of collecting the overseas trade
statistics. However, there are controls governing such exports as military
equipment and advanced industrial goods of strategic significance as well as
nuclear-related goods, steel exports to the United States, and certain
chemicals and items controlled under the Middle Technology Control
Regime.
Other controls include those for health certification purposes on certain
animals, meat and fish exported to another member of the European
Community; on endangered animal and plant species; on photographic and
artistic material over a certain age and value; and on documents, manu¬
scripts and archaeological items.
The Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls
(COCOM),1 of which Britain is a member, announced major changes in
1990 to the control of exports on certain goods and technologies that are
enforced by its members. Many items have been removed from control, and
significant relaxations have been achieved on the controls on tele¬
communications equipment, computers and machine tools. COCOM is
continuing to seek to remove and relax its controls on other industrial goods
and technologies in order that the burden placed upon exporters by these
controls is reduced as much as possible. The Government wishes to assist in
creating more favourable export conditions while maintaining an embargo
on the most strategically sensitive equipment and technologies.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities
for trade in other countries, services designed to help exporters and improve
exporting practices, and credit insurance facilities.
The British Overseas Trade Board (the export arm of the Department of
Trade and Industry—DTI) guides and directs the Government’s export
promotion efforts, including the provision of export services. Among these
services are the dissemination of export intelligence, assistance to British
exporters in appointing agents and researching potential markets overseas,
help at trade fairs and other promotional events overseas, and support for
firms participating in trade missions. The Board comprises mainly rep¬
resentatives of commerce and industry with personal involvement in
exporting, but also includes representatives of the DTI, the ECGD (Export
Credits Guarantee Department) and the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office. It operates under the general authority of the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry. In 1989-90 about £122 million was spent on support
for exporters.
'COCOM is an informal body of countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation except Iceland,
plus Australia and Japan. It was established in 1950 to co-ordinate controls on East-West trade and on
the export of strategic equipment, including atomic energy material, munitions and industrial goods of
potential military use.
OVERSEAS TRADE
431
ECGD
BALANCE OF
PAYMENTS
Following a review of the deployment of export resources in 1990, the
Board identified priorities for official export promotion both in terms of
geographical markets and of industrial sectors within them. The markets of
Western Europe and of the Pacific Rim countries were designated as highest
priority targets.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can initially consult the export
section of the regional offices of the DTI throughout Britain and, through
these offices, the DTFs overseas trade divisions in London and the
commercial posts of the British Diplomatic Service overseas. The Scottish
Export Office (Industry Department for Scotland), the Welsh Office and the
Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland (Department of Econo¬
mic Development) also act as the equivalent of the DTFs regional offices.
ECGD is Britain’s official export credit insurer. It is a government
department responsible to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. In
July 1990 the Government announced eventual executive agency status for
ECGD’s Project Group, which deals with capital goods exports on medium-
term credit. The Insurance Services Group, which covers exports on short¬
term credit, will be separated and sold by tender in 1991.
ECGD provides credit insurance for about one-fifth of the country’s
export trade and insures exporters of both goods and services against non¬
payment by overseas buyers. The main risks covered include insolvency or
protracted default of the buyer, governmental action which stops the British
exporter receiving payment, new import restrictions, and war or civil
disturbance in the buyer’s country. Cover may commence from the date of
shipment or from the date of contract (at higher premiums).
Under the Aid and Trade Provision, aid combined with export credits may
be provided to developing countries to support projects which promise
opportunities to British exporters. In April 1990 ECGD announced that its
credit insurance scheme would be open to exporters seeking to invest in
Eastern Europe.
The balance-of-payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The transactions are classified into two groups:
Table 21.5: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1985—89
£ million
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989
Current account
Visible trade balance -3,345 -9,485 -11,223 -21,078 -23,840
Invisible transactions
balance 6,095 9,462 7,042 5,927 4,714
Current balance 2,750 -24 -4,182 -15,151 -19,126
Financial account
Transactions in assets
and liabilities
British external assets
British external liabilities
Balancing item
-52,919 -92,888 -83,633 -56,244 -86,253
45,677 84,375 84,103 63,258 90,255
4,491 8,536 3,713 8,136 15,124
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1990 Edition.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
432
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Capital Flows
External Assets
and Liabilities
current account (visibles and invisibles) and transactions in assets and
liabilities. The balance on current account shows whether Britain has had a
surplus of income over expenditure.
Traditionally Britain has had a deficit on visible trade and a surplus on
trade in invisibles. In 1988 and 1989 the deficit on visible trade exceeded
£20,000 million. The increase in the degree of integration in the inter¬
national economy has enhanced differences in the pattern of investment
and savings opportunities. With the British economy expanding rapidly,
there has been a marked increase in investment unmatched by a cor¬
responding rise in savings; Britain has thus been importing capital. Since the
balance of payments must balance, a deficit on current account has been the
inevitable result. The deficit has arisen from private sector behaviour; in the
same way, it is likely to fall as the gap between private sector investment and
savings narrows.
The surplus on invisibles fell from £5,900 million in 1988 to £4,700
million in 1989. The surplus on services rose while that on interest, profits
and dividends fell. The deficit on transfers rose.
Britain has no exchange controls; residents are free to acquire foreign
currency for any purpose, including direct and portfolio investment
overseas. There are also no controls on the lending of sterling abroad and
non-residents may freely acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold may be
freely bought and sold. The abolition of exchange controls in 1979 means
that Britain meets its full obligations on capital movements under the OECD
code on capital movements and under European Community directives. The
Government welcomes both outward and inward investment. Outward
investment helps to develop markets for British exports, while providing
earnings in the form of interest, profits and dividends. Inward investment
creates employment directly; introduces new technology, products,
management styles and attitudes; and provides an opportunity to increase
exports or substitute imports. Inward investment is particularly encouraged
by the DTI’s Invest in Britain Bureau.
Inward direct investment almost doubled in 1989 compared with 1988, to
a record £18,300 million. In 1989 direct investment overseas by British
residents was £19,400 million. Outward portfolio investment was £36,800
million. The inflow of direct and portfolio investment into Britain amounted
to £29,200 million. An analysis of transactions in Britain’s external assets and
liabilities is given in Table 21.6.
At the end of 1989 Britain’s identified external assets exceeded identified
external liabilities by £113,000 million; only Japan had higher net external
assets. Net assets of the private sector and public corporations amounted to
£103,000 million and those of general government to £10,000 million.2
Direct investment assets overseas of British residents (investment in
branches, subsidiaries and associated companies) totalled £140,000 million at
the end of 1989 and portfolio investment £221,000 million. At the end of
1987 (the latest year for which data are available) over 84 per cent of direct
investment was in developed countries, with over 35 per cent in the United
States and nearly 28 per cent in the European Community. In terms of
industries, manufacturing accounted for 35 per cent of direct investment
holdings. By type of company, oil companies were responsible for 26 per
cent, insurance companies for 7 per cent and banks for 4 per cent.
2The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited because
a variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and
in method of valuation.
OVERSEAS TRADE
433
Table 21.6: Summary of Transactions in External Assetsaand
Liabilities1’' 1987—89
£ million
1987 1988 1989
Overseas direct investment in Britain
Overseas portfolio investment
in Britain
British direct investment overseas
British portfolio investment overseas
Borrowing from overseas
Deposits and lending overseas
Official reserves3
Other external liabilities of general
government
Other external assets of central
government
8,681 9,218 18,344
17,710 13,220 10,860
-19,198 -20,685 -19,365
3,323 -9,870 -36,781
56,139 39,916 59,629
-54,949 -22,037 -34,604
-12,012 -2,761 5,439
1,572 904 1,422
-796 -891 -942
Total 469 7,015 4,002
Source: United Kingdom balance of Payments 1990 Edition.
“Increase — / decrease +.
4 Increase + / decrease —.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Direct investment in Britain by overseas residents amounted to £87,000
million at the end of 1989 and portfolio investment to £100,000 million. At
the end of 1987 investment from developed countries accounted for 95 per
cent of overseas direct investment in Britain: 46 per cent originated in the
United States and 26 per cent in the European Community. A total of 36 per
cent was in manufacturing. Oil companies were responsible for 29 per cent,
insurance companies for 4 per cent and banks for 10 per cent.
Another type of overseas transaction is company cross-border acquisitions
and mergers. In 1989 overseas acquisitions and mergers less disposals
carried out by British companies were valued at £20,300 million, while the
corresponding figure for operations in Britain by overseas companies was
£8,300 million. The United States accounted for just over 80 per cent of the
value of acquisitions and mergers by British companies. The United States
accounted for 43 per cent of the value of acquisitions and mergers by
overseas companies and the European Community for 35 per cent.
. <£jjft<hrXHK$>ik>
22 Promotion of Science
and Technology
Britain has for centuries been in the forefront of innovation in science and
technology, and its record of achievement in relation to the size of its
population is in many respects unsurpassed. Recent important work includes
that of Professor Michael Green on superstring theories, which may lead to
an understanding of the ultimate nature of matter, and Professor Alec
Jeffreys’s invention in 1985 of genetic fingerprinting. The first combined
heart, lungs and liver transplant was carried out at Papworth Hospital,
Cambridge, in 1986. Agricultural research in Britain has produced the first
environmentally benign microbial pesticides.
Nobel prizes for science have been won by 70 British citizens, a number
exceeded only by the United States, and fable 22.1 lists British laureates
(excluding those in economic sciences) since 1970.
Research and
Development
Expenditure
International comparisons of expenditure on research and development
(R & D) are based on definitions agreed by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development. According to these, total expenditure in
Britain on scientific research and development in 1988 was about £10,300
million, 2-2 per cent of gross domestic product. Some 51 per cent of this was
provided by industry and 37 per cent by government. Significant con¬
tributions were also made by overseas sources, private endowments, trusts
and charities.
The pattern of research activity is as diverse as the pattern of research
funding. Government finance for R & D goes to its own research
establishments, to institutions of higher education and to private industry. In
many cases nationalised and private-sector industries finance their own
research and run their own laboratories. Industry also funds university
research and spends money on contracts to government establishments.
Charities may have their own laboratories in addition to offering research
grants for outside work.
Expenditure According to a sample survey, expenditure on R & D in industry in 1988
in Industry amounted to £6,861 million, of which £1,133 million came from govern¬
ment, £830 million from overseas and the remaining £4,898 million mainly
from industry’s own funds. The most important areas of expenditure were
electronics (£2,064 million), chemicals (£1,574 million) and aerospace (£814
million).
Expenditure by Government figures for its R & D expenditure differ somewhat from those
Government used in international comparisons and those resulting from industrial
surveys because they include expenditure on social science and the
humanities, and also expenditure overseas. In addition, survey methods tend
to produce an understatement of government funding of research in
industry. Total government R & D expenditure in 1988-89 was some £4,900
436
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 22.1: Recent British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Year of
award Category Subject
Sir Bernard 1970
Katz
Professor 1971
Dennis Gabor
Professor 1972
Rodney Porter
Professor Brian 1973
Josephson
Professor 1973
Nikolaas
Tinbergen
Professor Sir 1973
Geoffrey
Wilkinson
Sir Martin Ryle 1974
and Professor
Anthony
Hewish
Sir Nevill Mott 1977
Dr Peter 1978
Mitchell
Sir Godfrey 1979
Hounsfield
Dr Frederick 1980
Sanger
Sir Aaron King 1982
Sir John Vane 1982
Dr Cesar 1984
Milstein
Sir James Black 1988
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physics
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physics
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Chemistry (jointly)
Physics
Physics (jointly)
Chemistry
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Chemistry (jointly)
Chemistry
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
The role of neural
transmitter substances
Invention of holography
Discoveries concerning the
chemical structure of
antibodies
Work on superconductivity
The organisation of
individual and social
behaviour patterns
Work on organometallic
compounds
Development of new types of
radio telesocopes
Theoretical investigations of
the electronic structure of
magnetic systems
Contributions to the
understanding of biological
energy transfer
Computer-assisted assembly
of X-ray information in
three dimensions
Determination of base
sequences in nucleic acids
Work on the structure of
viruses and genetic material
in cells
Clarification of the pathways
of prostaglandin
metabolism in the body
Production of monoclonal
antibodies
Discovery of therapeutic
drugs, especially for heart
disease and stomach ulcers
million, the largest departmental budget being that of the Ministry of
Defence. The main civil departments involved are the Department of
Education and Science, which supports the research councils and the
universities (see pp 439 and 441); the Department of Trade and Industry
(see p 437); the Department of Energy (see p 440); and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (see p 441).
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
437
Government
and Scientific
Research
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
General
Industrial
Innovation
The main objectives of the Government’s expenditure on research and
development are to advance scientific knowledge and develop technology in
Britain as well as to support its own activities. Generally the Government
seeks to enhance the contribution of both public and private research and
development expenditure to improving the efficiency and competitiveness
of the British economy. Its view is that government should finance the
pursuit of basic scientific knowledge, but that the commercial development
of scientific principles should mainly be the task of industry.
Science and technology policy is decided by collective ministerial
consideration under the leadership of the Prime Minister. The Government
is advised by the Chief Scientific Adviser, Cabinet Office, and by an
independent Advisory Council on Science and Technology (ACOST).
ACOST is composed of industrialists and scientists covering all areas of
science and technology and appointed by the Prime Minister for their
personal eminence in their field. In addition, there are two ex officio
members, the chairman of the Advisory Board for the Research Councils
(ABRC) and the chairman of the Universities Funding Council and the
Innovation Advisory Board. The remit of ACOST covers defence as well as
civil research, and both academic science and industrial research and
development. It advises on national priorities in science and technology, on
the application of science and technology, on the co-ordination of
government policy and on Britain’s participation in international scientific
projects.
Responsibility for basic civil science rests with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science, who is advised by the ABRC; that for technology
rests mainly with the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Other
departments with a substantial involvement in science and technology have a
departmental advisory body; these bodies work closely with ACOST.
A committee of Departmental Chief Scientists, under the chairmanship of
the Chief Scientific Adviser, is responsible for co-ordination among
departments. A Science and Technology Assessment Office, responsible to
the Chief Scientific Adviser, evaluates the impact of government-funded
research on the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy. The Centre
for Exploitation of Science and Technology (CEST) was set up in 1988. By
studying the evolution of markets it aims to identify the science and
technologies needed to improve competitive performance in particular
industries. CEST is supported by industry and by the Government.
Although most industrial research and development is financed by industry
itself, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) provides support where
there is a sound case for doing so. Following a review in 1988, the
Government decided that, in general, near-market R & D should not be
supported. Instead, there should be greater emphasis on collaborative
programmes of pre-competitive research between companies and on
encouraging collaboration between companies and higher education
institutions. Technology transfer should also be given greater emphasis. The
DTI spent £316 million on R & D in 1988-89, on general industrial inno¬
vation, aeronautics, space (see p 449) and its own research establishments;
and £92 million on technology transfer and related activities.
There are four main schemes of collaborative R & D: LINK, EUREKA (see
p 448), Advanced Technology Programmes and general industrial collab¬
orative projects. They complement the European Community R & D
programmes (see p 448).
The LINK scheme aims at encouraging firms to work jointly with higher
education institutions on pre-competitive research relevant to industrial
438
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aeronautics
Research
Establishments
needs. By July 1990, 24 LINK programmes had been approved, involving
total government funding of some £155 million, and mainly falling under
the general headings of biotechnology, advanced materials, advanced
manufacturing and electronics.
Advanced Technology Programmes encourage pre-competitive research
in new technologies. Eleven programmes had been approved by August
1990, in high-temperature superconductivity, marine exploitation and
several aspects of electronics and information technology.
General industrial collaborative projects are those projects supported by
the DTI which do not fall under the other collaborative schemes. They
include industry-led projects undertaken by research associations, non¬
nuclear laboratories of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (see
p 440) and other government research establishments. Particular emphasis
is given to encouraging the participation of small and medium-sized
enterprises in all these programmes.
Following the 1988 policy review, new single-company projects are not
normally supported. However, the Small Firms Merit Award for Research
and Technology (SMART), a competitive scheme designed to support
innovation by small companies, is an exception. In the 1989 competition 150
awards were made.
In aeronautics the DTI funds programmes of research, and also the
demonstration of technology prior to its commitment to specific products.
Nearly half of the work supported is in industry and in universities, and half
in Ministry of Defence establishments, where DTI funding allows the
maximum civil benefit to be derived. A significant proportion of DTI
support is now being spent on the European Wind Tunnel. Launch Aid is a
form of assistance provided under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 for specific
development projects in the aerospace industry.
The DTI has four research establishments, which accounted for £36 million
of its R & D expenditure in 1988—89. Most of their work serves to underpin
regulatory, statutory and policy work. In addition, the DTI contributes
directly to programmes under the various collaborative schemes. The
laboratories are also involved in a variety of international activities. They
provide technological services to industry which are not available
commercially, run a number of industrial ‘clubs’ and also undertake a limited
amount of research sponsored by industry.
The Laboratory of the Government Chemist provides government with a
comprehensive service in analytical chemistry and develops and maintains a
capability which underpins sound chemical measurement in Britain as part
of the National Measurement System (see below). The National Engineering
Laboratory carries out R &: D in a wide range of engineering and related
disciplines and maintains the British standards of flow measurement, of
especial importance in the oil and gas industries. The National Physical
Laboratory is Britain’s national standards laboratory and the focus of the
National Measurement System; in addition to developing and disseminating
standards of measurement, it undertakes research on engineering materials
and information technology. The Warren Spring Laboratory is devoted to
environmental research, including the impact of process technology. The
laboratories support industrial innovation through sponsored research and
industrial ‘club’ projects.
The Warren Spring Laboratory and the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist are now executive agencies within the public sector. The
Government plans agency status for the other two and, in the long term, to
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
439
Technology
Transfer
The
Department of
Education and
Science
privatise the National Engineering Laboratory, where roughly three-
quarters of the work is for the benefit of industry.
The DTI has introduced several programmes specifically to encourage
technology transfer. They promote the use of best-practice techniques and
modern technology as well as exploiting the most recent research. Examples
are the ‘Open Systems’ information technology standards programme and
the ‘Materials Matter’ programme, concerned with modern materials and
associated manufacturing methods. Each programme comprises an in¬
tegrated package of activities which may include seminars, conferences and
demonstration activities, as well as the production of case study material and
other practical literature.
There are also general technology transfer programmes not related
to specific technology areas. For example, the foundation of Regional
Technology Centres has been supported, in association with the Department
of Education and Science and the Training Agency, to provide a technology
transfer and training focus for small and medium-sized enterprises and to
help promote the expertise of higher education institutions.
The DTI maintains close contact with the British Technology Group, a
self-financing public organisation which negotiates patent protection and
commercial licensing for scientific and technological inventions, especially
those coming from universities and other public-sector research or¬
ganisations.
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for
basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils (see
P 441), to which it allocates funds from its science budget. This is £897
million in 1990-91. The councils, along with their 1988-89 R & D expendi¬
ture figures, are: the Science and Engineering Research Council (£340
million), the Medical Research Council (£145 million), the Natural Environ¬
ment Research Council (£82 million), the Agricultural and Food Research
Council (£55 million) and the Economic and Social Research Council (£23
million). Science budget grants are also made to the Royal Society and the
Fellowship of Engineering for science policy studies commissioned by the
Advisory Board for the Research Councils and to the Centre for Exploitation
of Science and Technology (see p 437). The allocations provide support for
research in the form of grants and contracts to universities, polytechnics,
research units and other establishments of the research councils;
postgraduate support; and subscriptions to international scientific
organisations. In addition, the Department funds the Computer Board for
Universities and Research Councils, which helps to provide centrally
managed computer services for the support of research in universities.
The Department is also responsible for some aspects of international
scientific relations and helps to co-ordinate government policy regarding
scientific and technical information. Together with the Scottish Education
Department and the departments concerned with training, it funds various
schemes for training both students and those working in industry in the
latest technology. For example, under the Professional, Industrial and
Commercial Updating (PICKUP) initiative, a network of 13 Regional
Technology Centres has been established since 1987, where scientists from
higher education institutions spend some of their time training employees of
private sector companies in recent developments in their fields. The
Department is also encouraging, through a variety of initiatives, the teaching
in schools of technical and scientific subjects, such as craft, design and
technology; and computing.
440
The Advisory
Board for the
Research
Councils
The Ministry
of Defence
Other
Government
Departments
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department is also the main source of funding for the universities,
whose individual allocations are determined by the Universities Funding
Council (see p 445). Until 1990 each university decided on the division of its
resources between teaching and research. The overall proportion committed
to research was thought to be about 40 per cent. Research funding is now
identified separately by the Council.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State
on civil science, particularly with regard to the research council system and
its links with higher education through the support of postgraduate
students; the proper balance between national and international scientific
activities; the resource needs of the research councils and other bodies; and
the allocation of the science budget between them.
It promotes effective collaboration between the five research councils in
areas of scientific overlap, and administratively. It also promotes close liaison
between the councils and industrial and other users of their research,
including government departments, and between them and the higher
education funding councils. The Board’s membership includes the heads of
the research councils and senior scientists from industry and the academic
world.
The expenditure of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) on research and
development in 1988—89 was some £2,000 million. About £390 million of
this was medium- and long-term applied research relevant to known military
needs, much of it carried out in the MoD’s Defence Research Establishments.
Some £140 million of this research was carried out under contract in
industry and the academic sector. The Government is committed to
achieving a gradual reduction in real terms in spending on defence research
and development in future years. An increasing emphasis is placed on
research funded jointly with industry, and initiatives have also been taken to
encourage ‘spin-off from defence technology to the civil market.
Examples of technological innovations at research establishments include
research carried out at the Royal Aerospace Establishment’s Propulsion
Department to reduce jet engine exhaust noise, which has led to changes in
Rolls-Royce’s new civil engines; the pioneering work of the Royal Signals and
Radar Establishment on liquid crystal displays, now widely used in the civil
sector; its current development of a new, simpler type of ‘supercomputer ;
and the development of infra-red detectors now widely used by fire services.
The Admiralty Research Establishment has, together with Plessey (now part
of GEC), developed a Multi-function Electronically Scanned Adaptive Radar
(MESAR), which can perform the functions of several different radars in one
system.
The Government announced in 1989 that the four principal non-nuclear
research establishments were to be set up as a separate organisation, with the
intention that this should become an executive agency by spring 1991.
The major part of MoD R & D expenditure (more than £1,700 million in
1988-89) is on the development of individual items of equipment. Most of
this takes place in industry, and represents the bulk of government
expenditure on R &: D in industry.
The Department of Energy funds research in support of offshore oil and gas
technology, energy efficiency and the development and exploitation of
British renewable energy sources. The major part of its R & D is on nuclear
energy (£159 million in 1988—89), most of which is carried out by the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA), a public corporation that
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
441
performs a large amount of contract research, under the name AEA
Technology, in both nuclear and non-nuclear fields, and manages a variety
of research ‘clubs’. 7
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food co-ordinates its research
programme with the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland and the Agricultural
and Food Research Council (see p 444). Overall, the Ministry’s research has
three main objectives: to protect the consumer and the environment; to
assist in the formulation and assessment of policy; and to underpin the
applied R & D done by the agricultural industry.
Ministry R & D includes alternative enterprises and land use; animal
welfare, enhancement and conservation of the environment; micro¬
organisms in food; the safety assessment of chemicals in food and objective
methods of determining food quality; and assessment and conservation of
fish stocks. As part of the Government’s re-ordering of its research priorities,
support is being withdrawn from R & D which has the primary objective of
developing commercial products or processes. Expenditure in 1988-89 was
£119 million, about half of which was in the Ministry’s own establishments.
Most of the rest was in contracts to the Agricultural and Food Research
Council.
The Department of the Environment funds research in seven policy areas-
environmental protection, including radioactive substances; water;
countryside; planning and inner cities; local government; housing; and
building and construction. The largest individual sub-programme is on the
safe disposal of radioactive waste. Other environmental protection sub-
programmes cover research on air quality, noise, toxic substances, con¬
taminated land and controlled waste management. An area of research of
increasing importance is that of pollution-related climate change.
The Department of Health manages health-related R & D programmes
directly and also funds non-departmental bodies which carry out research in
support of their statutory duties. The National Biological Standards Board
through the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, is
responsible for preparing, holding and distributing standard preparations;
the control testing of biological substances; and associated research and
development.
The National Computing Centre promotes best practice in software
engineering in industry and the Central Computer and Telecommunications
Agency, part of HM Treasury, encourages the establishment of standards of
computer compatibility and the best use of information technology in the
public sector. 07
THE RESEARCH
COUNCILS
Each of the four research councils engaged in scientific research is an
autonomous body established under Royal Charter, with membership drawn
Irom the universities, professions, industry and the Government. They
conduct research through their own establishments and by supporting
selected research, study and training in universities and other higher
education establishments. In addition to funding from the Department of
Education and Science (see p 439), they also receive income for research
commissioned by departments under the customer-contractor principle and
from the private sector. Income from commissioned research is particularly
important for the Agricultural and Food Research Council and the Natural
Environment Research Council.
The rights and responsibility for the commercial exploitation of research
carried out with the support of research council grants rest with the
institution receiving the grant, subject to the existence of procedures agreed
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
Nuclear Physics
Astronomy and
Planetary Science
Science
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
with the sponsoring research council. Universities and research institutes
may make use of the expertise of the British Technology Group (see p 439)
to patent and license their inventions, but are not obliged to do so.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) is responsible for
the support of research and postgraduate training in pure and applied
science (including engineering) outside the areas of agriculture, medicine
and the environment. Expenditure is divided among contributions to
international organisations (£90 million in 1988—89, see p 449); research
grants, chiefly to higher education institutions (£121 million); and the
Council’s own establishments (£96 million). The SERC also funds
postgraduate training (£57 million). The Council has initiated plans for
Interdisciplinary Research Centres in the fields of high-temperature
superconductivity, engineering design, surface science, molecular sciences,
semiconductor materials, high performance materials, polymer science and
technology, process simulation integration and control, and optical and laser-
related science and technology. It encourages collaboration between higher
education and industry, partly by sponsoring co-ordinated research
programmes in areas of special industrial concern.
The SERC maintains four research establishments: the Rutherford
Appleton Laboratory at Chilton (Oxfordshire), the Daresbury Laboratory at
Warrington (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Cambridge,
and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. They are centres of specialised
research and provide experimental facilities beyond the resources of
individual academic institutions, and also undertake contract research.
SERC research support is organised under four boards, covering
astronomy and planetary science (£63 million in 1988—89); nuclear physics
(£83 million); science (£100 million); and engineering (£96 million). In
recent years the SERC’s policy has been to transfer funds from the first two
of these, representing largely big’ science and basic research, to the second
two, representing largely strategic research on a smaller scale.
The Nuclear Physics Board supports particle physics and nuclear structure
physics. The Rutherford Appleton Laboratory co-ordinates Britain’s
experimental particle physics research programme and links university
researchers with overseas centres such as CERN (see p 449). The nuclear
structure physics programme is concentrated largely at Daresbury, where
the 20-million volt tandem accelerator is being made increasingly powerful.
The Astronomy and Planetary Science Board supports space science,
including contributions to international programmes (see p 449), ground-
based astronomy and geophysics. In optical astronomy the SERC is a
principal partner in the international observatory on the island of La Palma
in the Canary Islands. This contains four telescopes, including the 4 2-m
William Herschel. Opened in 1987, it is the third largest single-mirror
optical telescope in the world. On Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the SERC has a 3-8-m
infra-red telescope, the largest telescope in the world designed specifically
for infra-red observations, and the 15-m James Clerk Maxwell radio
telescope (built in collaboration with the Netherlands and Canada).
The Science Board supports academic research in chemistry, mainstream
physics, mathematics, the biological sciences and science-based archaeology.
Its main priority is the provision of research grants to universities and poly¬
technics. About 50 per cent of grants are awarded as part of co-ordinated
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
443
Engineering
Medical
Research
Council
programmes of interdisciplinary strategic research falling within the areas of
materials; molecular sciences; and mathematics, computational and
cognitive science. They may be part of a LINK programme (see p 437) or
associated with an Interdisciplinary Research Centre. The Daresbury
Laboratory operates a synchrotron radiation facility which provides high-
intensity electromagnetic radiation used in a wide range of experiments in
protein crystallography, surface physics, chemical structure and materials
science. Other special facilities include, at the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory, the spallation neutron source (called ‘ISIS’), the world’s leading
pulsed neutron facility; and a high-power laser facility which is used to study
plasmas.
The Engineering Board, whose funding has increased greatly in recent
years, supports strategic research underpinned by work in the core sciences.
It tries to identify areas of promising national strategic importance and
initiates co-ordinated programmes of research which will generate
knowledge of specific benefit to British industry and sustain the introduction
of advanced technology. Some of the areas that have been identified for
priority action are training, information technology in engineering,
computer software research, materials research, biotechnology (where a
special directorate funded jointly with the Science Board is in operation) and
supercomputing in engineering. The Teaching Company scheme is jointly
sponsored by the SERC and the DTI, with contributions from the Northern
Ireland Department of Economic Development and the Economic and
Social Research Council. The scheme supports some 350 collaborative
ventures between academic engineering departments and industrial
companies to improve their manufacturing and management methods and
performance.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for
the support of biomedical research, both at its own centres and units, which
together account for about three-quarters of its budget, and by means of
grants to research workers at higher education institutions and hospitals. Its
major research establishments are the National Institute for Medical
Research at Mill Hill, London; the Clinical Research Centre at Northwick
Park Hospital, London; and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at
Cambridge. The Council also has more than 50 other research units, located
in universities and medical schools throughout Britain. Two Inter¬
disciplinary Research Centres are being set up, in toxicology and molecular
medicine, and two more are planned, in cell biology and protein
engineering.
The MRC s scientists and doctors have pioneered developments in
molecular biology, therapeutic clinical trials, applied psychology, and
methods of imaging the body such as magnetic resonance and ultrasound.
The Council’s larger research programmes include those into psychiatric
and neurological (including Alzheimer’s) disease, heart and respiratory
ailments, infectious diseases, tropical medicine, and antenatal screening for
cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy. Major new projects are specially
funded work on all aspects of AIDS; research on vaccines against meningitis
and whooping cough; and the mapping of the human genome, the complete
sequence of genes in a human cell. Recent achievements include the
determination, at the Virology Unit in Glasgow and the Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, of the DNA sequences of three of the disease-causing
herpes viruses. °
The Council’s policy is to foster collaboration between its establishments
444
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and industry in order to promote the transfer of industrially relevant skills
and technologies, the exploitation of Council discoveries, and the
development of new products in the health care field. A Centre for
Collaborative Research at Mill Hill provides a consultancy service for the
analysis of problems; acts as an information source for channelling advice to
industrial, academic and clinical partners; and also undertakes collaborative
projects with industry and the universities.
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) aims at advancing
understanding of the natural processes of the planet and of the impact of
human activities through research in the physical and biological sciences at
its own institutes, at grant-aided institutions and in universities and
polytechnics. The NERC’s three science directorates cover terrestrial and
freshwater, earth, and marine and atmospheric sciences. The NERC
supports 11 institutes, three grant-aided associations and four units in
universities. The institutes include the British Antarctic Survey, the British
Geological Survey, the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology and the Institute of
Oceanographic Sciences Deacon Laboratory in Surrey. The associations
include the Scottish Marine Biological Association. The NERC is taking the
lead in establishing an Interdisciplinary Research Centre in population
biology at Imperial College, Silwood Park, Berkshire.
About 70 per cent of the NERC’s funds are provided from the science
budget and about 30 per cent by research commissioned by public
authorities and industry in Britain and overseas.
Examples of work include GLORIA, a unique side-scan sonar developed
by geophysicists, which is being used to map areas of the ocean floor around
the world; the North Sea Project to develop a prognostic water quality
model; and a study to discover how carbon dioxide is absorbed by the oceans
and buried in the sea-floor sediments, helping to balance the ‘greenhouse
effect’. British Antarctic Survey scientists were the first to identify the hole in
the ozone layer above Antarctica.
Applied projects in progress overseas include those on biological pest
control, regeneration of tropical hardwoods and drip irrigation techniques
for tropical crops. The NERC also offers specialist data services providing
information on various subjects, including biology and ecology, from
satellite and aircraft surveys and its research vessels, as well as through its
various centres and units in Britain.
Agricultural
and Food
Research
Council
The Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRC) supports research
underpinning agriculture, food and the non-medical biologically based
industries, having regard to social needs and environmental consequences.
Work is carried out at the seven AFRC institutes (Animal Health, Animal
Physiology and Genetics, Arable Crops, Engineering, Food, Grassland and
Environmental Research, Plant Science), at the British Society for Hor¬
ticultural Research and in universities and polytechnics. It is co-ordinated
with that of the Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes, funded by the
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. The Council plans to
double its support for higher education institutions over the next five years
to 30 per cent of its core science budget funding.
The AFRC at present draws approximately 55 per cent of its funding from
the science budget, about a third from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food (MAFF) for commissioned research, and an increasing proportion
from industry. In the light of a decline in commissioned research from the
MAFF (see p 441), the Council aims at raising 25 per cent of its institute
funding from commercial and other sources by 1994—95.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
445
Recent achievements include identification of the molecular genetics of
the production in wheat grains of the proteins which determine bread¬
making qualities; use of anti-sense technology to identify gene expression
during plant development; exploitation of the bacterium Streptomyces
coelicolar for the industrial production of new antibiotics; demonstration of
the transmissibility of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and its link with
scrapie in sheep; development of new ways of genetically engineering lactic
acid bacteria, including a prototype food grade marker system based on
lactose genes, design of rapid methods of detecting food poisoning
organisms; and the demonstration in developmental genetics that male and
female genomes are not functionally equivalent.
UNIVERSITY About half the research carried out in universities is financed from resources
RESEARCH allocated by the Universities Funding Council. These funds contribute to the
cost of academic staff—who teach as well as carry out research—and provide
for the research infrastructure in the form of support staff, administration,
equipment and accommodation.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher
education is also supported through the research councils, in two ways. First,
between a quarter and a third of postgraduate students in science and
technology receive maintenance awards from the research councils.
Secondly, grants and contracts are given to the universities and other
institutions by the research councils for specified projects, particularly in
new or developing areas of research.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the
universities are various government departments, the Royal Society,
industry and the independent foundations. Universities are encouraged to
recover the full cost of research from these foundations. They are also
encouraged to direct their resources into those areas where they have
existing research strength or where they see a prospect of establishing strong
groups in new and promising spheres of science and technology.
Increasingly close relationships are being fostered between the uni¬
versities, industry and the Government in numerous joint projects. British
universities earnings from industry and other outside agencies are rising
rapidly and amounted to some £630 million in 1988-89. The money comes
from research contracts and royalties on the exploitation of university
innovations. Many universities now operate industrial liaison service units,
which are linked together by university directors of industrial liaison.
Technological breakthroughs in the university sector in the 1980s
included optoelectronic devices for future super-fast optical computers
at Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, and techniques for the active
cancellation of sound and other vibrations (whereby unwanted noise is
cancelled out by generating a noise which interferes destructively with it)
pioneered at the universities of Cambridge and Essex. Important research
on optical fibres is being carried out at Southampton, Exeter and Essex
universities; on liquid crystal displays at Hull and Manchester; and on
pharmaceutical products and biotechnology at Strathclyde.
Science Parks Science parks provide both existing and new businesses using high
technology with an environment in which they have easy access to the
research expertise of higher education institutions. By January 1990 there
were 38 such parks in operation at or near universities and similar
organisations, with a further 20 under construction or planned. One of the
first to be established (in 1972), and still the largest, is the Cambridge Science
Park, where some 80 companies occupy most of a 53-hectare (130-acre) site,
with room for further companies.
446
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OTHER
RESEARCH
ORGANISATIONS
Charitable
Foundations
Industrial
Research
Organisations
Professional
Institutions
The Learned
Societies
Royal Society
Britain’s science parks now provide accommodation for around 900
companies, employing over 12,000 people. They range from subsidiaries of
large corporations, such as the British Oxygen Company, Olivetti and British
Petroleum, to a wide variety of new and recently formed businesses. A survey
conducted for the United Kingdom Science Park Association showed that
companies on parks tended to exhibit high growth and low failure rates. The
main areas in which science park companies are involved are computing,
electronics, instrumentation, robotics, electrical engineering, chemicals and
biotechnology, with the emphasis on research, design, development, con¬
sultancy, testing and training activities rather than large-scale manu¬
facturing.
Charitable foundations sponsoring research in Britain include the Cancer
Research Campaign, the Chester Beatty Institute for Cancer Research, the
Ciba Foundation, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Institute for
Cancer Research, the Leverhulme Foundation, the Nuffield Foundation, the
Wellcome Trust and the Wolfson Foundation. In 1989 the largest spenders
on medical research were the Imperial Cancer Research Fund at £42 million
and the Wellcome Trust at £40 million.
The Association of Independent Research and Technology Organisations
links 43 such institutions, which between them employ about 9,400 people
and had a turnover of about £300 million in 1989. These are limited
companies undertaking research contracts and providing consultancy and
training services to 20,000 companies in particular branches of industry. In
addition to payment for this work, many are supported by membership fees
from firms in their sectors and by government grants.
The British Technology Group (see p 439) also finances new technology
projects, as do a number of venture capital companies.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations,
many of which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the
education and professional well-being of their members. The Council of
Science and Technology Institutes has seven member institutes representing
biology, chemical engineering, chemistry, food science and technology,
geology, hospital physics and physics.
The Engineering Council, established in 1981, promotes the study of all
types of engineering in schools and other organisations, in co-operation with
its 300 industrial affiliates, including large private sector companies and
government departments. Together with 45 professional engineering
institutions, the Council accredits courses in higher education institutions. It
also maintains a register of about 285,000 engineers and technicians with
varying levels of qualifications. The Engineering Council advises the
Government on a range of academic, industrial and professional issues.
The national academy of engineering in Britain is the Fellowship of
Engineering, set up in 1976, which promotes the discipline and advises the
Government on related policy issues. Its membership consists of dis¬
tinguished engineers.
More than 300 learned societies in Britain play an important part in the
promotion of science and technology through meetings, publications and
sponsorship.
The most prestigious of the learned societies is the Royal Society, or, more
fully, the Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge,
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
447
Other Societies
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
founded in 1660, which is equivalent to national academies of science in
other countries. It is the oldest such academy in the world to have enjoyed
continuous existence. The Society has over 1,000 Fellows, many of whom
serve on the governmental advisory councils and committees concerned with
research. It administers a grant-in-aid from the Department of Education
and Science (£14 million in 1990—91) which represents some 75 per cent of
its annual expenditure. The remainder is derived from private funds.
The Royal Society encourages scientific research and its application
through a programme of meetings and lectures, its publications, and
through the award of grants, fellowships and other funding, 214 ap¬
pointments being administered in 1990. It recognises scientific and tech¬
nological achievements through election to the Fellowship and the award of
medals and endowed lectureships. As the national academy of sciences, it
promotes international scientific relations, representing Britain in a number
of international non-governmental organisations and is involved in a variety
of international scientific programmes. It also facilitates collaborative
projects and the exchange of scientists through bilateral agreements with
academies and research councils throughout the world. It provides
independent advice on scientific matters, notably to government, and
represents and supports the scientific community as a whole. The Society is
increasingly active in promoting science understanding and awareness in the
public, and also science education. It supports research into the history of
science.
In Scotland, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, established in 1783, promotes
science through scholarships, the organisation of meetings and symposia,
the publication of journals and the award of prizes. The Society also
administers various fellowship schemes for post-doctoral research workers.
Three other major institutions publicise scientific developments through
lectures and publications for specialists and for schoolchildren. Of these, the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, founded in 1831, is
mainly concerned with science, while the Royal Society of Arts, dating from
1754, deals with the arts and commerce as well as science. The Royal
Institution, founded in 1799, also performs these functions and in addition
runs its own research laboratories.
The Zoological Society of London, an independent scientific body, runs the
world-famous London Zoo, which occupies some 15 hectares (36 acres) of
Regent’s Park, London. The Society also runs Whipsnade Wild Animal Park
near Dunstable (Bedfordshire), and is responsible for the Institute of
Zoology, which carries out research in conservation and comparative
medicine. It also organises scientific meetings and symposia, publishes
scientific journals and maintains one of the largest zoological libraries in the
world. Other well-known zoos include those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester,
Dudley, Chessington and Marwell (near Winchester).
The Royal Botanic Gardens, founded in 1759, cover 121 hectares (300 acres)
at Kew (west London) and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at Wakehurst
Place, Ardingly (West Sussex). They contain the largest collections of living
and dried plants in the world. Research is conducted into all aspects of plant
life, including physiology, biochemistry, genetics, economic botany and the
conservation of rare species.
The Royal Botanic Garden in Edinburgh, founded in 1670, is a centre for
research into taxonomy, for the conservation and study of living plants and
for horticultural education.
448
Scientific
Museums
INTERNA¬
TIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
European
Community
Non-EC
Activities
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Natural History Museum, which now includes the Geological Museum,
contains the national collections of extant and fossil animals and plants, as
well as rocks and meteorites. It has some 60 million specimens, ranging in
size from a blue whale skeleton to minute insects. The Museum is one of the
world’s principal centres for the study of natural history. Its research
concentrates on areas which exploit its taxonomic expertise and which relate
to the advisory service it offers to institutions all over the world.
The Science Museum, with a world renowned collection of more than
200,000 objects, promotes understanding of the history of science, tech¬
nology, industry and medicine. Exhibits of equipment, instruments and
machinery tell the story of the history of science and industry from the first
steam locomotive and the beginnings of photography to space travel and
computer technology.
These two museums are in South Kensington, London. Other important
collections include the Museum of Science and Industry in Birmingham, the
Museum of the History of Science at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish
Museum, Edinburgh.
British researchers, companies and higher education institutions take part in
European Community (EC) programmes for research and development.
The Community’s aim in R & D is to strengthen the scientific and
technological basis of European industry and to encourage it to become
more competitive at an international level. The Second Framework
Programme (1987—91) has Community funding of some £3,600 million and
covers eight areas: health and environment, information technology and
telecommunications, industry, biological resources, energy, development,
marine resources, and European science and technology co-operation.
Overall, British organisations secure some 20 per cent of the total funding
available. This is broadly equal to Britain’s contribution to the R & D budget.
There are three major programmes related to industrial competitiveness.
The European Strategic Programme for Research and Development in
Information Technology (ESPRIT) has a total budget of about £1,000
million and British organisations are involved in 134 out of the 181 projects
so far approved in the second phase. Basic Research in Industrial
Technologies for Europe/European Research in Advanced Materials
(BRITE/EURAM) has a budget of some £360 million and British
organisations participate in 96 of the 163 contracts under the existing
programme. Research and Development in Advanced Communications
Technologies in Europe (RACE) has a budget of some £380 million and
British organisations participate in 82 of the 91 contracts in the first phase.
The Third Framework Programme (1990-94), providing Community
funding of £4,200 million, will overlap and interlock with the Second.
Industrial research continues to be important under the new programme,
which gives greater priority to the environment.
Britain participates in the Joint European Torus nuclear fusion project,
JET, which is based at Culham, Oxfordshire, and which is part of the
European Community’s collaborative research effort.
More than 180 British companies or organisations are involved in some 100
projects (out of a total of 390) in EUREKA, the European framework for
promoting collaboration in the development of advanced technologies. (The
members of EUREKA are the 12 countries of the European Community, the
six countries of the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, and the
European Commission.)
Britain is a member of the European Organisation for Nuclear Research
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
449
Space
Activities
(CERN) in Geneva. Britain’s contributions to CERN, to the high-flux
neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin and to the European
Synchrotron Radiation Facility, both at Grenoble, are paid through the
SERC. The SERC is also a partner in the European Incoherent Scatter radar
facilities in northern Scandinavia, which are used for atmospheric research.
Through the NERC Britain is a member of the Ocean Drilling Program led
by the United States, and through the MRC of the European Molecular
Biology Organisation.
Britain is also a member of the science and technology committees of
international organisations such as the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation,
and various specialised agencies of the United Nations.
Britain has concluded a number of inter-governmental and inter-agency
agreements with other countries for co-operation in science and technology.
Among non-governmental organisations, the five research councils, the
Royal Society and the British Academy were founder members of the
European Science Foundation in 1974. The research councils also maintain
ajoint office in Brussels to further European co-operation in research.
Staff in British Embassies and High Commissions promote contacts in
science and technology between Britain and the countries in which they are
accredited. The British Council promotes better understanding and
knowledge of Britain and its scientific and technological achievements by
encouraging exchanges of specialists; by the provision of specialised
information; by fostering co-operation in research, training and education;
and—in the newly industrialising countries and developing countries—by
identifying and managing developmental projects in the technological,
scientific and educational sectors. Many British companies are involved in
commercial co-operative research projects with overseas manufacturers.
Britain’s involvement in civil space research is co-ordinated by the British
National Space Centre. The Government spent about £150 million on all
space activities in 1988-89, chiefly through the DTI and the SERC. Of this
60 per cent went towards the work of the European Space Agency (ESA).
The remainder supported a programme of research and development in
government establishments, universities and companies. British industry has
led the consortia which have developed all the communications satellites for
the ESA to date. The largest ever communications satellite, Olympus, was
launched in 1989. Britain is also developing the main active microwave
instrument for an earth observation satellite, ERS-1, to be launched in 1991.
Another British instrument, to provide extremely accurate measurements of
sea surface temperature, will also fly on ERS-1. A new £20 million Earth
Observation Data Centre is being established at Farnborough (Hampshire)
to process and disseminate ERS data to users.
Britain is contributing £250 million to the development and use of
Columbus, Europe’s contribution to the United States-led International
Space Station project, which will be used mainly for earth observation.
Britain is playing the leading role in constructing the Columbus polar-
orbiting platform and is providing key elements of the instrument payload.
British groups have been selected to participate in almost all of the ESA’s
science missions, including the 1986 launch of the British-built Giotto
spacecraft, which investigated Halley’s Comet, and the Infrared Space
Observatory. Britain will contribute £76 million to the Cluster and SOHO
missions to be launched in 1995 to study the Sun, the Earth’s magnetosphere
and the solar wind, and also expects to have a substantial involvement in the
ESA’s X-ray spectroscopy mission due for launch in 1998.
450
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Participation in ESA missions is complemented by bilateral arrangements
for space research with other countries, notably the United States through its
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Soviet Union
and the People’s Republic of China. British groups have participated in
several NASA space science missions, and have developed instruments for
NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. Other collaborations include
the development of the wide field camera for the Federal Republic of
Germany’s X-ray satellite ROSAT, launched in 1990 from Cape Canaveral in
the United States, and the X-ray sensor for the Japanese-built Ginga satellite.
British scientists will also be involved in the Soviet Union’s Spectrum-X-
Gamma X-ray mission due for launch in 1993 and are taking part in studies
relating to the Soviet mission to Mars and one of its satellites, Phobos.
2 3 Promotion of the Arts
Policies
Administration
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest professional
standards to the enthusiastic support and participation of amateurs. London
is one of the leading world centres for drama, music, opera and dance, and
festivals held in towns and cities throughout the country attract much
interest. Glasgow, which has developed into an important artistic centre, was
chosen as European City of Culture for 1990. Many British playwrights, com¬
posers, film-makers, sculptors, painters, writers, actors, singers, choreo¬
graphers and dancers enjoy international reputations. Television and radio
play an important role in bringing a wide range of artistic events to a large
audience. At an amateur level, innumerable choral, orchestral, operatic,
dramatic and other societies for the arts make use of local talent and
resources. Arts activities introduced and developed by the ethnic minorities
are also flourishing.
The objectives of the Government’s policies for the arts are to develop a high
standard of artistic and cultural activity throughout Britain; to encourage
innovation and scholarship; and to promote public access to, and
appreciation of, the arts and the cultural heritage. This is achieved through
the provision of funds and advice, and through the expansion of total
resources by encouraging partnership with the private sector, including
business sponsorship. National museums and galleries are encouraged and
given an incentive to increase their resources, for example, through trading
and other activities. In 1990-91 these sources will provide an estimated £39
million. An important concept in funding policy is the ‘arm’s length’
principle, by which government funds are distributed to arts organisations
indirectly, through bodies such as the Arts Councils and the British Film
Institute; this helps safeguard against political interference in the arts.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities play an active part,
and a substantial and increasing amount of help comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns.
The Minister for the Arts is responsible for general arts policy and heads
the Office of Arts and Libraries, which administers government expenditure
on national museums and art galleries in England, the Arts Council, the
British Library and other national arts and heritage bodies. English Heritage
(the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England) manages
400 ancient monuments and historic buildings on behalf of the Department
of the Environment. The regulation of the film industry and of broadcasting
is conducted by the Department of Trade and Industry and the Home Office
respectively. The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland are responsible for the national museums, galleries and libraries in
their countries, and for other cultural matters.
Local authorities maintain more than 1,000 local museums and art
galleries and some 4,000 public libraries in England. They also support
452
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
Arts Councils
many arts organisations and artistic events in their respective areas,
providing grant aid for professional and voluntary organisations, including
orchestras and theatre, opera and dance companies; and undertake direct
promotions through local arts councils. Local authorities also contribute to
the cost of new or converted buildings for the arts. Arts education in schools,
colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and community centres is the
responsibility of central government education departments, in partnership
with local education authorities and voluntary bodies.
Since 1988 the Government has set the arts budget for a three-year period in
order to give recipient arts bodies a firm basis on which to plan future
activities and to encourage greater self-reliance and diversification in their
sources of funding. It considers that this strategy has proved successful in
encouraging arts bodies to match their plans and priorities to a realistic view
of the total resources likely to be available. The three-year settlement applies
to the larger part of the central government arts programme. Planned
central government expenditure through the Office of Arts and Libraries
amounts to £494 million in 1990-91. About 33 per cent is spent on 11
national galleries and museums in England, with 35 per cent channelled
through the Arts Council to support the performing and visual arts
throughout England, Scotland and Wales; about 12 per cent goes to the
British Library. Grants are also made to the British Film Institute, the Crafts
Council, certain other museums and arts bodies, and to the National
Heritage Memorial Fund. The Fund provides assistance to organisations
wishing to acquire, for the public benefit, land, buildings, works of art and
other objects associated with the national heritage. Additional central
government expenditure on arts and libraries in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland amounts to £87 million.
Industrial and commercial concerns offer a vital and growing source of
sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of arts, including exhibitions,
concerts and opera seasons. The Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme
was launched by the Office of Arts and Libraries in co-operation with the
Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts in Great Britain in 1984,
with the aim of raising the overall level of business sponsorship. (A similar
scheme was set up in Northern Ireland in 1987.) In its first five years the
scheme attracted over £31 million of new money into the arts and over 1,300
new sponsors. An estimated 70 per cent of the awards has been made to arts
organisations outside London. In 1990-91 the scheme is making available
£3-5 million to match new sponsorships. Further support is encouraged by
tax concessions which allow companies and individuals to obtain tax relief on
donations to arts charities. For example, under the Gift Aid scheme,
announced in March 1990, single gifts of between £600 and £5 million in any
one year qualify for tax relief. Two new arts marketing schemes were
introduced in 1989—90 with funds of £150,000, aimed at helping
organisations find ways of increasing their audiences, in particular those of
young people, multi-cultural groups and the retired.
The independent Arts Council of Great Britain, established in 1946, is the
main channel for government aid to the performing and visual arts. Its
principal objects are to improve the knowledge, understanding and practice
of the performing and visual arts, increase their accessibility to the public,
and advise and co-operate with government departments, local authorities
and other organisations. The Council gives financial help and advice to
organisations ranging from the major opera, dance and drama companies;
orchestras and festivals; to small touring theatres and experimental groups.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
453
Developments
Local Arts
Councils
Regional Arts
Associations
It also trains arts administrators and helps arts organisations to develop
other sources of income. It encourages contemporary dance, mime, jazz,
literature, photography and art films, and helps professional creative
writers, choreographers, composers, artists and photographers through a
variety of schemes. It also promotes art exhibitions and tours by opera, dance
and drama companies and contemporary music groups; and makes funds
available for some specialist training courses in the arts. The Council has
allocated £2 million a year from 1988-89 to 1991-92 for increased touring
to help widen access to the arts throughout England, Wales and Scotland;
one new initiative is the funding of a three-year touring programme by the
four leading London symphony orchestras, involving some 30 concerts a
year.
Under a ten-year development programme launched in 1984, the Council
has been increasing its funding of the arts in the regions. In the first five
years support for new activities concentrated on art, dance, drama, music
and education—focusing on 13 main centres of population throughout
England. Greater emphasis is being placed on obtaining funds through
partnership arrangements with local authorities and other agencies, and
from commercial sources.
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are committees of the Arts Council
of Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy. Northern Ireland has an
independent Arts Council with aims and functions similar to those of the
Arts Council of Great Britain.
The Government has announced plans for changing the structure of arts
funding in England, to take effect from April 1993. These will strengthen
the policy-making role of the Arts Council and involve a major shift in direct
funding responsibilities from the Council to the regional arts associations
(see below). The Council will retain the funding of the four national
companies—the Royal Opera House, the English National Opera, the Royal
Shakespeare Company and the Royal National Theatre—and a number of
other centres of excellence and will retain responsibility for touring,
broadcasting, research, education and training. The regional arts
associations will become regional arts boards, each with its own chairman,
and will be subject to greater financial accountability through a system of
forward planning and budgeting, under the direction of the Arts Council.
Local arts councils in towns and communities throughout Britain, some of
them founded and supported by local authorities, aim to develop and co¬
ordinate arts activities in their localities. Industrial and commercial interests
also give financial help.
Regional development of the arts is promoted by 12 regional arts as¬
sociations in England and three in Wales. They bring together all those in a
region, from local authorities and private companies to local artists, with an
interest in improving the artistic life of their area. Their aim is to ensure that
the arts are more widely available and that artists receive support at regional
as well as national level. They offer financial assistance to artists and arts
organisations, and advise on, and in some cases promote, activities. The
associations are financed mainly by the Arts Council, with smaller sums from
the British Film Institute, the Crafts Council and local authorities, and these
interests are represented on their governing bodies. Business sponsorship is
also an increasingly important source of regional funds.
454
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arts of Ethnic
Minorities
Arts Centres
British Council
Visiting Arts
Office
Broadcasting
Organisations
As a result of proposed changes for arts funding in England (see p 453),
the existing 12 regional arts associations will be replaced by ten regional arts
boards in April 1991.
A wide range of arts activities is undertaken by ethnic minorities, embracing
both the traditional and new forms of artistic expression. In its support for
ethnic minority arts the Arts Council has, over the last five years, devoted
particular attention to black and Asian dance and drama. The Com¬
monwealth Institute arranges a varied programme of artistic events and
festivals, and the Minorities Arts Advisory Service is an independent
organisation which provides advice and information on, and training in, the
arts of the ethnic minority communities.
More than 250 arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for the
enjoyment of and participation in a range of activities in both the
performing and visual arts, with educational projects becoming increasingly
important. Nearly all are professionally managed and most are supported by
volunteer groups. About 80 per cent of all arts centres are converted
buildings, including former churches, warehouses, schools, town halls and
private houses. Nearly 70 per cent arrange holiday programmes for young
people. The centres are assisted mainly by regional arts associations and local
authorities, with some help from the Arts Council and other organisations.
Many theatres and art galleries also provide a focal point for the community
by making available facilities for other arts.
The British Council promotes a knowledge of British culture overseas and
maintains libraries in many of the 90 or so countries in which it is
represented. The Council initiates or supports overseas tours by British
theatre companies, orchestras, choirs, opera and dance companies, and jazz,
rock and folk groups, as well as by individual actors, musicians and artists. It
also arranges for directors, designers, choreographers and conductors to
work with overseas companies, orchestras and choirs. The Council organises
and supports fine arts and other exhibitions overseas as well as British
participation in international exhibitions and film festivals. It also maintains
film libraries in many of the countries in which it works, and encourages
professional interchange between Britain and other countries in all cultural
fields.
The Visiting Arts Office, an autonomous body administered by the British
Council, promotes foreign arts in Britain. It provides a clearing house for
British and overseas arts organisations, advises on touring matters and
makes awards for projects.
Both BBC radio and television and the independent companies broadcast a
wide variety of drama (including adaptations of novels and stage plays),
opera, ballet, and music; and general arts magazine programmes and
documentaries. These have won many international awards at festivals such
as the Prix Italia and Montreux International Television Festivals.
Independent television companies also make grants for arts promotion in
their regions.
The BBC has orchestras which employ many of Britain’s full-time
professional musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of
classical and other music (both live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. A
large part of the output of Radios 1 and 2 and of many independent local
radio stations is popular and light music. The BBC regularly commissions
Communications
An artificial ear on the
Head and Torso Simulator
enables a British Telecom
technician to monitor
the loudness of telephone
equipment as part of a
project to benefit hearing-
impaired users.
Mercury Communications
introduced its first public
payphone system in 1988,
and the service is now being
extended.
Libraries
The Mitchell Library, Glasgow,
was opened in 1877. It is the
largest free public reference
library in Europe, with a stock of
over 1!4 million volumes.
The modern public library at
Derringham Bank in Hull,
Humberside, operates a fully
computerised issue system.
The county library at Pembroke
Dock in Carmarthen, Wales, is
built on one level, providing
easy access for disabled users.
It also houses an art gallery.
The Belfast Central Library,
which celebrated its centenary
in 1988, offers reference and
lending facilities, as well as
special services to prisons, schools
and hospitals.
Broadcasting
Jazz FM, Britain’s first radio
station devoted to jazz music,
was launched in March 1990.
It broadcasts a mixture of live
and recorded music 24 hours
a day to listeners in the
London area.
The Ginger Tree, a co-production
by the British Broadcasting
Corporation and thejapanese
television company NHK, was
the first programme made in
High Definition Television
to be broadcast in Britain.
It has been sold to 17 countries.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
455
Festivals
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
new music, particularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, com¬
petitions and festivals. Each summer it presents and broadcasts the BBC
Promenade Concerts at the Royal Albert Hall.
Some 650 professional arts festivals take place in Britain each year. The
Edinburgh International Festival, featuring a wide range of arts, is the
largest of its kind in the world. Other annual festivals held in the Scottish
capital include International Folk and Jazz Festivals and the Film and
Television Festival, while the Mayfest, the second largest festival in Britain,
takes place in Glasgow. Some well-known festivals concentrating on music
are the Three Choirs Festival, which has taken place annually for 260 years
in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham Festival, largely
devoted to contemporary British music; and the Aldeburgh and Bath
festivals. Among others catering for a number of art forms are the Royal
National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen International Musical
Eisteddfod, the National Gaelic Mod in Scotland, and the festivals in Belfast,
Brighton, Buxton, Chichester, Harrogate, Malvern, Pitlochry, Salisbury,
Windsor and York.
Britain is one of the world’s major centres for theatre, and has a long and
rich dramatic tradition. There are many companies based in London and
other major cities and towns, as well as numerous touring companies which
visit theatres, festivals and other venues throughout Britain, including arts
and sports centres and social and working men’s clubs. There are 60
companies in receipt of subsidies from the Arts Council; 26 of these are
touring companies. Contemporary British playwrights who have received
international recognition include Harold Pinter, Tom Stoppard, Alan
Ayckbourn, Caryl Churchill, Alan Bennett, Peter Shaffer, and David Hare.
The musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber have been highly successful both in
Britain and overseas. Among the best-known directors are Sir Peter Hall,
Trevor Nunn, Peter Brook, Richard Eyre, Jonathan Miller, Terry Hands
and Deborah Warner, while the many British performers who enjoy
international reputations include Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Sir John Gielgud,
Sir Alec Guinness, Vanessa Redgrave, Ian McKellen, Derek Jacobi, Jeremy
Irons, Albert Finney, Dame Judi Dench, Glenda Jackson and Diana Rigg.
British designers such as John Bury, Ralph Koltai and Carl Toms are
internationally recognised.
Britain has about 300 theatres intended for professional use which can
seat between 200 and 2,300 people. Some are privately owned, but most are
owned either municipally or by non-profit-distributing organisations. Over
30 of these house resident theatre companies receiving subsidies from the
Arts Council. London is the main focus, with a hundred or so West End and
suburban theatres, 15 of them permanently occupied by subsidised
companies. These include the Royal National Theatre, which stages a wide
range of modern and classical plays in its three auditoriums in the South
Bank Centre; the Royal Shakespeare Company, which presents plays mainly
by Shakespeare and his contemporaries, as well as modern work, both in
Stratford-upon-Avon and in its two auditoriums in the City’s Barbican
Centre; and the English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre, which
stages the work of the most talented new playwrights.
In 1989 the partial remains of two Elizabethan theatres, the Rose Theatre,
where most of Christopher Marlowe’s plays were performed, and the Globe
Theatre, where Shakespeare acted, were excavated on the south bank of the
Thames in central London; the Globe has since been listed as an ancient
monument. A modern reconstruction of the Globe Theatre, on its orig-
456
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Regional
Theatres
Theatre for
Young People
Dramatic
Training
Amateur
Theatre
inal site, is in progress. This is planned to open in 1992, at the cost of £18
million.
Outside London most cities and many large towns have at least one theatre;
some, like the Theatre Royal, Newcastle upon Tyne, date from the
eighteenth century and have been handsomely restored. Others, like the
Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, and the Theatre Royal, Plymouth, have been
built to the latest designs. Universities such as those in Aberystwyth,
Manchester, Exeter and Southampton have theatres which house
professional companies playing to the general public. A major new theatre,
the West Yorkshire Playhouse, opened in Leeds in March 1990. Most
regional repertory companies mount about eight to ten productions a year;
several have studio theatres in addition to the main auditorium, where they
present new or experimental drama and plays of specialist interest.
Repertory theatres also often function as a social centre and meeting place by
offering events such as concerts, poetry readings and exhibitions, and by
providing restaurants, bars and theatre shops. Successful productions from
regional theatre companies often transfer to London’s West End, while the
largest regional theatres receive visits from the Royal National Theatre or
the Royal Shakespeare Company. The English Shakespeare Company, a
recently formed classical company, tours worldwide.
A number of companies provide theatre for young audiences. Unicorn
Theatre for Children and Polka Children’s Theatre, both in London, present
plays specially written and directed for young people; and the Whirligig
Theatre tours throughout Britain. The Young Vic Company in London and
Contact Theatre Company in Manchester stage plays for young people.
There are numerous Theatre-in-Education companies which perform in
schools for all age ranges and abilities. Some of these companies operate
independently—Theatre Centre, for example, plays in London and tours
further afield. Others are attached to regional repertory theatres such as the
Belgrade in Coventry and the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. Most
regional repertory theatres also mount occasional productions for younger
audiences, and concessionary ticket prices are generally available for those at
school, college or university. There are also a number of puppet companies.
There has been a marked growth in youth theatres, which number more
than 500 in England alone; both the National Youth Theatre in London and
the Scottish Youth Theatre in Glasgow offer early acting opportunities to
young people.
Training for actors, directors and stage managers is provided mainly in
drama schools. Among the best known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic
Art, the Central School of Speech and Drama, the London Academy of
Music and Dramatic Art, and the Drama Centre (all in London); the Bristol
Old Vic School, the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama (Glasgow)
and the Manchester Polytechnic School of Drama. Theatre design courses,
often based in art schools, are available for people wanting to train as stage
designers. A number of universities, polytechnics and other colleges offer
courses in drama.
There are several thousand amateur dramatic societies throughout Britain.
Their work is encouraged by a number of organisations, such as the Central
Council for Amateur Theatre, the National Drama Conference, the Scottish
Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster Drama Fes-
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
457
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestral and
Choral
Pop and Rock
Music
tivals. Amateur companies sometimes receive financial support from local
government, regional arts associations and other bodies.
A wide range of musical interests is catered for in Britain, ranging from
classical music to rock and pop music, the latter being extremely popular,
especially among younger people. Folk music, jazz, light music and brass
band music also have substantial followings.
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are promoted every year in many
large towns and cities. The principal concert-halls in central London are the
Royal Festival Hall in the South Bank Centre, next to which are the Queen
Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room, which accommodate smaller-scale
performances; the Barbican Hall (part of the Barbican Centre for Arts and
Conferences); the Royal Albert Hall; the Wigmore Hall, a recital centre; and
St John’s, Smith Square.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony, the Philharmonia, the Royal Philharmonic, the BBC
Symphony, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester), the
City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony, and the
Ulster and the Scottish National Orchestras. The BBC’s six orchestras
provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There are
also specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English Chamber
Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the Academy of Ancient
Music, the Bournemouth Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle
upon Tyne), the Scottish Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
The London Sinfonietta specialises in performing contemporary music.
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis, Jane Glover, Sir Neville
Marriner, Simon Rattle and Jeffrey Tate reach a wide audience through
their recordings as well as by their performances. The works of living
composers such as Sir Michael Tippett, Sir Peter Maxwell Davies and Sir
Harrison Birtwistle enjoy international acclaim. Younger composers include
George Benjamin, Oliver Knussen, Colin Matthews, Nigel Osborne and
Robert Saxton. The Master of the Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson,
holds an office within the Royal Household with responsibility for organising
and writing music for state occasions.
The principal choral societies include the Bach Choir, the Brighton
Festival Chorus, the Royal Choral Society, the Huddersfield Choral Society,
the CardTf Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh International Festival Chorus
and the Belfast Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras
maintain their own choral societies. The English tradition of church singing
is represented by choirs such as those of King’s College Chapel, Cambridge
and Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. There are many male-voice choirs in
Wales and in certain parts of England.
Among the characteristics of modern pop and rock music are the diversity of
styles, the frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short
lifespan of many groups. Electric guitars and drums usually provide the
instrumental basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass
instruments, while many groups have adopted synthesisers. In the 1960s and
1970s groups such as the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Who, Led Zeppelin
and Pink Floyd achieved international success. British groups continue to
have enormous appeal to audiences throughout the world and often set new
trends in music. Some of the more recent groups include Def Leppard, the
Eurythmics, Fine Young Cannibals, the Pet Shop Boys and Wet Wet Wet
Well-known performers include George Michael, David Bowie, Phil Collins
458
Jazz
Opera and
Dance
Subsidised Dance
Companies
Training
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Paul McCartney and Lisa Stansfield. In recent years black musicians have
made a large contribution to the development of popular music.
Jazz has an enthusiastic following in Britain and is played in numerous clubs
and public houses. British musicians such as Barbara Thompson, Stan
Tracey, John Surman, Andy Sheppard and Courtney Pine have established
strong reputations throughout Europe. Festivals of jazz music are held
annually at Camden (London), Edinburgh, Glasgow, Crawley (West Sussex)
and at a number of other places. Jazz Services provides a national touring
network.
Jazz EM, Britain’s first radio station devoted exclusively to jazz, was
launched in March 1990. It broadcasts both live and recorded music 24
hours a day to listeners in the London area.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are held at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London. The Royal Opera and Royal Ballet, which rank
among the world’s finest companies, are supported by a permanent
orchestra. Seasons of opera in English are given by the English National
Opera at the London Coliseum. Scottish Opera has regular winter seasons at
the Theatre Royal in Glasgow, and tours mainly in Scotland and northern
England. Welsh National Opera presents seasons in Cardiff and other cities.
Opera 80 takes opera to towns throughout England, playing in a wide range
of venues. Opera North, based in Leeds, undertakes tours primarily in the
north of England and Opera Factory stages experimental work in opera and
music theatre. Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by Opera, Northern
Ireland.
An opera season for which international casts are specially assembled is
held every summer at Glyndebourne in East Sussex. This is followed by an
autumn tour by Glyndebourne Touring Opera, often using casts drawn
from the chorus of the festival season.
Subsidised dance companies include: the Birmingham (formerly Sadler’s
Wells) Royal Ballet, which is based in the English regions; English National
Ballet, which divides its performances between London and the regions;
Northern Ballet Theatre, which is based in Manchester and also tours widely
throughout England, and Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow. Also included
are Rambert Dance (Britain’s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in
1966 as a leading contemporary dance company); London Contemporary
Dance Theatre, which provides regular seasons in London besides touring
extensively; Adzido (Pan African Dance Ensemble) and African People s
Dance Company. The Arts Council also supports Dance Umbrella, an
organisation which promotes an annual festival of contemporary dance. In
addition, the three Arts Councils and the regional arts associations support
individual artists and offer project grants to several small groups.
Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The
leading London colleges are the Royal Academy of Music, the Royal College
of Music, the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity College of
Music. Outside London the main centres are the Royal Scottish Academy of
Music and Drama in Glasgow, the Royal Northern College of Music in
Manchester, the Welsh College of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the
Birmingham Conservatoire. The National Opera Studio provides advanced
training courses.
Leading dance schools include the Royal Ballet School, the Ballet Rambert
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
459
FILMS
Government
Support for the
Film Industry
School and the London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many
private schools, have helped in raising British dance to its present standard.
Dance is now a subject for degree studies at the Laban Centre, the University
of Surrey and Darlington College of the Arts. Courses for students intending
to work with community groups are available at three institutions.
A city technology college offering studies in drama, music and dance
to pupils aged from 13 to 18, with the emphasis on the application of
technology to the performing arts, is due to open in Croydon, Surrey, in
September 1991. The capital cost, amounting to £5-9 million, will be shared
between the Government (60 per cent) and the British phonographic in¬
dustry (40 per cent).
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and
concert performances. Special performances of orchestral music for children
include the Robert Mayer Concerts, held in London on Saturday mornings.
Ludus Dance in Education Company and Outreach (in the north of
England) work mainly with young people. Scottish Ballet Steps Out works in
schools throughout Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take
the examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music.
Music is one of the foundation subjects in the National Curriculum in
publicly maintained schools in England and Wales. The National Youth
Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other youth
orchestras are noted for their high standards. Nearly a third of the players in
the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain. There is also
a National Youth Jazz Orchestra.
National Youth Music Theatre, which is based in London, gives young
people between 11 and 18 the opportunity to perform music theatre under
the guidance of professional directors and choreographers. All the work
takes place in the school holidays.
British films, actors, and the creative and technical services supporting them
are widely acclaimed in international film festivals and other events. Besides
feature films, including co-productions with other countries, the industry
produces films for television as well as promotional, advertising, industrial,
scientific, educational and training films.
There are approximately 1,560 cinema screens in Britain and estimated
attendances in 1989 amounted to about 90 million. Cinema attendance
figures declined rapidly between the mid-1950s and the early 1980s, due
mainly to competition from television. However, cinema-going started to
increase in 1986, partly as a result of British Film Year (1985), which was
successful in promoting the cinema and British films. The present
resurgence can be attributed partly to the rapid growth in the rental of video
films, which has stimulated not only an interest in films generally but also a
wish to see popular action films in their original medium. There has been a
growth in recent years in the number of grant-aided regional film theatres
and film societies offering alternative programmes to those of the
commercial cinema chains.
Following a wide-ranging review of the film industry, measures were taken
by the Government in 1985 to remove certain statutory controls on cinemas
which had become outdated and were no longer contributing to the
industry s development. British Screen Finance, a private sector company
with shareholders from the film and television industries, was set up in 1986
460
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Film
Institute
to provide a source of finance for new film-makers with commercially viable
productions who have difficulty in attracting funding. The company,
investing its own money, together with contributions from the Government
amounting to £7-5 million over five years, part-finances the production of
low- and medium-budget films involving largely British talent. With further
government funding of £2-5 million over five years, the company manages
schemes to encourage the early stages of film project development and the
production of short films.
An annual government grant (£12-7 million for 1990—91) is made to the
British Film Institute and one of over £656,000 to the Scottish Film Council
and the Scottish Film Production Fund. In June 1990 the Government
agreed to provide £5 million over three years to help British film producers
seeking to enter European co-production.
The development of film, video and television as an art form is promoted by
the British Film Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scot¬
tish Film Council. The Institute offers direct financial and technical help
through its Film Production Board to new and experienced film-makers who
cannot find support elsewhere, and helps to fund film and video workshops
in liaison with the Channel Four Television Company.
It administers the National Film Theatre in London and the National Film
Archive, and has a library from which films and video-cassettes may be hired.
The Institute’s Information Division holds extensive international collections
of books, periodicals, scripts, stills and posters. Its Education Department
aims to enable as many people as possible to discover new ways of producing
and enjoying film, video and television.
The National Film Archive contains over 150,000 films, including
newsreels and other miscellaneous items, and over 35,000 television
programmes. BFI South Bank comprises the Museum of the Moving Image
(see p 464), and the National Film Theatre. The latter has two cinemas
showing films of historical, artistic or technical interest, and is unique in
offering regular programmes unrestricted by commercial considerations or
by the date or country of origin of the films. Each autumn it mounts the
London Film Festival, at which some 150 new films from all over the world
are screened.
The British Film Institute has promoted, and helps to fund, the
development of some 40 regional film theatres, and is involved in
establishing film and television centres with a range of activities and facilities
in a number of major cities. It also co-operates with the regional arts
associations and grant-aids their film activities. The Institute received
£500,000 in incentive funding in 1989-90, which it is using to generate a
further £1 million from other sources. It has raised some £15 million from
private sources for capital development.
The Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute’s agent in Wales. In Scotland
the Scottish Film Council supports regional film theatres, administers the
Scottish Film Archive, and promotes and provides material for media
education. Together with the Scottish Arts Council, it has set up the Scottish
Film Production Fund, which makes grants towards film production in
Scotland. Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts Council of
Northern Ireland. An annual festival of film and television in the Celtic
countries is held in rotation in Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France.
Children’s
Film
The Children’s Film and Television Foundation produces and distributes
entertainment films specially designed for children. These are shown largely
through the medium of video and television.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
461
Training in
Film
Production
Cinema
Licensing and
Film
Classification
Videos
VISUAL ARTS
The National Film and Television School, which is financed jointly by the
Government and the film and television industry, offers postgraduate and
short course training for directors, editors, camera technicians, animators
and other specialists. Training in film production is also given at the London
International Film School, the Royal College of Art, and at some poly¬
technics and other institutions.
Cinemas showing films to the public must be licensed by local authorities,
which have a legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to
unsuitable films, and may prevent the showing of any film. In assessing the
suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the judgment of an
independent non-statutory body, the British Board of Film Classification, to
which films offered to the public must be submitted. The Board was set up
on the initiative of the cinema industry to ensure a proper standard is
maintained in films shown to the public. It does not use any written code of
censorship, but can require cuts to be made before granting a certificate;
very rarely, it refuses a certificate.
Films passed by the Board are put into one of six categories: U meaning
universal—suitable for all; PC, meaning parental guidance, in which some
scenes may be unsuitable for young children; 12, 15 and 18, for people of
not less than 12, 15 and 18 years of age respectively; and Restricted 18, for
restricted showing only at segregated premises to which no one under 18 is
admitted—for example, licensed cinema clubs.
The British Board of Film Classification is also legally responsible for the
classification of videos. The system of classification is similar to that for films.
It is an offence to supply commercially a video which has not been classified
or to supply it in contravention of its classification—for example, to sell or
hire a video classified 18 to a person under the age of 18.
State support for the visual arts consists largely of maintenance and purchase
grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase grants for
municipal museums and galleries, and funding through local authorities, the
Museums and Galleries Commission and the area museum councils (see
p 462). It also includes funding for living artists channelled through the Arts
Councils, the Crafts Council and the regional arts associations, and grants
towards the cost of art education. The Government encourages high
standards of industrial design and craftsmanship through grants to the
Design Council.
All national museums and galleries are financed chiefly from government
funds. They may levy entrance charges to their permanent collections,
special exhibitions and outstations at their discretion. Government policy is
to give priority to the conservation of the buildings and collections of the
national institutions rather than to increasing purchase grants for acqui¬
sitions. All the national collections are managed by independent trustees.
Museums and art galleries maintained by local authorities, universities and
private benefactions may receive help in building up their collections
through annual government grants administered by the Museums and
Galleries Commission (for England and Wales) and the Scottish Museums
Council. Financial and practical assistance to both national and local
museums and galleries is also given by the Arts Council and by trusts and
voluntary bodies, including the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, the
National Art-Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society.
Pre-eminent works of art accepted by the Government in place of
inheritance tax are allocated to public galleries. In 1989-90, total
462
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Museums and
Art Galleries
Museums
Association
government spending on this scheme amounted to a record level of over
£11-5 million. Financial help may be available from the National Heritage
Memorial Fund, which was allocated £3 million by the Government in
1990-91. In recent years, the Fund has made important contributions
towards pictures bought by the Birmingham, Leeds and Manchester City Art
Galleries, and by the national galleries and museums.
In co-operation with regional arts associations, the Arts Council makes
grants towards the public display of the visual arts, especially contemporary
and experimental works, and the publication of books and magazines. It also
encourages the commissioning of works of art in public places. The South
Bank Board maintains a collection of contemporary British art and organises
touring exhibitions throughout the country on behalf of the Arts Council.
The Council supports a number of art and photography galleries in London,
including the Hayward Gallery, Serpentine Gallery, Photographers’ Gallery
and Whitechapel Art Gallery; and in the regions, the Arnolfini in Bristol and
the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford. It also provides support for artists
and photographers through purchasing and commissioning fellowships and
residencies. Similar support is given by the Scottish Arts Council to galleries
in Scotland such as the Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh. The Welsh and
Northern Ireland Arts Councils have galleries in Cardiff and Belfast
respectively.
A number of modern British sculptors and painters have international
reputations, and have received international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. Among the best known are Francis Bacon,
David Hockney, Lucian Freud, Eduardo Paolozzi and Richard Long.
A major expansion in the number of museums is taking place and many are
introducing new display techniques that attract increasing numbers of
visitors. About 100 million people a year attend some 2,500 museums and
galleries open to the public, which include the major national collections and
a wide variety of municipally and independently or privately owned
institutions. Government provision for museums and galleries is £174
million in 1991-92. The Museums and Galleries Improvement Fund, which
is jointly financed by the Government and the Wolfson Charities, was
announced in March 1990. The Fund, which will have an initial annual
budget of £4 million for three years, will be available for renovating and
improving galleries, focusing on priority work which museums are unable to
fund fully from their own resources.
The Government takes advice on policy matters from the Museums and
Galleries Commission. The Commission also promotes co-operation
between national and provincial institutions. Nine area museum councils
supply technical services and advice on conservation, display, documentation
and publicity.
The Government encourages the loan of objects from national and
provincial museums and gallery collections so that works of art can be seen
by as wide a public as possible. It provides funds for promoting the touring
of exhibitions and for facilitating the loan of items between institutions.
The independent Museums Association, to which many museums and art
galleries and their staffs belong, and which has many overseas members,
facilitates exchange of information and discussion of matters relating to
museums and galleries, and is an examining body for professional
qualifications. It provides training, seminar, research and publishing
programmes. Its subsidiary, Museum Enterprises, provides consultancy
services to museums and galleries in planning, trading and recruitment.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
463
National
Collections
Other Collections
The Museum Training Institute, announced in 1989, is responsible for
developing training standards and programmes.
The national museums and art galleries, most of which are located in
London, contain some of the world’s most comprehensive collections of
objects of artistic, archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest.
They are the British Museum (including the Museum of Mankind), the
Natural History Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum (V & A ), the
Science Museum, the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National
Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War Museum, the National Army Museum,
the Royal Air Force Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the Wallace
Collection, the Geological Museum and a group of museums and galleries on
Merseyside. Some of the museums in London have branches in the regions,
examples being the National Railway Museum (York) and the National
Museum of Photography, Film and Television (Bradford), which are part of
the Science Museum. The V & A plans to open a branch in Bradford.
Recent developments at the Tate Gallery have included the opening in
1987 of the Clore Gallery to house the paintings bequeathed to the nation by
J. M. W. Turner, and the opening of the Tate Gallery in Liverpool in 1988.
An extension to the National Gallery, which is being financed by the
Sainsbury family, is under construction. The Theatre Museum, a branch of
the V & A, opened in Covent Garden, London, in 1987.
In Scotland the national collections are held by the National Museums of
Scotland and the National Galleries of Scotland. The former includes the
Royal Museum of Scotland and the Scottish United Services Museum, both
in Edinburgh; the Museum of Flight, near North Berwick; the Scottish
Agricultural Museum, at Ingliston; and the Shambellie House Museum of
Costume, near Dumfries. The latter collection comprises the National
Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery and the Scottish
National Gallery of Modern Art. The National Museum of Wales (where a
major expansion scheme is in progress), in Cardiff, has a branch at St
Fagan’s Castle, where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed; an Industrial and
Maritime Museum in Cardiffs dockland; the Museum of the Woollen
Industry at Drefach Felindre; and the Slate Museum at Llanberis. Northern
Ireland has two national museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and the
Ulster Folk and Transport Museum in County Down.
Other important collections in London include the Royal Armouries in the
Tower of London, the Museum of London, Sir John Soane’s Museum, the
Courtauld collection and the London Transport Museum. The Queen’s
Gallery in Buckingham Palace has exhibitions of pictures from the extensive
royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and
natural history, usually administered by the local authorities but sometimes
by local learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and
Cambridge are rich in museums. Many are associated with their universities,
such as the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford (founded in 1683—the oldest in
the world), and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Many private art
collections in historic family mansions, including those owned by the
National Trusts, are open to the public, while an increasing number of open
air museums depict the regional life of an area or preserve early industrial
remains. These include the Weald and Downland Museum in West Sussex,
the North of England Open Air Museum in Durham, and the Ironbridge
Gorge Museum in Shropshire. Skills of the past are revived in a number of
‘living’ museums like the Gladstone Pottery Museum near Stoke-on-Trent
and the Quarry Bank Mill at Styal in Cheshire.
464
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crafts
Training in Art
and Design
The Art Market
Among the newest museums are the National Horseracing Museum at
Newmarket; the Jorvik Viking Centre, a reconstruction of the Viking
settlement in York; a new maritime museum in Portsmouth, housing the
restored wreck of the Mary Rose, the flagship of Henry VIII, which sank in
1545 and was raised in 1982; and Catalyst: Museum of the Chemical
Industry, at Widnes, Cheshire. The Burrell Collection in Glasgow houses a
world-famous series of tapestries, paintings and objets d’art. The Museum of
the Moving Image, which opened on the South Bank of the Thames in 1988,
traces the history of film and television and features displays of moving
images ranging from ancient shadow theatre to future technologies.
Apart from their permanent collections, most museums and galleries stage
temporary exhibitions on particular themes. There are also a number of
national art exhibiting societies, the most famous being the Royal Academy
of Arts at Burlington House. The Academy holds an annual Summer
Exhibition, where the works of hundreds of professional and amateur artists
can be seen, and important exhibitions during the rest of the year. The Royal
Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh. There are also
children’s exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of Children’s Art.
Government aid for the crafts, amounting to just over £2-5 million in
1990-91, is administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The
Council supports artist craftsmen and women by promoting interest in their
work, making it accessible to the public and encouraging the creation and
appreciation of articles of fine craftsmanship. Grants are available to help
with training, setting up workshops and acquiring equipment. The Council
arranges exhibitions and seminars and circulates information. It also runs a
British crafts shop at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Funding is given to
the Welsh Arts Council and the regional arts associations in England for the
support of crafts, and to Contemporary Applied Art, a membership organ¬
isation that holds exhibitions and sells work through its London gallery.
Scotland receives a separate government grant for support for crafts.
Most practical education in art and design is provided in colleges of art
(among the best known of which are the Slade School and the Royal College
of Art, both in London), further education colleges and private art schools.
The London Institute was formed in 1986 from a merger of four art colleges
in London with a number of other colleges. Degrees at postgraduate level
are awarded by the Royal College of Art. Art is also taught at an advanced
level at the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities and polytechnics concentrate largely on academic
disciplines such as the history of art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology at University College, London.
Art is one of the foundation subjects in the National Curriculum in publicly
maintained schools in England and Wales; and the Society for Education
through Art encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of
original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The Open College of the Arts, launched in 1987, offers correspondence
courses in art and design, painting, sculpture, textiles, photography and
creative writing to people wishing to study at home.
London is a major centre for the international art market, and sales of works
of art take place in the main auction houses (two of the longest established
being Sotheby’s and Christie’s), and through private dealers. Certain items
are covered by export control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
465
LITERATURE
AND LIBRARIES
Authors’
Copyright and
Performers’
Protection
over 50 years old and worth £20,000 or more (£5,000 or more in the case of
British historical portraits); photographic material over 50 years old and
valued at £500 or more an item; and documents, manuscripts and archives
over 50 years old, irrespective of value. A licence from the Department of
Trade and Industry is required before such items can be exported. If the
Department’s advisers recommend withholding a licence, the matter is
referred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art. If the
Committee considers a work to be of national importance it can advise the
Government to withhold the export licence for a specified time to give a
public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a fair price.
A number of literary activities receive public subsidy through the Arts
Council of Great Britain. In 1989, for example, the Council supported the
Silver Jubilee Conference of the Association for Commonwealth Literature
and Language Studies, held in Britain for the first time. The Council further
developed its scheme to support the translation into English of works written
in other languages, with special priority being given to books in Asian, East
European and Scandinavian languages. It also established a touring network
for writers. Financial assistance was given to help set up a black literary
archive, partly based on recorded materials; to improve the management of
multicultural publishing presses; and to provide school teachers with the
opportunities to consider how best to introduce non-Western literature into
the classroom.
There are free public libraries throughout Britain, private libraries and
several private literary societies. Book reviews are featured in the press and
on television and radio and numerous periodicals concerned with literature
are published. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is provided by a
number of awards, some of the most valuable being the Booker, National
Cash Register and Whitbread prizes. Awards to encourage young writers
include those of the Somerset Maugham Trust Fund and the E. C. Gregory
Trust Fund. Many British writers are internationally recognised and in 1983
the Nobel prize for literature was awarded to the novelist Sir William
Golding. Other well-known living authors include Graham Greene, Anthony
Burgess, Penelope Lively and Iris Murdoch. Distinguished British poets
include Ted Hughes, the Poet Laureate, who writes verse to mark royal
occasions; Geoffrey Hill; Tony Harrison; James Berry; Gavin Ewart; and
Elizabeth Jennings.
Original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works, films and sound
recordings are automatically protected in Britain. This protection is given to
foreign works under the terms of international conventions.1 The copyright
owner has rights against unauthorised reproduction, public performance
and broadcasting of his or her work. In most cases the author is the first
owner of the copyright, and the term of copyright is the life of the author
and a period of 50 years after his or her death (50 years from the date of
release for films and sound recordings).
The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 reformed and restated the
copyright law, defining copyright as a property right capable, like any other
property, of being exploited, used, bought or sold. It also introduced the
concept of moral rights, whereby authors have the right to be identified on
their works and to object to any unjustified modifications of them. The Act
'All countries which are members of the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright
Convention are obliged to protect the works of British nationals and works first published in Britain.
466
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Libraries
The British
Library
Other
Libraries
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
introduced a statutory framework of civil rights to protect performers
against the trading in unauthorised recordings of live performance, the term
of protection for these rights being 50 years from the year in which the
performance is given.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading
society for studies in the humanities.
Other specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the Bib¬
liographical Society and several societies devoted to particular authors, the
largest of which is the Dickens Fellowship. Various societies, such as the
Poetry Society, sponsor poetry readings and recitals.
The British Library, the national library of Britain, is one of the world’s
greatest libraries. Its collections comprise over 18 million items—mono¬
graphs, manuscripts, maps, newspapers, patents, stamps and recorded
sound. Publishers are obliged to deposit there a copy of most items published
or sold in Britain.
The Science Reference and Information Service manages a com¬
prehensive collection of material on modern science, technology and com¬
merce. It also includes the national patents collection.
The National Bibliographic Service processes material legally deposited at
the Library for inclusion in catalogues and maintains a machine-readable
database of bibliographical records from which is derived the British National
Bibliography (a list of new and forthcoming British books) and a range of
automated bibliographical services.
The Research and Development Department is a major source of funding
for research and development in library and information services.
The Library’s Document Supply Centre at Boston Spa (West Yorltshire) is
the national centre for inter-library lending within Britain and between
Britain and countries overseas. It supplies 3-5 million requests a year, mostly
from its own stock of 7 million documents.
The Library’s new London headquarters at St Pancras is being built at a
cost of £450 million, and will be open to the public from 1993. It will provide
reading rooms for most of the Library’s London-based collections—human¬
ities, science, technology and industry—and also specialist reading areas.
The new Library will also offer greatly improved services, including
exhibition galleries, a bookshop, a lecture theatre and a conference centre.
The National Libraries of Scotland and Wales, the Bodleian Library of
Oxford University and the Cambridge University Library can also claim
copies of all new British publications under legal deposit. The first phase of a
new building for the National Library of Scotland was opened in 1989.
Costing £11-5 million, it provides 49 km (30 miles) of storage shelving and
accommodates a map library, lending services and the Scottish Science
Library. Work on the next stage is expected to start in late 1990, for
completion in 1994.
Some of the national museums and government departments have
important libraries. The Public Record Office contains the records of the
superior courts of law and of most government departments, as well as
famous historical documents. The Scottish Record Office in Edinburgh
serves the same purpose.
Besides a number of great private collections, such as that of the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
467
University
Libraries
Special Libraries
Public Libraries
Examples are the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs,
the Commonwealth Trust, the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal
Academy of Music, the National Library for the Blind and the Book Trust.
The Poetry Library, owned by the Arts Council, is a national collection of
twentieth century poetry written in or translated into English.
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those
of the more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of
the colleges and institutions of the University of London total 9 million
volumes, the John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains 3-4
million volumes, Edinburgh 2 million, Leeds 1-8 million, and Birmingham,
Glasgow, Liverpool and Aberdeen each have over one million volumes.
Many universities have important research collections in special subjects;
examples include the Barnes Medical Library at Birmingham and the British
Library of Political and Economic Science at the London School of
Economics.
Numerous associations and commercial and industrial organisations run
library and information services. Although most are primarily intended for
use within the organisation, many special libraries can be used, by
arrangement, by people interested in the area covered, and the specialist
publications held are often available for inter-library lending.
Local authorities have a duty to provide a free lending and reference library
service in their areas, and Britain’s network of libraries has a total stock of
about 137 million books. Over half of the total population are members of
public libraries. Some areas are served by mobile libraries, and domiciliary
services cater for people unable to visit a library. Many libraries have
collections of records, audio- and video-cassettes, and musical scores for loan
to the public, while a number also lend from collections of works of art,
which may be originals or reproductions. Most libraries hold documents on
local history, and nearly all provide children’s departments, while reference
and information sections and art, music, commercial and technical
departments meet the growing and more specific demands in these fields.
The information role is one of increasing importance for many libraries, and
greater use is being made of information technology, including micro¬
computers and reference databases.
The Government remains committed to providing a free basic library
service—the borrowing and consultation of books and other printed
materials—but believes there is scope for greater private sector involvement.
In 1988 it made available £250,000 a year over three years for an incentive
funding scheme to encourage new developments and increase efficiency in
public library services in England. Priority is given to projects involving
collaboration with other libraries and the private sector.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 protects the core of the
free public library service. It enables public library authorities to charge for
some services, such as research services and the lending of non-printed
materials, including cassettes and records.
The Public Lending Right Scheme gives registered authors the right to
receive payment from a central fund (totalling £3-5 million in 1990—91) for
the use of their books borrowed from public libraries. Payment is made in
proportion to the number of times the authors’ books are lent out. The
Government is advised on library and information matters by four library
and information services councils or committees, representing England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
468
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Library
Association
Historical
Manuscripts
Books
The Library Association is the principal professional organisation for those
engaged in library and information services. Founded in 1877, the
Association has 24,000 members working in all kinds of libraries and
information units. It maintains a Register of Chartered Librarians and
publishes books, pamphlets and official journals.
The Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts is the central investigatory
and advisory body on manuscripts, records and archives other than the
public records. It maintains a National Register of Archives and advises
owners, custodians and government, assists researchers and co-ordinates the
activities of bodies working in the field. The Government has announced
support of £300,000 over three years from 1990-91 towards the
establishment of a National Manuscripts Conservation Trust, whose purpose
is to provide assistance to record offices, libraries and other owners of
manuscripts and archives accessible to the public.
In 1989 British publishers issued nearly 62,000 separate titles, of which
about 46,000 were new titles and the remainder reprints and new editions.
The British publishing industry devotes much effort to developing overseas
markets, and in 1989 the value of exports of British books amounted to over
£660 million. The industry is also noted for its interest in new technological
developments, including electronic publishing and the development of
software for educational and other purposes.
Among the leading organisations representing publishing and distribution
interests are the Publishers Association, which has 200 members, and the
Booksellers’ Association, with 3,300 members. The Publishers Association,
through its associated body the Book Development Council, promotes the
export of British books worldwide.
The British Council publicises British books through its 116 libraries
overseas, participation in international book fairs and a programme of
travelling exhibitions. The Council also publishes a monthly periodical,
British Book News.
The Book Trust, whose membership includes authors, publishers, book¬
sellers, librarians and readers, encourages an interest in books and arranges
exhibitions throughout Britain.
24 The Press
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain
than in most other developed countries. On an average day two out of three
people over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper; about three
out of four read a Sunday newspaper. Three out of four adults regularly
read a paid-for regional or local newspaper as well as a free local paper.
National papers have a total circulation of 15-8 million on weekdays and 17-9
million on Sundays, though the total readership is considerably greater.
There are about 135 daily (Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers,
2,000 weekly paid-for and free newspapers (including business, sporting and
religious newspapers) and some 7,000 periodical publications.
There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is subject to the
general laws on publication (see p 479). With the aim of improving the
present largely voluntary system of press regulation in Britain, both the
Press Council (see p 478) and the national newpapers have published codes
of conduct and new procedures for dealing with readers’ complaints. In
addition, a government-appointed committee has recommended the setting
up by the newspaper industry of a Press Complaints Commission, in a final
attempt to make self-regulation of the press work properly. It also proposes
that physical intrusion into privacy by journalists should, in certain
circumstances, be unlawful (see p 478). These measures were prompted by
growing criticism of press standards, with allegations of unjustified invasion
of privacy and inaccurate and biased reporting, among other abuses,
resulting in calls for increased government regulation of the press.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of
education. Newspapers are almost always financially independent of any
political party; where they express pronounced views and show obvious
political leanings in their editorial comments, these derive from proprietorial
and other non-party influences. Nevertheless, during general election
campaigns many newspapers recommend their readers to vote for a
particular political party. Even newspapers which adopt strong political
views in their editorial columns include feature and other types of articles by
authors of a variety of political persuasions. In order to preserve their
character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are governed by
various trustee-type arrangements. Others have management arrangements
to ensure their editors’ authority and independence.
Working practices have undergone profound changes throughout the
newspaper industry in response to the challenges posed by computer-based
technology and the need to contain costs; using computerised technology
can reduce the initial capital outlay required to produce new papers.
Newsprint, about three-quarters of which is imported, forms 24 per cent
of average national newspaper costs; labour represents about 55 per cent.
Revenue from sales accounts for varying proportions of income. Many
newspapers and periodicals derive considerable earnings from their
470
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 24.1: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date Controlled by
Circulation3
average
January—June
1990
National dailies
‘Populars’
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1964)
Today (1986)
‘Qualities’
Financial Times (1888)
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
The Guardian (1821)
The Independent (1986)
The Times (1785)
National Sundays
‘Populars’
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday Sport (1986)
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
The People (1881)
‘Qualities’
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
The Independent on Sunday
(1990)
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Correspondent
(1989) '
The Sunday Times (1822)
United Newspapers 1,561,754
Associated Newspapers Group 1,670,036
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 3,129,890
United Newspapers 919,133
Morning Star Co-operative Society 18,000
News International 3,936,692
News International 581,240
Pearson 291,531
The Daily Telegraph 1,113,033
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 430,458
Newspaper Publishing 414,357
News International 432,453
News International 5,036,019
United Newspapers 1,727,376
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 2,910,867
Apollo 451,951
Associated Newspapers Group 1,889,431
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 2,588,468
The Daily Telegraph 656,120
Newspaper Publishing 362,647
Lonrho International 566,854
The Sunday Correspondent Ltd 205,947
News International 1,186,667
‘‘Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (consisting of publishers, advertisers and advertising
agencies) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period. The circulation figure of the Morning Star is
otherwise audited. The circulation figures for The Daily Telegraph and the Sunday Telegraph are from January to June
1989, and for The Independent on Sunday from February to June 1990.
advertising; total current yearly spending of £2,900 million on newspaper
advertising makes newspapers by far the largest advertising medium in
Britain.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no
subsidies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and
magazine sales (but not advertising receipts) are zero-rated for value added
tax. Newspapers registered with the Post Office receive a concession on
THE PRESS
471
Newspaper
Ownership
The National
Press
postal rates, and there are concessions on ‘per-word’ rates for international
press telegrams and photo-telegrams. Like all postal customers, publishers
can obtain reductions in charges for regular bulk postings.
In discussions on a ‘new world information and communication order’
Britain has opposed measures designed to increase governmental regulation
of the media or to limit the free flow of information. At the same time, it has
reaffirmed its willingness to support efforts to improve communications
systems in the developing world.
Ownership of the national, London and regional daily newspapers is
concentrated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the
groups controlling the national press are listed in Table 24.1). There are, in
addition, some 350 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national news¬
paper and periodical publishers are major corporations with interests
ranging over the whole field of publishing and communications; some have
shares in independent television and radio companies while others are
involved in industrial and commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue
concentration of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears
that newspaper shareholdings in independent television or independent
local radio companies have led or are leading to results contrary to the public
interest, the Independent Broadcasting Authority (which regulates com¬
mercial television and radio) can, with the consent of the Home Secretary,
notify the companies that their programmes may cease to be transmitted.
There are additional controls over newspaper interests in cable television
services. It is unlawful to transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a
proprietor whose newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting,
with that of the newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies
without the written consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Except in certain limited cases, consent may be given only after the Secretary
of State has referred the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission
and received its report.
The Government has included new proposals for preventing excessive
cross-media ownership in the Broadcasting Bill currently before Parliament,
and has set up an independent inquiry into cross-media promotion.
Twelve morning daily papers and 11 Sunday papers (see Table 24.1)
circulate throughout most parts of Britain, and are known as national
newspapers. Formerly they were produced in or near Fleet Street in London
with, in some cases, northern editions being printed in Manchester. All of
the national papers have now moved their editorial and printing facilities to
other parts of London (including the Docklands) or away from the capital
altogether; some use contract printing. Today, launched in 1986, is printed at
Poyle (Middlesex) and Manchester. The Independent, which also began
publishing in 1986, uses printing presses in Bradford, Northampton and
Portsmouth. Scottish editions of The Sun, The Times, News of the World and The
Sunday Times are printed in Glasgow. In order to improve distribution and
sales overseas, editions of the Financial Times are printed in Frankfurt,
Roubaix (northern France), New Jersey and Tokyo, while The Guardian
prints an international edition in Frankfurt.
Several newspapers have had very long and distinguished histories: for
example, The Observer, first published in 1791, is the oldest national Sunday
newspaper in the world, and The Times, one of the most influential
472
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Regional
Newspapers
England
newspapers and Britain’s oldest daily national newspaper, began publication
in 1785. A new quality Sunday paper, The Sunday Correspondent, was
launched in 1989, and The Independent started a Sunday edition in January
1990. In May 1990 Mirror Group Newspapers began publishing The
European, a weekly English-language international newspaper. It is printed
in Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Hungary.
The leading Scottish papers. The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’
papers on the basis of differences in style and content. Quality newspapers
are directed at readers who want full information on a wide range of public
matters and are prepared to spend a considerable amount of time reading it.
Popular newspapers appeal to people wanting news of a more entertaining
character, presented in a more concise form and with ample illustrations. At
present, all quality papers, apart from The Sunday Correspondent, are
broadsheet in format and all popular papers, with the exception of the
Sunday Express, tabloid. Five dailies and five Sundays are usually described as
quality newspapers. Many newspapers are printed in colour, while a number
of papers produce colour magazines as part of the Saturday or Sunday
paper. Several of the Sunday newspapers (and some of the dailies on
Saturday) publish sections with articles on travel, food and wine, and other
leisure topics.
There is a growing market for news and information in the electronic
media, and quality papers like the Financial Times provide material for use on
databases and videotext services such as Prestel. The Times supplies a news
service to Sky Television, a direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS) company
under the same ownership.
The total circulation of national newspapers amounted to 33 million in
1989, compared with 32 million in 1982. Sales of quality papers have risen by
20 per cent since 1982, while the popular press has experienced a fall of
5 per cent.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, around 70 morning
or evening dailies and Sundays and some 700 newspapers appearing once or
twice a week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers
also give coverage of national and international affairs. Generally, regional
evening newspapers are non-political, while the morning newspapers adopt
a more positive political stance and tend to be independent or conservative in
outlook.
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds), the Northern Echo
(Darlington) and the Eastern Daily Press (Norwich) each have a circulation of
around 90,000, and two provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun
(Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury (Birmingham)—sell 115,000
and 150,000 copies respectively. Circulation figures of evening papers start
at about 11,000 and most are in the 20,000 to 100,000 range. Those with
much larger sales include the Manchester Evening News (266,000), the
Birmingham Evening Mail (217,000), Wolverhampton’s Express and Star
(239,000) and the Liverpool Echo (201,000). Paid weekly papers are of mainly
local appeal and are a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have
circulations in the 5,000 to 60,000 range.
There is one London evening newspaper, the Evening Standard, with a
circulation of 517,000. A number of evening newspapers are published in
the outer metropolitan area. The hundred or so local weeklies include
papers for every district in Greater London, often in the form of local
editions of an individual paper.
THE PRESS
473
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Free Distribution
Newspapers
Ethnic Minority
Publications
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in
Cardiff, with a circulation of 76,000 throughout Wales. In north Wales the
Daily Post, published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in the area.
A new Sunday newspaper—on Sunday—also published in Cardiff, with
a circulation of 45,000, was launched in 1989. Evening papers published in
Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South Wales Argus, Newport; the
South Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and the Evening Leader, Wrexham. Their
circulation range is between 27,000 and 90,000. North Wales is also served
by the Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers parts of north and mid-
Wales, and there is coverage to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening
News. 6
The weekly press (some 82 publications) includes English-language
papers, some of which carry articles in Welsh; bilingual papers; and Welsh-
language papers. Welsh community newspapers receive an annual grant as
part of the Government’s wider financial support for the Welsh language.
Scotland has six morning, six evening and four Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between 86,000 and 771,000, are The
Scotsman (published in Edinburgh); the Glasgow Herald- the Daily Record
(sister paper of the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser; the
Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the Scottish Daily Express (printed in
Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the range of 11,000 to
167,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times,
Dundee’s Evening Telegraph, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily
Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail,
the Sunday Post, the Scottish Sunday Express (printed in Manchester), and a
quality broadsheet paper, Scotland on Sunday, which was launched in 1988.
The national Sunday newspapers The Observer and The Sunday Times carry
Scottish supplements.
Local weekly newspapers number 113 and there are 60 free local papers.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and three
Sunday papers, all published in Belfast, with circulations ranging from
24,000 to 137,000. They are the News Letter (unionist), the Irish News
(nationalist), the evening Belfast Telegraph, the Sunday News, Sunday Life and
Sunday World (Northern Ireland edition). The News Letter, established in
1737, is the oldest English-language newspaper in the world. There are
about 45 weeklies. Newspapers from the Irish Republic, as well as the British
national press, are widely read in Northern Ireland.
Some 1,150 free distribution newspapers, mostly weekly and financed by
advertising, are now published in Britain; over half of them are produced by
established newspaper publishers. They have enjoyed rapid growth in recent
years and now have an estimated total weekly circulation of about 43 million.
Europe’s first daily free distribution paper, the Daily News (published four
days a week), was launched in Birmingham in 1984.
Some 100 newspapers and magazines are produced by members of the
ethnic minorities, about 60 of which are intended for the Asian community.
Most are published weekly or monthly. They include the Asian newspapers
The Daily Jang, New Life, Indiamail and Asian Times; and The Weekly Gleaner—a
local edition of the Jamaican Gleaner—and West Indian Digest. The Voice and
Caribbean Times are aimed at the black population in general, as is the
magazine Root; Chic is a fashion and beauty magazine. An Arabic daily, Al-
Arab, is also produced in Britain.
474
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Periodical
Press
The 7,000 periodical publications are classified as ‘consumer general
interest’, ‘special interest’ and ‘business-to-business’. There are also several
hundred ‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business
houses or public services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients,
and some 500 free consumer magazines. Directories and similar publications
number more than 2,000. The ‘alternative’ press comprises a large number
of titles, many of them devoted to radical politics, community matters,
religion, the occult, science or ecology.
Consumer general and specialist periodicals comprise magazines for a
wide range of interests. These include women’s magazines; publications for
children; religious periodicals; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with
sport, motoring, gardening, teenage interests and pop music; hobbies,
humour and retirement; and computer magazines. Also included are the
publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and
other organisations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are Radio Times and 7V Times,
which alone are allowed to carry full details of the coming week’s television
and radio programmes. Each has a circulation of around 3 million. The
Radio TimesITV Times listings duopoly will come to an end in March 1991,
and the advent of competition is likely to reduce the circulation figures of
both magazines.
Womans Weekly, Womans Own, Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in
Scotland) and My Weekly have circulations in the 490,000 to 1 million range,
and Womans Realm and Chat 523,000 and 331,000 respectively. A new
magazine aimed at young women, Me, has built up a circulation of over one
million since 1989, when it first appeared. In recent years several women’s
magazines from overseas have achieved large circulations; Prima and Best,
for instance, each sell around 825,000 copies, while Bella and Hello! are also
widely read. Smash Hits, with a circulation of 661,000, is a fortnightly
magazine dealing with pop music and teenage life styles.
Investors Chronicle is one of a number of periodicals for people with
business and investment interests. Of monthly magazines Reader’s Digest has
the highest circulation (1 -5 million).
The leading journals of opinion include The Economist, an independent
conservative publication covering a wider range of topics than its title
implies. The New Statesman and Society reviews social issues, politics, literature
and the arts from an independent socialist point of view, while the Spectator
covers similar subjects from an independent conservative standpoint. Tribune
represents certain left-wing views within the Labour Party.
New Scientist reports on science and technology in terms that the non¬
specialist can understand. Articles and features relating largely to television
and radio programmes appear in The Listener. Punch, traditionally the
leading humorous periodical, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also
cover public affairs. Weekly ‘listings’ magazines, including Time Out and City
Limits, provide details of cultural and other events in London and other large
cities.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to
the more serious reader. Business, scientific and professional journals,
publication of which ranges from twice weekly to quarterly, are an important
aspect of British publishing and business communication, many having a
considerable circulation overseas. There are about 4,000 publications
covering business and industrial affairs.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales
there are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both
New Printing
Technology
News Agencies
THE PRESS 475
Welsh and English. In Scotland there are three monthly illustrated
periodicals, a weekly paper devoted to farming interests, a number of literary
journals and numerous popular magazines. Northern Ireland has weekly,
monthly and quarterly publications covering business, professional and
leisure interests.
The heavy production costs of newspapers and periodicals continue to
encourage publishers to look for ways of reducing these costs, often by using
advanced computer systems to control editing and production processes.
The ‘front end’ or ‘single stroking’ system, for example, allows journalists or
advertising staff to input ‘copy’ directly into a video terminal, and then by
pressing a button to transform it automatically into computer-set columns of
type. Although it is possible for these columns to be assembled electronically
on a page-sized screen, turned into a full page, and made automatically into
a plate ready for transfer to the printing press, at present very few such
systems are in operation. Most involve the production of bromides from the
computer setting, which are pasted up into columns before being placed in a
plate-making machine.
The most advanced systems present opportunities for reorganisation
which have implications throughout a newspaper office and may give rise to
disputes over staffing levels and other industrial relations problems.
Generally, and most recently in the case of national newspapers, the
introduction of computerised systems has led to substantial reductions in
workforces, particularly, but not solely, among print workers.
All the national newspapers utilise computer technology, while its use in
the provincial press, which has generally led the way in adopting new
techniques, is widespread. Journalists type articles directly into, and edit
them on, computer terminals; colour pictures and graphics are entered into
the same system electronically. News International, publisher of three daily
and two Sunday papers, has at its London Docklands headquarters more
than 500 computer terminals, one of the largest systems installed at one time
anywhere in the world. The Financial Times opened a new printing plant in
the Docklands in 1988 with about 200 production workers, compared with
the 650 employed at its former printing facility in the City of London.
Other national papers have moved into new computer-based printing
plants outside Fleet Street. Where printing plants are some distance from
editorial offices, pages for printing are sent by facsimile machine from
typesetter to print plant.
Other technological developments include the use of full-colour printing,
and a switch from traditional letterpress printing to the web-offset litho or
plastic-plate processes. The new Docklands plant of the Associated News¬
papers Group uses flexography, a rubber-plate process.
The principal news agencies in Britain are Reuters, an international news
organisation registered in London, the Press Association and Extel Financial.
Reuters is a publicly owned company, employing some 10,000 full-time
staff in 82 countries. It has 1,270journalists, over 860 of whom work outside
Britain. The company serves subscribers in 158 countries, including
financial institutions; commodities houses; traders in currencies, equities
and bonds; major corporations; news agencies; newspapers; and radio and
television stations.
Reuters has developed the world’s most extensive international private
satellite and cable communications network to transmit its services. It
provides the media with general and economic news, news pictures and
476
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training for
Journalism
graphics, and television news. Services for business clients comprise
constantly updated price information and news, historical information,
facilities for computerised trading; and the supply of communications and
other equipment for financial dealing rooms. Information is distributed
through video terminals and teleprinters.
Visnews, a television news agency whose service is estimated to reach 1,500
million viewers every day, is jointly owned by Reuters.
The Press Association, the British and Irish national news agency, is co¬
operatively owned by the principal daily newspapers of Britain outside
London, and of the Irish Republic. It offers national and regional
newspapers and broadcasters a comprehensive range of home
news—general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all types of
financial, commercial and sports news—and includes in its services to
regional papers the world news of Reuters and Associated Press.
News is teleprinted from London by the Press Association, certain items
being available in Dataformat, as camera-ready copy. Its ‘Newsfile’ operation
provides general news, sports and foreign news on screen to non-media as
well as media clients by means of telephone and viewdata terminals. The
photographic department offers newspapers and broadcasters a daily service
of pictures from Britain and overseas; these are wired to the regional press.
The NewsFeatures service supplies reports of local or special interest and
provides exclusive rights to syndicated features. There is also a dial-in
graphics facility as well as extensive cuttings and photograph libraries.
Extel Financial supplies information and services to financial and business
communities throughout the world. Based in London, it has a network of
offices in Europe and the United States and direct representation in Japan
and South-East Asia. Data are collected from all the world’s major stock
exchanges, from companies and from the international press. The agency is
a major source of reference material on companies and securities. It supplies
a comprehensive range of data products on international financial matters,
and undertakes investment accounting for banks, insurance companies and
other institutions. Up-to-the-minute business and company news is made
available by the agency’s specialist financial news operation.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also catered for
by Associated Press and United Press International, which are British
subsidiaries of United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical
requirements. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which
represents the principal regional press organisations, sets and conducts
examinations, and organises short training courses for journalists.
The two main methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection
for a one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college of further education or
direct recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of
entrant take part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of ‘on-the-job’
training, and block-release courses (preceded by a period of distance
learning) are provided for those who have not attended a pre-entry course.
There are similar courses for press photographers.
Postgraduate diploma courses in journalism are available at the University
of Wales College of Cardiff; the City University, London; and Lancashire
Polytechnic, Preston. Courses are provided by the Newspaper Society
THE PRESS
477
Press
Institutions
Training Service for regional newspapers in such subjects as newspaper
sales, advertising, industrial relations and management.
Specialist training courses for journalists and editorial managers from
developing countries are offered by the Thomson Foundation in Cardiff.
The Foundation also conducts training courses in developing countries and
provides consultants to assist newspapers and magazines in advertising,
management, circulation and the introduction and operation of new
technology. It runs an international journalism training centre in
collaboration with Xinhua News Agency in Peking.
Reuters offers assistance to overseas journalists to study and train in
Britain, as well as in other parts of Europe and the United States. The Reuter
Foundation awards fellowships to journalists from developing nations to
spend a year at Oxford University. The company has also started to run
practical training courses in London for journalists from Eastern Europe;
these cover international news writing and business news skills.
The Periodicals Training Council is the official training organisation in
periodical publishing. It offers a wide range of short courses covering man¬
agement, editorial work, advertisement sales and circulation sales. It has
special responsibility for editorial training and administers an industry-wide
editorial training scheme for those already in employment. The
postgraduate courses in journalism at the University of Wales College of
Cardiff and the City University, London, contain periodical journalism
options, and the London College of Printing provides postgraduate courses
and General Certificate of Education Advanced level courses in periodical
journalism. Reed Business Publishing, one of the largest publishing
companies, has an in-company training course for suitable candidates from
the general public on a fee-paying basis.
Employers organisations include the Newspaper Publishers Association,
whose members publish national newspapers, and the Newspaper Society,
which represents the regional, local and London suburban press. The
Scottish Daily Newspaper Society represents the interests of daily and
Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper Publishers’
Association acts on behalf of the owners of weekly newspapers in Scotland;
and Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers is made up of proprietors of
weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland. The membership of the Periodical
Publishers’ Association embraces the majority of independent publishers of
business, professional and consumer journals.
Organisations representing journalists are the National Union of
Journalists, with some 32,000 members, and the Institute of Journalists, with
about 2,500 members. The two main printing unions are the Society of
Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT) ’82, with about 190,000 members;
and the National Graphical Association 1982, with around 130,000
members.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors is the officially recognised
professional body for newspaper editors. It has approximately 400 members
and aims to maintain the professional status and independence of editors, to
defend the freedom of the press, and to improve the education and training
of journalists. The British Association of Industrial Editors is the
professional organisation to which most editors of house journals belong.
The Association of British Editors represents the whole range of media,
including radio, television, newspapers and magazines.
The main aim of the Foreign Press Association, formed in 1888, is to help
the correspondents of overseas newspapers in their work by arranging press
conferences, tours, briefings, and other services and facilities.
478
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press
Council
Press Conduct
The Press Council is a voluntary and non-statutory body founded by the
newspaper industry in 1953, on the recommendation of the first Royal
Commission on the press, to safeguard press freedom and to ensure that the
press conducts itself responsibly. It comprises equal numbers of press and
non-press members with an independent chairman. Among its other duties,
the Council keeps under review any developments likely to restrict the
supply of information of public interest and importance; reports on
developments in the press which may tend towards greater concentration or
monopoly; and publishes its adjudications and periodic reports recording its
work. The Council’s annual reports usually include press statistics and
articles on the structure of leading press groups.
The Press Council’s best-known function is dealing with complaints from the
public about the content and conduct of the press. It has no power to impose
penalties on publications which it has found guilty of malpractice, but relies
on the sanction of adverse publicity. It can censure newspapers, magazines,
editors and journalists, and issues adjudications which the editor of the
newspaper or magazine criticised by the Council has a moral obligation to
publish in full. The Council sometimes initiates inquiries into aspects of
press conduct without first receiving public complaints.
In 1989 the Press Council issued a newspaper code of practice, which it
drew up with the co-operation of national and regional newspapers and
magazines. This covered such matters as accuracy, opportunity to reply,
respect for privacy, payments for articles by criminals or their associates,
intrusion into grief, references to race and colour and several other topics
that have caused concern. The Council has also devised a shorter and
speedier reader complaints procedure to be used alongside existing
processes. Papers and magazines are encouraged to publish all Press Council
adjudications concerning them; in appropriate cases the Council also makes
a recommendation that an apology be made to the complainant.
Newspapers’ own ‘in-house’ complaints procedures should not, according to
the Council, be considered a substitute for the overall regulatory role of the
Press Council.
The national newspapers have published their own common code of
practice relating to respect for privacy, opportunity for reply, corrections,
conduct of journalists, references to race, colour and religion and payments
to criminals. Readers’ representatives have been appointed by most papers to
handle complaints and breaches of the code, as well as to help guarantee
standards of accuracy, fairness and good behaviour on the part of journalists.
The Government has welcomed a report on privacy and the press by an
independent committee, under the chairmanship of Mr David Calcutt, QC.
Published in June 1990, the report recommends the formation of a non-
statutory Press Complaints Commission by the newspaper industry in place
of the Press Council. It also proposes creating three new criminal offences of
physical intrusion to obtain personal information for publication. Reporting
restrictions on criminal cases would be extended so that the anonymity
granted to rape victims would apply also to victims of other sexual offences.
The Press Complaints Commission would, under the Calcutt Committee’s
proposals, operate a code of practice more specific and comprehensive than
those published by the national papers and the Press Council. The news¬
paper industry would be allowed 12 months to establish the Commission,
whose performance the Government would review after 18 months of
operation to see whether a statutory underpinning was required. In the
event of the industry not setting up the Commission, the Government
would, with regret, draw up a statutory framework.
THE PRESS
479
Advertising
Practice
The Press and
the Law
Advertising practice in the press (and in the cinema and on posters) is
regulated and controlled by the Advertising Standards Authority, an
independent body. It aims to promote and enforce the highest standards of
advertising in the interests of the public and the industry, in particular
through the British Code of Advertising Practice. The objects of the code are
to ensure that advertisements are legal, decent, honest and truthful; that
they are prepared with a sense of responsibility to the consumer; that they
conform to the principles of fair competition as generally accepted in
business; and that no advertisement brings advertising into disrepute or
reduces confidence in advertising as a service to industry and the public.
The Authority’s chief activities are monitoring advertisements for their
compliance with the code; initiating modifications to the code; and dealing
with complaints received direct from members of the public. Its main
sanction is the recommendation to media that advertisements considered to
be in breach of the code should not be published. It also publishes regular
reports on the results of its investigations, naming the companies involved.
The Director General of Fair Trading has the power to seek a court
injunction to prevent the publication of a misleading advertisement.
The press generally has the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest. There are no specific press laws, but certain
statutes include sections which apply to the press. There is a legal
requirement to reproduce ‘the printer’s imprint’ (the printer’s name and
place of publication) on all publications, including newspapers. Publishers
are legally obliged to deposit copies of newspapers and other publications at
the British Library and to make annual returns to Companies House in the
rare circumstances in which a newspaper is not printed and published as a
joint stock company.
^8*^ provisions relate to the extent of newspaper ownership in
television and radio companies; the transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions
on reporting certain types of court proceedings and on publishing material
likely to stir up racial hatred; and the right of press representatives to be
admitted to meetings of local authorities. There are also restrictions on the
publication of advertisement and investment circulars, governed by Acts
dealing with the publication of false or misleading descriptions of goods and
services and with fraud. Advertisements for remedies for certain diseases are
covered by public health legislation. Legal restrictions are imposed on
certain types of prize competition; and copyrights come under various
copyright laws.
Of particular relevance to the press are laws on contempt of court, official
secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish comments on
the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice the courts’
reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor may it
publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence the
result.
The unauthorised acquisition and publication of information from state
and official sources is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and
1989. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings for seditious libel and
incitement to disaffection.
Most legal proceedings against the press are libel actions brought by
private individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publishers, printer
and distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author, may all be held
responsible.
Government officials and representatives of the media form the Defence,
Press and Broadcasting Committee, which has agreed that in some
480
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
circumstances the publication of certain categories of information might
endanger national security. Details of these categories are contained in
Defence Notices (D Notices) circulated to the media, members of which are
asked to seek advice from the Secretary of the Committee, a retired senior
military officer, before publishing information in these areas. Compliance
with any advice offered by the Secretary is expected but there is no legal
force behind it and the final decision on whether to publish rests with the
editor, producer or publisher concerned.
25 Television and Radio
Broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service accountable
to the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the British
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting
Authority (IBA)—provide television and radio services throughout Britain.
Under legisation before Parliament, the IBA would be replaced by two new
bodies—the Independent Television Commission (ITC) and the Radio
Authority (see below). In Wales the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority is
responsible for programmes on one television channel. The authorities work
to broad requirements and objectives defined by Parliament, but are
otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct of business.
As well as regulating broadcasting generally, the Home Secretary is
answerable to Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions
on a number of technical and other matters. Since 1988, for example, the
BBC and the independent sector have been prohibited from broadcasting
direct statements made by representatives of Northern Ireland terrorist
organisations and their supporters. During election campaigns the policy is
modified.
Developments Throughout the 1980s the British broadcasting system has been
in Broadcasting characterised by change: the major technical developments of satellite, cable
and microwave transmissions as well as the availability of increased radio
frequencies have made it possible to offer viewers and listeners a much
greater range of choice and have introduced a period of greatly increased
competition.
The Broadcasting Bill, introduced in Parliament in December 1989, aims
to lay the foundations for a more competitive and efficient broadcasting
framework in Britain. T his would allow viewers and listeners much greater
choice while at the same time promoting quality and diversity as well as high
standards of decency and taste. A new independent national television
service and as many as three new national commercial radio stations would
be established, and there would be opportunities to launch hundreds of
private local and community radio stations. Local delivery operators would
be able to provide national and local television channels by cable or
microwave. Clear and extensive rules would be laid down to ensure that
ownership remained widely spread and that unhealthy concentrations and
cross-media ownership would be checked.
Broadcasting The independence enjoyed by the broadcasting authorities carries with it
Standards certain obligations over programmes and programme content. Programmes
must display, as far as possible, a proper balance and wide range of subject
matter, impartiality in matters of controversy, accuracy in news coverage,
and must not offend against good taste. Codes of guidance on violence in
television programmes, particularly during hours when large numbers of
children are likely to be viewing, are operated by both authorities.
Broadcasting
Standards
Council
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A code of advertising standards and practice is operated by the IBA; the
BBC does not broadcast commercial advertisements. A Broadcasting
Complaints Commission deals with allegations of unfair treatment or
infringement of privacy in programmes. Publicly available video recordings
are classified according to their suitability for different audiences.
A new Broadcasting Standards Council has been set up to act as a focus for
public concern about the portrayal of violence and sex, and about standards
of taste and decency, in television and radio programmes and in video
recordings; it has drawn up a code of practice on these matters. The Council
monitors programmes, examines complaints and undertakes research.
The Broadcasting Bill provides for the Council to be given statutory
powers under which the BBC and other broadcasting regulatory bodies’
codes of practice would be required to reflect the Council’s own code of
practice. Broadcasters would be obliged to publish the Council’s findings on
complaints in whatever form it considered appropriate. Programmes
broadcast to Britain from abroad would be monitored by the Council. The
Government would have powers to ban unacceptable foreign satellite
services receivable in Britain, and anyone in Britain supporting such a
service could be prosecuted for a criminal offence. In addition, the
broadcasters’ current exemption from legislation relating to obscenity and
incitement to racial hatred would be removed.
The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by Royal Charter
and by a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation’s board of 12 governors,
including the chairman, vice-chairman and national governors for Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland, is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the
Government and has ultimate responsibility for all aspects of broadcasting
on the BBC. Committees advise it on a wide range of matters, including
religious broadcasting, agriculture, schools broadcasting, continuing
education, science, and charitable appeals. The governors appoint the
Director-General, the Corporation’s chief executive officer, who heads the
BBC’s board of management, which is in charge of the daily running of the
services.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland control the policy and content of television and radio programmes
intended primarily for reception in their areas. Local radio councils,
representative of the local community, advise on the development and op¬
eration of the BBC’s local radio stations. In 1989 the BBC issued guide¬
lines to programme makers offering practical advice across the whole range
of programming, including the presentation of news and political issues.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
television licences. Households with television must buy an annual licence
costing £24 for black and white or £71 for colour. Over 19-5 million licences
were current in April 1990, of which about 18 million were for colour.
Licence income is supplemented by profits from trading activities, including
television programme exports, sale of recordings and publications connected
with BBC programmes, hire and sale of educational films, film library sales,
and exhibitions based on programmes. More than two-thirds of expenditure
on domestic services relates to television. The BBC meets the cost of its local
radio stations, while some local education authorities help to make
educational programmes.
The BBC’s World Service is financed by a grant-in-aid from the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office.
The Broadcasting Bill left untouched the BBC’s public service
TELEVISION AND RADIO
483
Independent
Broadcasting
The ITV
Programme
Companies
Independent Local
Radio
Proposed
Legislation
broadcasting role of providing high-quality programmes with wide appeal
that educate, inform and entertain. For some time to come it will continue to
be financed largely by the licence fee, the collection of which is to become the
responsibility of the BBC from April 1991, and the government grant for the
World Service.
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. It does not
produce radio or television programmes; these are provided by independent
programme companies on a regional basis and by the Channel Four
Television Company (a wholly owned subsidiary of the IBA). The IBA’s
main functions are to appoint the companies, supervise programme
arrangements, control advertising, and build, own and operate transmitting
stations.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the
television and radio programme companies for the use of its transmitters.
The television programme companies are also liable to pay the IBA a levy
related to their profit and net advertising revenue for transfer to
government funds.
Fifteen independent (ITV) companies hold contracts to provide pro¬
grammes in the 14 independent television regions. Two companies share the
contract for London, one providing programmes during weekdays and the
other at the weekend. A contract to supply a national early morning
television service, transmitted on the ITV network, is held by an additional
company. I he companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving most of
their revenue from the sale of advertising time. The financial resources,
advertising revenue and programme production of the companies vary
considerably, depending largely on the size of population in the areas in
which they operate. Although newspapers may acquire an interest in
programme companies, there are safeguards to ensure against concentration
of media ownership and thereby protect the public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the
programmes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company
itself, or by other programme companies or bought from elsewhere. There
are restrictions on the amount of time devoted to screening television
programmes acquired from abroad. The five largest companies—two
serving London and three serving north-west England, the Midlands and
Yorkshire—provide more programmes for broadcast elsewhere on the
national network than do the smaller ones. A common news service is
provided 24 hours a day by Independent Television News (ITN), a non-
profit-making company in which all the programme companies are
shareholders. Negotiations for the supply, exchange and purchase of
programmes and their co-ordinated transmission through the independent
television network take place largely on the Network Programme
Committee, which consists of representatives of all the programme
companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply to independent local radio. The programme
companies are under contract to the IBA, operating under its control and
financed by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common
service by Independent Radio News.
Under the Broadcasting Bill, the Independent Television Commission and
the Radio Authority would succeed the Independent Broadcasting
Authority and the Cable Authority (see p 486) on 1 January 1991. The ITC
484
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Television
BBC
would be responsible for licensing and regulating all commercially funded
television services originating in Britain, including British-based satellite and
cable channels. It would be financed by a licence fee paid by franchise-
holders. Until the end of 1992, when the present ITV franchises (see p 483)
end, it would continue to fulfil the IBA’s obligations in respect of the ITV
contracts. From 1993, when the new Channel 3 (ITV’s successor) licences
would begin, the ITC would not be the broadcaster or ‘publisher’ of
programmes. These responsibilities would be passed to the new licensees.
Although the ITC would supervise with a ‘light touch’, in that it would not
be involved in detailed scheduling of programmes, it would have wider
powers than the IBA to enforce licence conditions and rules designed to
limit cross-media ownership and excessive concentration of ownership.
There is provision in the Bill for privatising the IBA’s transmission system
early in 1991.
The role of the new Radio Authority would be to assign frequencies, issue
licences and regulate all independent radio stations (see p 487).
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain:
nearly everyone watches television, average viewing time per person being
just over 25 hours a week. About 50 per cent of households have two or more
receivers. The growth in use of video-cassette recorders and equipment
(including home computers) for playing television games has for many
people increased the choice of entertainment available in the home. Some 68
per cent of households rent or own a video-cassette recorder.
Britain is one of the world’s foremost exporters of television productions;
in 1989 the overseas earnings of the television companies amounted to £194
million. British television productions continue to win large numbers of
international awards.
Four television channels are in operation. BBC 1 and BBC 2 are operated
by the BBC; ITV is controlled by, and Channel 4 is owned by, the IBA. All
four channels broadcast on 625 lines uhf (ultra-high frequency). More than
90 per cent of the population live within range of transmission.
Both the BBC and the commercial television companies enter into co¬
production agreements with overseas television corporations in order to
make new programmes economically.
Apart from a break during the second world war the BBC has been making
regular television broadcasts since 1936. An average of 124 hours of
programmes is transmitted by BBC 1 and 114 by BBC 2 every week; all BBC
2 programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast on the
national network. Approximately 60 per cent of the BBC’s home-produced
network programmes for 1988—89 were produced in London.
Through co-ordinated planning of its two services the BBC caters
simultaneously for people of different interests. While both services cover
the whole range of television output, BBC 1 presents more programmes of
general interest, such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s
programmes and outside broadcasts. BBC 2 places greater emphasis on
minority interests, but also provides documentaries, travel programmes,
serious drama, music, programmes on pastimes and international films. On
BBC 1 the daytime schedule consists of an early morning television service of
news and information (from Monday to Friday), as well as documentaries,
children’s programmes, films and other programmes catering for many
interests throughout the rest of the morning and afternoon.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
485
ITV
Channel 4
Proposed
Legislation
The first regular ITV programmes began in London in 1955. ITV
programmes are broadcast 24 hours a day in all parts of the country. About
one-third of ITV’s output comprises informative programmes—including
news, documentaries, and programmes on current affairs, education and
religion. The remainder covers sport, comedy, drama, game shows, films,
and a wide range of other programmes with popular appeal. Over a half of
programmes are produced by the programme companies and ITN. A
national early morning television service on ITV transmits over three hours
of news, information, current affairs and light entertainment daily.
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in 1982, provides a national television
service throughout Britain, except in Wales, which has a corresponding
service (Sianel 4 Cymru—S4C). It is obliged to present programmes that are
complementary to those of ITV, appealing to tastes and interests not
normally catered for by the original independent service. It must present a
suitable proportion (about 15 per cent) of educational programmes,
encourage innovation and experiment, and include a substantial proportion
of programmes from independent producers. An early morning news and
current affairs service was launched in 1989. Late-night programmes are
transmitted until the early hours of the morning. Channel 4 broadcasts for
approximately 140 hours a week, about half of which are devoted to
informative programmes.
The service, both nationally and in Wales, is financed by subscriptions
from the programme companies in return for advertising time in fourth
channel programmes broadcast in their own regions. In Wales programmes
on the fourth channel are run and controlled by the Welsh Fourth Channel
Authority, appointed by the Home Secretary. The Authority is required to
ensure that a significant proportion (in practice some 23 hours a week) are in
the Welsh language and that those broadcast between 18-30 and 22-00 hours
are mainly in Welsh. At other times the Welsh fourth channel shows national
Channel 4 programmes.
Under the Broadcasting Bill, the present independent television system
(ITV) would, from January 1993, be replaced by Channel 3, made up of
regionally based licensees of the Independent Television Commission (see
p 483), which would decide the areas to be covered. Licences would be
awarded by competitive tender to the highest bidder who had passed a
quality threshold, but in exceptional cases a lower bid might be selected.
Such circumstances might include those where an applicant was offering a
quality of service significantly better than the quality of service offered by the
highest bidder. There would be substantial safeguards for quality
programming, with licensees being required to provide a diverse
programme service, a proportion of good quality programmes, as well as
high quality news and current affairs programmes and a reasonable amount
of children’s and religious programmes. There would also be, for the first
time, a statutory requirement to present programmes made in and about the
region.
The proposed legislation would oblige the BBC and ITV to acquire 25 per
cent of their original programmes from independent producers.
Channel 4 and S4C’s distinctive remit to screen diverse programmes
would be strengthened and the services guaranteed by special arrangements
to protect revenue levels. Channel 4 would become a public corporation,
selling its own advertising time and retaining the proceeds. SC4 would be
government funded.
A new national terrestrial television channel—Channel 5, covering about
486
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teletext
Cable Services
70 per cent of households—would be established during 1993. Franchises
would be awarded by competitive tender subject to a quality threshold and
would have similar programming requirements to Channel 3. The channel
would be financed by advertising, subscription or sponsorship, or a com¬
bination of all three.
The Broadcasting Bill would provide for the further development of local
television services using both cable and microwave transmission systems, in
some cases carrying over 30 channels.
The BBC and independent television each operate a teletext service,
offering constantly updated information on a broad variety of subjects,
including news, sport, travel, local weather conditions and entertainment.
The teletext system allows the television signal to carry additional
information which can be selected and displayed as ‘pages’ of text and
graphics on receivers equipped with the necessary decoders. Both Ceefax,
the BBC’s service, and independent television’s Oracle service have a
subtitling facility for certain of their programmes for people with hearing
difficulties.
The Broadcasting Bill would introduce a new regulatory system for the
licensing of spare capacity within the television signal. This would allow
more varied use of spare capacity—data transfer, for instance—but the
position of teletext on commercial television would be safeguarded. The
proposed Channels 3 and 5 would be obliged to offer a subtitling service for
at least 50 per cent of their programmes by 1998, with further increases after
that.
Radio teletext, pioneered in Britain by the IBA and independent radio,
uses spare capacity on VHF(very high frequency)/FM frequencies to provide
up-to-the-moment financial information in London on hand-held receivers.
The vast majority of cable systems have in the past been used solely to relay
broadcast television and radio services in order to improve reception quality,
to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography, or because external
aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings.
Under the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 a more general expansion of
non-broadcast cable television services was permitted and a national Cable
Authority was established to issue licences, supervise programme services
and promote cable development. Cable investment must be privately
financed. Regulation is as light as possible to allow the development of a wide
range of services and facilities, and flexible enough to adapt to changing
technology. There are safeguards for existing broadcasting services.
By July 1990 the Cable Authority had awarded 135 new broadband (multi¬
channel) cable franchises covering 14-5 million homes. Some 50 broadband
franchises are expected to be in operation by the end of 1990, with the
remaining ones likely to be operational during 1991.
The new broadband cable systems at present carry up to 30 television
channels, including the terrestrial broadcasts, satellite television, channels
delivered by videotape and local services. Some also provide their own
telephone services, home shopping and other interactive services. In June
1990 over 1-5 million homes were capable of receiving all available cable
services. The number of homes receiving such services was more than
300,000. By 1996 two-thirds of British homes are expected to have access to
cable. Cable operators are represented by the Cable Television Association.
Under the Broadcasting Bill, the Cable Authority would hand over its
responsibilities to the Independent Television Commission in January 1991.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
487
Broadcasting
by Satellite
Radio
Proposed
Legislation
Several British-based satellite television channels have been set up to supply
programmes to cable operators in Britain and, in many cases, throughout
Europe. While some offer general entertainment, others concentrate on
specific areas of interest, such as sport, music and children’s programmes.
Since 1989 direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS), by which television
pictures are transmitted directly by satellite into people’s homes, has been
available throughout Britain from the privately financed Astra satellite,
which transmits 16 channels, including eight in English. Four are controlled
by Sky Television and provide light entertainment, news, feature films and
sport. W. H. Smith operates a sports and general entertainment channel as
well as a children’s channel and MTV, a pop video channel.
British Satellite Broadcasting, the programme contractor appointed by the
IBA to run the five satellite broadcasting channels allocated to Britain by
international agreement, began broadcasting in April 1990. Its five separate
national programme services cover news and information, sport, feature
films, popular music and general entertainment; all are commercial services
funded by advertising and subscription.
The signals from satellite broadcasting are receivable on specially designed
aerials and reception equipment.
Practically every home in Britain has a radio set, and car radios and portable
sets have greatly increased daytime listening. BBC Radio has five national
channels. Radio 1 broadcasts rock and pop music, while Radio 2 (on
VHF/FM only) transmits a broad range of popular music and light
entertainment 24 hours a day. Although Radio 3 broadcasts mainly classical
music, it also presents drama, poetry, short stories and talks, and Test match
cricket. Radio 4 is the main speech network, providing the principal news
and current affairs service, as well as drama, comedy, documentaries and
panel games. It also carries parliamentary coverage and live relays of major
public events. In August 1990 the BBC launched Radio 5 (on medium wave
only), which is devoted chiefly to sport and education.
There are 37 BBC local radio stations serving England and the Channel
Islands, and regional and community radio services in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, in addition to 70 independent local radio (ILR) stations
throughout Britain. Further BBC and ILR stations are planned. About 90
per cent of the population is served by BBC or ILR stations. Broadcasts
supply a comprehensive service of local news and information, music and
other entertainment, education, consumer advice and coverage of local
events, and offer listeners a chance to air their views, often by using the
phone-in technique.
More than 300 hospitals and many universities have closed-circuit radio
stations. The organisers of sporting events can apply for licences to transmit
their own radio broadcasts supplying information and commentaries locally.
Under the Broadcasting Bill, a new Radio Authority would take over
responsibility for independent radio from the IBA on 1 January 1991. Like
the Independent Television Commission (see p 483), it would supervise with
a light touch. The new authority would allocate licences, by competitive
tender, for up to three national commercial radio services. One of these
would be required to be speech-based and another to include a large
proportion of music that was not pop music. In the course of the 1990s,
some 200 to 300 new stations could come on the air, including
neighbourhood and community of interest stations. Local audience demands
and the extent to which the service would broaden the range of local
programmes would affect local licence allocation.
488
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Educational
and Special
Interest
Broadcasting
BBC World
Service
As a step towards the new arrangements, the Government has approved
the issue of contracts for 23 new community of interest and ethnic minority
radio stations under existing legislation. The first to go on the air, in October
1989, was Sunset Radio, aimed at Manchester’s multi-cultural population.
Jazz FM became the first of the new London music stations, starting up in
March 1990.
Under the Broadcasting Bill, strict controls on the limits of ownership of
local and national radio would be imposed by the Government in the
interests of a competitive radio broadcasting market. Powers to deter illegal
(‘pirate’) broadcasters would be strengthened.
Both the BBC and independent television broadcast educational pro¬
grammes for children and students in schools of all kinds, as well as for pre¬
school children, and for adults in colleges and other institutions and in their
homes. Broadcasts to schools deal with most subjects of the curriculum,
while education programmes for adults cover many fields of learning, voca¬
tional training and recreation. Supporting material, in the form of books,
pamphlets, filmstrips, computer software, and audio and video cassettes,
is available to supplement the programmes.
The BBC broadcasts television and radio programmes made specially for
students of the Open University, most of whose undergraduate courses
contain video and audio components, some of them on cassette for use with
correspondence texts. The BBC Open University Centre also produces
educational and training audio-visual materials in collaboration with
external agencies such as the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Department of Education and Science, and the Engineering Industry
Training Board. The Open College, an independent company set up in 1987
with government support, transmits courses on Channel 4 ranging from
basic literacy and numeracy to high-level technological studies.
The BBC will continue to provide programmes for schools and to
contribute to the operation of the Open University. The proposed
Independent Television Commission (see p 483) would have a duty to
ensure that schools programmes were presented on independent television.
Permission has been granted to the BBC to operate an overnight television
subscription service which is planned to start broadcasting in spring 1991.
Specialist services may include the arts, music and wildlife programmes as
well as legal and farming programmes. The BBC is planning to develop
other specialist television services for the professions, business and industry;
a decoder or specially adapted video recorder will be needed to receive the
services.
The BBC World Service broadcasts by radio worldwide, using English and
35 other languages, for over 785 hours a week. The main objectives are to
give unbiased news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture
and developments in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs
programmes, political commentaries and topical magazine programmes
form the main part of the output, with a full sports service, music, drama
and general entertainment. Regular listeners are estimated to number 120
million.
The languages in which the World Service broadcasts and the length of
time each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this
the BBC has full responsibility and is completely independent in
determining the content of news and other programmes. A plan to improve
audibility is in progress.
There are broadcasts by radio for 24 hours a day in English, which are
TELEVISION AND RADIO
489
COI Overseas
Radio and
Television
Services
Advertising
Codes of
Practice
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa, South Asia and the Falkland Islands.
BBC World Service news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast
by more than 250 stations in over 60 countries, which receive the
programmes by satellite. Two World Service departments also specialise in
supplying radio material for re-broadcast. One sells recordings to more than
100 countries, while the other sends by airmail some 260 tapes of original
programmes to over 50 countries each week.
BBC English is the most extensive language-teaching undertaking in the
world. English lessons are broadcast daily by radio with explanations in over
25 languages, including English, and re-broadcast by many radio stations.
BBC English television programmes are also shown in more than 100
countries. A wide range of printed and audio material accompanies these
programmes.
Another part of the World Service, BBC Monitoring, listens to and reports
on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC and the Government. This information
is also sold to the press, to companies, to academic staff and public bodies.
The Central Office of Information (COI), which provides publicity material
and other information services on behalf of government departments and
other public agencies, produces radio programmes for overseas. A wide
range of recorded material is sent to radio stations in over 100 countries.
COI television services provide material such as documentary and magazine
programmes for distribution to overseas stations.
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except
when it is necessary in order to make effective and informative programmes.
It must not broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored
programme; it may, however, cover sponsored events.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television at the beginning
and end of programmes as well as in breaks during programmes. Advertisers
are not permitted directly to influence programme content or editorial
control. Food manufacturers are the largest category of advertisers.
Sponsorship of certain programmes shown by independent television is
permitted, provided that it conforms with IBA guidelines and relevant
legislation.
Advertisements must be clearly distinguishable and separate from
programmes, and the time given to them must not be so great as to detract
from the value of the programmes as a medium of information, education or
entertainment. Advertising is limited to seven and a half minutes an hour
between 18.00 and 23.00 hours, with the overall amount of advertising
throughout the day normally restricted to seven minutes an hour.
Independent television’s Oracle teletext service (see p 486) carries paginated
advertisements. Independent local radio stations are normally limited to a
maximum of nine minutes of advertising each hour.
The IBA has a code governing standards and practice in advertising on
television and radio, and giving guidance on the types and methods of
advertisement which are prohibited; these include political and religious
advertising and advertisements for cigarettes or betting. Advertisements may
not be inserted in certain types of programme, such as broadcasts to schools.
A comparable code was adopted by the Cable Authority, which is responsible
for advertising control and policy on cable television. Both the IBA and the
Cable Authority have the power to prevent transmission of advertisements
Government
Publicity
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
Audience
Research
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which they consider misleading. The IBA has endorsed the Principles for
Advertising by Direct Satellite Broadcasting, which were drawn up by the
European Broadcasting Union. The Broadcasting Bill contains provisions
giving the proposed Independent Television Commission and the Radio
Authority powers comparable to those of the IBA and the Cable Authority.
The Broadcasting Standards Council’s code of practice (see p 482) will cover
advertisements.
The Government has no general privileged access to radio or television but
government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. This is prepared through the
COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short public
service items, concerning health, safety and welfare, are also produced by the
COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent television and radio.
The proceedings of the Houses of Parliament are recorded round-the-clock
by the BBC for its parliamentary sound archive. The proceedings of both
Houses of Parliament may be broadcast on television and radio, either live,
or more usually in recorded and edited form on news and current affairs
programmes.
In 1989 the House of Commons voted in favour of televising its
proceedings for an eight-month experimental period, and in July 1990
decided to allow televising permanently. Proceedings are recorded by an
independent company appointed by the House of Commons Broadcasting
Unit, which makes television pictures available to the BBC, Independent
Television News and other approved broadcasters for use in news and
current affairs programmes. Television reporting of the Commons pro¬
ceedings is subject to strict rules about what can be shown, and coverage is
overseen by a select committee of the House of Commons. Broadcasters will
finance the service until at least July 1991. Proceedings of the House of
Lords have been televised since 1985.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on
radio and television under rules agreed between the major political parties,
the BBC and the IBA, and there are special arrangements for the period
following the announcement of a general election. Under the Broadcasting
Bill, independent television would be required to show party political
broadcasts, and the Independent Television Commission would be
responsible for drawing up appropriate rules for Channels 3,4 and 5.
Both the BBC and the independent sector are required to keep themselves
informed on the state of public opinion about the programmes (and, in the
case of independent television and radio, the advertising) they broadcast.
This is done through the continuous measurement of the size and
composition of audiences and their opinions of programmes. For television,
this work is undertaken through the Broadcasters’ Audience Research
Board, which is owned jointly by the BBC and the IBA. Information is
collected from a panel of about 3,000 homes throughout Britain chosen as
representative of all private households in the country with a television set.
Meters attached to each television set and linked to a central computer are
used to record times of viewing, numbers of viewers and programmes
watched. The BBC and independent local radio use different systems of
radio audience measurement.
Regular surveys are conducted by both the BBC and the independent
sector to gauge audience opinion on television and radio services. Public
opinion is further assessed by both bodies through the work of their many
TELEVISION AND RADIO
491
Technical
Developments
International
Relations
advisory committees, councils and panels (whose members are drawn from a
wide cross-section of the public). In addition, there are regular public
meetings to debate services, and careful consideration is given to
correspondence and telephone calls from listeners and viewers.
One of the most important recent developments in television has been in
news coverage, where compact electronic cameras have replaced film
cameras, eliminating the need for film processing and enabling pictures to
be transmitted directly to a studio or recorded on video tape on location.
Other advances include the adoption of digital video tape recorders, the
increasing use of computer-aided equipment for picture generation and
manipulation, the use of portable satellite links to transmit pictures from
remote locations to studios, and the introduction of stereo sound based on
the BBC’s NICAM 728 digital system. The Radio Data System was
developed for the British market by the BBC and is being adopted
throughout Europe. It offers automatic radio tuning and station
identification, and is especially useful for car radios.
The IBA is in the process of equipping its television networks for digital
stereo sound. It is also engaged in the further development of digital
techniques for studio applications and inter-city links. In satellite
broadcasting, the MAC transmission format was developed by IBA
engineers, and the European Broadcasting Union recommends use of the
MAC/packet family for all direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS). In Britain
the DBS service provided by British Satellite Broadcasting uses the D-MAC
format, considered to produce a significant improvement in picture and
sound quality over traditional methods of transmission. The IBA devised
refinements for the MAC system compatible with widescreen television. As a
result, the full 1,250 line high definition television (HDTV) is being
developed by the EUREKA 95 group of European manufacturers.
The BBC and IBA co-operated in the development of teletext, and
teletext sets in 30 countries are based on the British system. British
Telecom’s public viewdata service, ‘Prestel’, offers a broad range of
information transmitted by telephone and viewed on the television screen.
The Government has authorised British Telecom, in conjunction with
several British telecommunications firms, to transmit television pictures over
a fibre-optic communications network in a field trial. British Telecom has
also demonstrated a method of transmitting television using radio signals
with extremely short wavelengths.
The BBC and the IBA (together with the Independent Television
Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union. This
body manages Eurovision, the international network of television news and
programme exchange, and is responsible for the technical and ad¬
ministrative arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes
and news over the Eurovision network and intercontinental satellite links.
It also maintains a technical monitoring station where frequency
measurements and other observations on broadcasting stations are carried
out. The Union provides a forum linking the major public services and
national broadcasters of Western Europe and other parts of the world and co¬
ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
Co-operation between governments takes place within the Council of
Europe (linking 23 countries) and the European Community (comprising 12
member states). Britain has signed a Council of Europe Convention on the
regulation of broadcasting across frontiers. Rules have been devised
covering programme standards, advertising, sponsorship and a number of
492
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
other matters. Under these, programmes must not be indecent, contain
pornography, give undue prominence to violence or be likely to incite racial
hatred; nor should programmes unsuitable for children be broadcast at a
time when they can be expected to be watching. A comparable European
Community directive on cross-border broadcasting has been approved by
member states.
Visnews is the largest television news agency in the world, supplying world
newsfilm to over 400 broadcasters in 85 countries and running bureaux in
29 major cities throughout the world. The BBC and Reuters are
shareholders
in the company. Worldwide Television News, owned by Independent
Television News, the American Broadcasting Company and Channel 9 in
Australia, supplies news services to 1,000 broadcasters in 75 countries. Both
agencies provide services through the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC and the IBA are associate members of the Asian Pacific
Broadcasting Union, and the BBC also belongs to the Commonwealth
Broadcasting Association, whose members share such facilities as studios,
recording channels and programme contributions.
The BBC provides technical aid, particularly in training the staff of other
broadcasting organisations throughout the world; members of its staff are
seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on broadcasting
training courses at the BBC, the British Council,1 and the Thomson
Foundation Television College in Glasgow, which sends lecturers and
arranges courses overseas.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International
Telecommunications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for
regulating and controlling all international telecommunications services,
including radio and television. It also allocates and registers all radio
frequencies, and promotes and co-ordinates the international study of
technical problems in broadcasting. The BBC and the IBA are also
represented on the United Kingdom Committee of the International Special
Committee on Radio Interference.
'The British Council aims to promote a wider knowledge of Britain and the English language abroad
and to develop closer cultural relations between Britain and other countries.
26 Sport and Recreation
Policies
The British invented and codified the rules of many of the sports and games
now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in most kinds
of sport throughout Britain. Large crowds attend occasions such as the
football and rugby league Challenge Cup Finals at Wembley Stadium,
international rugby union matches at Twickenham (near London),
Murrayfield (Edinburgh) and Cardiff Arms Park; the Wimbledon lawn
tennis championships; the classic horse races; the Open Golf Championship;
Grand Prix motor racing; and international cricket matches.
Extensive coverage on television (2,655 hours on the four terrestrial
channels in 1989) has helped to generate interest in a wide variety of sports
and recreations including basketball, darts, snooker, ice skating, skiing and
athletics, while American football and baseball are becoming known to the
British public through televised transmissions from the United States. The
advent of direct broadcasting by satellite and the greater availability of cable
are increasing televised coverage of sport substantially. The satellite
broadcasting services Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting both
have channels devoted to sport operating seven days a week, while
Screensport, a competing satellite channel, also broadcasts sporting events
daily.
Levels of participation in sport have been rising, due mainly to the
increase in leisure time and facilities, greater mobility and improvements in
living standards. A growing awareness of the importance of regular exercise
for good health has been reflected in the upsurge of interest in jogging, keep
fit and dance-related forms of exercise. It has been estimated that 25 million
people over the age of 13 regularly take part in sport or exercise, with men
outnumbering women. Walking, including rambling and hiking, is by far the
most popular recreation, followed by swimming, football, golf, keep fit and
yoga, athletics, angling, squash, badminton and cycling. Other widely
practised spare-time physical activities include gardening and ‘do-it-yourself
repair and improvement work.
The Government has long recognised the importance of physical recreation
for the health and general welfare of the community; the social role that
sport can play has become more important at a time of rapid change in work
and leisure patterns. Success in sport is also thought to strengthen Britain’s
international status and prestige. The ten-year strategy for the development
of sport in England drawn up by the Sports Council in 1982, and reviewed in
1988, is to encourage further participation, particularly among women and
young people; to provide adequate facilities for the whole community,
especially in the inner cities and in deprived rural areas; and to continue to
encourage high standards of performance. Similar strategies are being
followed by the Sports Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Sports Council’s ‘Action Sport’ programme, designed principally to
encourage socially disadvantaged people to take up sport and recreation, has
494
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Drug Misuse
International
Co-operation
Spectator
Violence
been managed in partnership with local authorities; around 60 schemes are
still running with the aid of Sports Council funding. Many local authorities
have gone on to provide their own schemes without Sports Council financial
support. The Council has also supported initiatives aimed at strengthening
links between football clubs and their local communities. ‘Whafs Your
Sport?’, a campaign to increase participation in sports, was launched by the
four Sports Councils in 1987.
In 1987 the Government initiated a public debate on the future direction
of official sports policy. It asked whether a correct balance was being
achieved between funding sporting excellence and encouraging wider
participation, and whether enough was being done to promote private sector
investment in sport, especially through corporate sponsorship. A major
review of sport and recreation provision in inner cities was undertaken in
1988 by a government-appointed group of business people, athletes and
sports administrators. The main conclusions were that there was a need for
more small, local facilities and for ways of enabling inner city communities to
run their own facilities.
The problem of drug-taking in sport in order to improve performance
unfairly has been a cause of concern both to the Sports Councils and to the
governing bodies of sport. A campaign to tackle the problem, launched by
the Sports Council, led to the introduction of a new drug testing regime in
1988. This provides for random testing of competitors in and out of
competition by independent sampling officers, and the publication of
adverse findings. The Sports Council provides financial support for the
British drug testing programme. It also funds the International Olympic
Committee (lOC)-accredited laboratory at London University, which carries
out analysis and research into methods of detection for new drugs that
unfairly aid performance.
The Government and the Sports Council have taken firm action at
international level by, for example, supporting the adoption of a Council of
Europe Anti-Doping Charter in 1984 and by chairing an international
working party to examine ways of promoting effective anti-doping
measures. In 1989 Council of Europe member countries agreed a new
European Convention to tackle the problem of drug abuse in sport. This
anti-doping convention was a British initiative, whose main aims are to
reinforce the ban on the use of drugs and doping methods specified by the
IOC and to require signatory states to adopt legal and other means to restrict
the availability of prohibited drugs. The convention seeks to ensure that
grants are given only to those sports bodies with anti-doping regulations.
Signatory states are encouraged to set up doping-control laboratories
meeting IOC standards, and sports governing bodies are urged to harmonise
out-of-competition testing and other anti-doping regulations with those of
the IOC. Testing at international events and out-of-competition testing by
international sports bodies is also promoted under the new agreement.
Britain has already implemented many provisions of this agreement.
Spectator violence associated with football both in Britain and overseas has
been a subject of widespread concern, and the Government has worked
closely with the football authorities and the governments of other European
countries to implement measures to combat the problem. The British
Government has continued to press for the closest co-operation with the
football authorities and the police and their counterparts throughout
Europe. Within the Council of Europe, Britain contributes to the work of the
SPORT AND RECREATION
495
Gleneagles
Agreement
ORGANISATION
AND
PROMOTION
Standing Committee on the European Convention on Spectator Violence,
which it chaired until July 1990. Britain was the first country to sign and
ratify the Convention. It has welcomed the Committee’s recommendation
urging tough action against hooliganism, including prosecution where
appropriate. During the World Cup finals in Italy in mid-1990, the
Government worked closely with the Italian authorities on the latter’s safety
and security arrangements for matches involving England and Scotland.
Recognising the link between excessive alcohol consumption and crowd
disorder, the Government introduced legislation in Scotland in 1980 and in
the rest of Britain in 1985 to establish firm controls on the sale and
possession of alcohol at football grounds and on transport to and from
grounds. The Public Order Act 1986 gives courts in England and Wales the
power to prohibit convicted football hooligans from attending certain
matches. It also introduced a new offence of disorderly conduct and banned
possession of fireworks and smoke bombs at matches. The use of closed-
circuit television at all Football League grounds has greatly assisted the
police in the enforcement of crowd control, as has the setting up, in 1989, of
the National Football Intelligence Unit. The Unit co-ordinates police
intelligence about football hooligans and strengthens liaison with overseas
police forces. An agreement exists between the Football League and the
police whereby the latter may insist that fixtures are rearranged if there is a
danger of crowd disorder.
Following the report of the independent inquiry into the Hillsborough
football stadium disaster, the Government decided, as a further aid to crowd
control and safety as well as spectator comfort, that all League grounds
should become all-seated by 1999 (see p 500). Although it is not to proceed
with plans to establish a compulsory national football membership scheme in
the light of the recommendations of the Hillsborough inquiry, the
Government retains the legislative framework for the scheme and intends to
implement it if alternative strategies to contain football hooliganism should
fail. Courts in England and Wales have powers to impose restriction orders
on convicted football hooligans to prevent them travelling abroad to attend
specified matches.
In accordance with the statement on apartheid in sport, agreed by the
Commonwealth heads of Government at Gleneagles in Scotland in 1977, the
Government seeks to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa and
withholds any form of support for such contacts. However, it is up to the
individuals and organisations concerned to decide whether to heed this
advice.
Government policy on sport, active recreation and children’s play is co¬
ordinated in England by the Minister for Sport, a Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State at the Department of the Environment. The Secretaries of
State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have responsibilities for
sport in their countries. Responsibility for the organisation and promotion of
sport is largely decentralised, and many sports and recreation facilities are
provided by local authorities.
The Government gives financial and other assistance through a number of
official bodies and schemes. This ‘arm’s length’ principle of funding
safeguards the long-established independence of sports organisations in
Britain. Some of these bodies, such as the Sports Councils and the
Countryside Commissions, have specific responsibilities for sport and/or
recreation, and help other public and private bodies to make facilities
available. Others, like the Forestry Commission and the Nature Conservancy
Council, provide recreational amenities in addition to their main functions.
496
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Individual sports are run by 395 independent governing bodies, whose
functions usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating
membership, selecting and training national teams and promoting
international links. There are also organisations representing people who
take part in more informal physical recreation, such as walking and cycling.
A National Coaching Foundation was established in 1983 to improve the
knowledge and practice of coaching. There are 16 national coaching centres.
The Foundation’s work complements that of the four Sports Councils and
the governing bodies of sports.
Sheffield is to host the World Student Games in 1991, with financial
assistance worth around £3 million from the Sports Council. Over £9 million
is being provided by the Government for games-related projects under
various programmes designed to promote urban renewal.
Sports Councils Government assistance for the development of sport in Britain is channelled
through four independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England and for
general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for Wales,
the Scottish Sports Council and the Sports Council for Northern Ireland. In
Northern Ireland the Department of Education makes direct grants towards
the capital cost of facilities to local authorities and voluntary sports bodies.
The Councils are allocating government funds amounting to about £56
million in 1990-91. They make grants for sports development, coaching and
administration to the governing bodies of sports and other national
organisations, and administer the national sports centres. Grants and loans
are also made to voluntary organisations, local authorities and, in some cases,
to commercial organisations, to help them to provide sports facilities. The
Sports Council assists British representatives at international sports meetings
and encourages links with international and overseas organisations. All four
Councils have information centres supplying data on a wide range of sports
topics.
The Sports Council consults with the Central Council of Physical
Recreation, comprising members of the national governing and rep¬
resentative bodies of sport and physical recreation in England. The equi¬
valent bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are the Scottish and
Welsh Sports Associations and the Northern Ireland Council of Physical
Recreation.
Ten regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each of
which sporting, recreational, educational, and local authority interests are
represented, advise on investment in and the planning of sporting and
recreational facilities and the promotion of sport.
About 70 per cent of the Sports Council’s budget is directed at increasing
participation by the general public; an objective is to encourage 1-25 million
more women and 750,000 more men to take part in sport over the next few
years. The Sports Council is exploring ways of attracting greater private
sector investment in sport, including the use of incentive funding schemes
whereby public money is used to generate revenue from private sources.
The The Countryside Commission for England and Wales and the Countryside
Countryside Commission for Scotland are responsible for conserving and improving the
Commissions natural beauty and amenity of the countryside, and encouraging the
provision and improvement of facilities for open-air recreation.
Government support in 1990-91 amounts to £23 million for the
Countryside Commission for England and Wales, of which almost one-half
will be spent on recreation. The Commission has launched a series of policy
initiatives aimed at increasing people’s enjoyment of the countryside. These
SPORT AND RECREATION
497
British
Waterways
Board
The British
Olympic
Association
Children’s Play
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for
People with
Disabilities
focus on the maintenance and sign-posting of public footpaths and other
‘rights of way’ and the development of national routes for long-distance
walking and riding. Rural communities are encouraged to build up local
facilities which promote public enjoyment of the countryside. These
initiatives operate alongside established policies for financing local
authorities and private bodies to make available country parks, picnic sites
and informal recreation facilities.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the
Department of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the
designation of‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’.
The British Waterways Board is a publicly owned body responsible for the
management and development of much of Great Britain’s inland waterways,
which are preserved primarily for leisure use. Many leisure and recreational
pursuits are practised on waterways and reservoirs and in waterside
buildings; these include angling and numerous types of sailing and boating.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, is the national Olympic
committee for Britain and its primary function is to organise the
participation of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association
comprises representatives of the 29 governing bodies of those sports in the
programme of the Olympic Games (summer and winter). It determines the
size of the British teams, raises funds, makes all arrangements and provides a
headquarters staff for the management of the teams. It also makes major
contributions in the fields of coaching, drug testing and control, and sports
medicine. The Association’s British Olympic Medical Centre provides a
medical back-up service for competitors before and during the Olympic
Games.
In 1988 the British Olympic Association, the Sports Council and the
Central Council of Physical Recreation agreed to form the British
International Sports Committee to co-ordinate and promote British interests
at international sporting forums.
The Minister for Sport is responsible for co-ordinating policy on children’s
play in England. The Sports Council is responsible for the National
Children s Play and Recreation Unit. This advises the Government on policy
and practice regarding children’s play and play-providers and other bodies
on such issues as playground safety.
The National Playing Fields Association is a charity with a Royal Charter,
whose purpose is to promote the provision of recreation and play facilities
for all age groups. It aims to preserve, improve and acquire playing fields,
playgrounds and playspace, and to specialise in the play and recreation
needs of children and young people, in particular those with special needs.
There are affiliated associations in the counties of England and Wales and
branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Opportunities exist for people with disabilities to take part in a wide variety
of physical and sporting activities. The structure of sport for disabled people
is undergoing change. There are national disability sports organisations
representing the seven main disability groups, but the trend is towards sports-
specific governing bodies. For example, the Riding for the Disabled
Association caters for some 23,000 riders and the British Disabled Water Ski
Association offers training and competition to a growing number of skiers.
498
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Sponsorship
The governing bodies of sport are increasingly taking responsibility for both
able-bodied and disabled participants. The British Paralympic Association,
which liaises closely with the British Olympic Association, looks after the
preparation and training of paralympic and other international teams.
In 1989 the Government published a major report calling for a
reorganisation of the structure of sport for people with disabilities. Under
this, disabled sportsmen and women would be integrated into able-bodied
sport and the governing bodies would assume responsibility for all
participants in their sport, whether able-bodied or disabled. Disabled athletes
would also be encouraged to participate in sporting events either in direct
competition with able-bodied athletes or in parallel events.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled aims to encourage and
provide opportunities for people with disabilities to take part in all forms of
sport and physical recreation. Sports clubs for disabled people throughout
Britain are affiliated to the Association, which helps to organise sporting and
physical activities at all levels. As well as offering advice to local clubs and
groups, the Association arranges conferences, seminars and coaching
courses. The Scottish Sports Association for the Disabled, the Federation of
Sports Associations for the Disabled (Wales) and the Northern Ireland
Sports Association for the Disabled have similar co-ordinating roles.
In the last few years greater emphasis has been placed on making
provision for people with a mental handicap, and on non-competitive
activities including outdoor pursuits. Evidence of the latter is seen in the
growing number of specialist centres, such as those run by the Calvert Trust.
More community facilities are becoming available and disabled awareness
courses are offered to professional and voluntary staff.
Britain has continued to play an active part at international level since Sir
Ludwig Guttmann began sport for paraplegics and established the first
sports stadium in the world designed for people with disabilities at Stoke
Mandeville in Buckinghamshire in 1969. At the Paralympic Games in Seoul,
Korea, held in 1988, the British team gained 62 gold, 67 silver and 53 bronze
medals, finishing third in the overall medals table. More than 2,000 athletes
with a mental handicap took part in the European Summer Special Olympic
Games held in Glasgow in July 1990.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations, and its importance as a source of funding is recognised by the
Government and the Sports Councils. The estimated value of commercial
sponsorship was £200 million in 1989. Sponsorship may take the form of
financing specific events, or of grants to individual sports organisations or
sportsmen and women. The Sports Aid Foundation and Sports Aid Trust
raise and distribute funds from industry, commerce and private sponsors in
order to assist the training of talented individuals; grants are awarded on the
recommendation of the governing bodies of sport. The Scottish and Welsh
Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust fulfil
similar functions. Sponsorship advisory services are run by the Sports
Councils and the Central Council of Physical Recreation.
Successive governments have negotiated voluntary agreements with the
tobacco industry to regulate tobacco companies’ sponsorship of sport, the
last one having come into force in 1987. This is designed to bring about a
reduction in spending by tobacco firms on sports sponsorship and
introduces a ceiling on promotional activity. It prohibits sponsorship of
events where a majority of the participants are under 18 years of age or
which are designed to appeal mainly to spectators under 18. The depiction
of any participants in a sport in media advertising is not permitted, and strict
SPORT AND RECREATION
499
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
Sports in
Education
controls are imposed on siting of signs at televised events and on the size of
health warnings on these signs.
Local authorities are major providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation: their estimated annual expenditure on sport and
recreation amounts to about £1,000 million in Britain. Provision of facilities
was substantially increased in the 1970s to meet the growing demand and to
encourage expansion of participation. The facilities include parks, lakes,
playing fields, sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools,
gymnasiums and sports centres catering for a wide range of activities. Local
authorities manage over 1,700 indoor centres, largely built in the last 20
years, as well as numerous outdoor amenities for sport and recreation.
The Government is instituting competitive tendering for the management
of local authority sports and leisure facilities to make them more cost-
effective and responsive to consumer demand. School and college facilities
are to be exempted from competition, and councils will retain controls over
pricing, admission and opening hours.
Increased emphasis is being placed on the need to provide new and
improved sports facilities in areas of urban deprivation. A broad range of
sports and recreational projects in urban areas have been supported under
the Government’s Urban Programme. The Derelict Land Grant scheme
offers funding towards sports and recreational facilities on reclaimed sites.
Under the Water Act 1989, water companies are required to ensure that
water and land under their control are put to the best use for sport and
recreation.
Recreational facilities are also made available by local sports clubs. Some
cater for indoor recreation, but more common are those providing sports
grounds, particularly for cricket, football, rugby, hockey, tennis and golf.
Many clubs linked to business firms cater for sporting activities. Commercial
facilities include tenpin bowling centres, ice and roller-skating rinks, squash
courts, golf courses and driving ranges, curling rinks, riding stables, marinas
and, increasingly, fitness centres. The Civil Service sports club, with a
membership of 250,000, has extensive facilities at its disposal for a large
number of sports.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. Physical education is one of the ten foundation subjects of the
National Curriculum, which are compulsory for all schoolchildren in
England and Wales between the ages of 5 and 16. It also features in the
recommended curriculum for Scottish schools. All schools (except those
solely for infants) are expected to have a playing field or the use of one, and
most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have other amenities such
as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for dance and movement.
The School Sports Forum was established by the Sports Council in 1987 to
consider all aspects of the provision of sport in schools.
Sports and recreation facilities are available at institutions of higher and
further education, some of which have departments of physical education.
There are also ‘centres of sporting excellence’, often at universities and other
colleges, which enable selected young athletes to develop their talents and
which cater, where appropriate, for their educational needs.
To achieve the maximum use of sports facilities, the Government and the
Sports Councils are encouraging greater community use of sports halls and
other facilities owned by schools, colleges and institutions such as football
clubs. Stronger links are being developed between schools and the wider
community to ensure that children have access to sports amenities which
clubs and associations can make available outside school hours.
500
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Safety
at Sports
Grounds
Sports Centres
Safety at sports grounds and stadiums is governed by legislation. Following
the fire at Bradford City Football Ground in 1985 in which 56 people died
and the disaster at Flillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, in April 1989,
when 95 spectators were crushed to death, safety standards are being
strengthened. The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 is
designed to improve provisions for the safety of spectators at sports grounds
and indoor sports premises. It empowers local authorities to restrict or ban
the admission of spectators to sports grounds where there is a serious risk to
safety, and requires them to arrange for the inspection of designated
football, rugby and cricket grounds with stands for over 500 spectators.
Indoor sporting events may only take place after the inspection of premises
by local authority safety experts.
The committee of inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy, whose final
report was issued in January 1990, recommended that the number of
spectators in sports grounds be reduced and that all those responsible for
controlling crowds exercise greater vigilance and control in the interests of
safety. It recommended the phased introduction of all-seated stadiums;
dismantling of perimeter fences; improved arrangements for crowd control
and better training for police and stewards; and the upgrading of stadiums
and facilities by the clubs.
The Government has accepted all the recommendations relating to safety
and is setting up a Football Licensing Authority to license grounds in
England and Wales satisfying its conditions. The Authority will also monitor
the way in which local authorities carry out their safety functions. First and
Second Division grounds will be required to be all-seated by 1994 and by
1999 no standing will be allowed at any Football League ground.
Five national sports centres, four in England and one in Wales, are run by
the Sports Council, and offer a range of competition and training facilities.
As well as running residential courses for national teams, coaches and
enthusiasts from all over Britain, the centres are used extensively by local
sports clubs and the local community. Combined facilities for a number of
sports are available at three of the centres: Crystal Palace in south-east
London, Bisham Abbey in Buckinghamshire and Lilleshall in Shropshire.
Crystal Palace provides major competition venues for athletics, swimming
and a variety of indoor sports; and Lilleshall houses the training school of
the Football Association. The other two are specialist centres: the National
Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, which caters
for rowing, canoeing and water-skiing; and the Plas-y-Brenin National
Centre for Mountain Activities in north Wales.
The Sports Council for Wales runs the National Sports Centre for Wales
in Cardiff and the National Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas Menai in north
Wales. The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training
centres: Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor pursuits, Inverclyde at
Largs for general sports, and a national water sports training centre on Great
Cumbrae Isle in the Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland
operates one national facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at
Tollymore in County Down.
Some 1,500 swimming pools and 2,000 sports centres serve local rather
than national needs; in Northern Ireland there has been a major
development of multi-purpose centres. Several privately run centres cater
for specialised interests, such as the British Equestrian Centre, run by the
British Horse Society, and the Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the
Disabled at Stoke Mandeville.
SPORT AND RECREATION
501
POPULAR
SPORTS AND
RECREATIONS
Angling
Association
Football
Some of the major sports and recreations in Britain are described below. The
increased provision of sports centres has improved opportunities for
participation in indoor sports such as basketball, volleyball, fencing, judo,
karate and other martial arts, gymnastics, squash, table tennis and shooting.
Almost all outdoor sports have continued to gain in popularity, including
‘high-risk’ activities such as rock-climbing and sub-aqua diving. The number
of people enjoying the recreational amenities of the countryside, rivers and
coastline is also growing.
Sportsmen and women may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs.
Some sports—such as hockey and rowing—are amateur, but in others the
distinction between amateur status and professional status is less strictly de¬
fined, or does not exist. The Amateur Athletic Association, for example,
allows payments to be made into trust funds held by many top-ranking
athletes.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 4 million
anglers in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout, particularly in the rivers
and lochs of Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most
widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp,
tench and bream. There are separate organisations in England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland for game (salmon and trout), coarse and sea
fishing clubs, which are co-ordinated in England and Wales by the National
Anglers’ Council.
The National Federation of Anglers in England organises national
championships for coarse fishing and enters a team in the world angling
championships. England won the world team event in 1987 and 1988 and
the individual title in 1989. Most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by
private owners, while those fishing for trout and salmon may rent a stretch of
river, join a club, or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month.
Coastal and deep-sea fishing are free to all, apart from salmon and sea trout
fishing, which is by licence only.
The largest spectator sport and one of the most popular participation sports,
association football was first developed and codified in England during the
nineteenth century. It is controlled by separate football associations in
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 335 clubs
are affiliated to the English Football Association (FA) and 42,000 clubs to
regional or district associations. The full-time professional clubs in England
and Wales belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the
Scottish Football League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in
England and Wales and three in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, 14 semi-
professional clubs play in the Irish Football League. During the season,
which lasts from August until May, attendances at over 2,000 English league
matches total about 19 million. The Football Association, founded in 1863,
and the Football League, founded in 1888, were both the first of their kind
in the world.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Rumbelow’s
League Cup, the Tennent’s Scottish Cup, the Skol Cup (formerly the
Scottish League Cup), the Irish Cup and the Welsh FA Cup are organised on
a knock-out basis. The finals are played at Wembley Stadium, London; at
Hampden Park, Glasgow; at Windsor Park, Belfast; and at the ground of one
of the finalists in Wales.
The Sports Councils have made grants to a number of clubs and local
authorities to enable them to modernise or expand football facilities in areas
of urban deprivation. Grants for various improvements such as all-weather
502
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
Billiards and
Snooker
pitches are also made throughout Britain by the Football Associations and
the Football Trust, a body Financed by the football pools (see p512)
companies. The Government has reduced pool betting duty on the under¬
standing that the revenue foregone by the Government is given to the
Football Trust to be used for ground improvements.
Amateur athletics is governed in England by the Amateur Athletic
Association (which, formed in 1880, was the First national governing body
for athletics) and by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland have their own associations. International
athletics and the selection of British teams are the concern of the Amateur
Athletic Association, which also administers coaching schemes. For the
Olympic Games and the world and European championships one team
represents Britain.
Athletics is attracting increasing numbers of participants, both men and
women, in part because of the success of British competitors and the wide
coverage of athletics events on television.
Many British athletes, especially middle-distance runners, have enjoyed
distinguished reputations: in 1954, for example, Dr (now Sir) Roger
Bannister became the First man to run a mile in under four minutes. More
recently British athletes won six silver and two bronze medals at the 1988
Olympic Games in Seoul, Korea, while the British men’s team Finished third
behind the United States and a team representing Europe at the World Cup
in Barcelona in 1989. At the Commonwealth Games held in Auckland in
1990, England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland competed separately
and between them gained 16 gold medals for athletics. In September 1990
Britain had one world champion—Fatima Whitbread in the women’s javelin,
while Britons held world records in the 800 metres (Sebastian Coe), the mile
(Steve Cram), the decathlon (Daley Thompson) and the men’s javelin (Steve
Backley).
The sport of badminton takes its name from the Duke of Beaufort’s country
home, Badminton House, where badminton was First played in the
nineteenth century. Badminton is organised by the Badminton Association
of England and the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Badminton Unions. There are
also English, Welsh and Scottish schools badminton associations. Around 4
million people are estimated to play the sport in Britain. From 1992
badminton will become a full Olympic sport.
Basketball is played in Britain, mainly indoors, by both men and women.
There are about 1,000 registered clubs and the sport is played in most
secondary schools and many other institutions. In all, over 1 million people
participate and its popularity has been increasing rapidly. The English
Basket Ball Association is the governing body of the sport in England, and
there are similar associations in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. The leading
clubs play in the National Basketball Leagues and the main events of the year
are the Coca-Cola National Cup Finals held at London Arena, and the
Carlsberg Basketball Championships staged at the National Exhibition
Centre, Birmingham.
The character of the present game of billiards was established in Britain at
the end of the seventeenth centory. Snooker, a more varied game invented
by the British in India in 1875, has greatly increased in popularity and
become a major spectator sport as a result of widespread television coverage
SPORT AND RECREATION
503
Bowls
Boxing
of the professional tournaments. It is estimated that between 7 and 8 million
people now play the game. British players have an outstanding record in
snooker and have dominated the major professional championships. The
main tournament is the annual Embassy World Professional Championship,
held in Sheffield. British winners include Steve Davis (1981, 1983, 1984,
1987, 1988 and 1989), Joe Johnson (1986), Dennis Taylor (1985), Alex
Higgins (1972 and 1982) and Stephen Hendry (1990).
The controlling body for the non-professional game is the Billiards and
Snooker Control Council, which holds the copyright of the rules. The World
Professional Billiards and Snooker Association is responsible for professional
players, and organises professional events. An increasing number of women
play billiards and snooker; their representative body is the World Ladies
Billiards and Snooker Association.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. The game of
lawn bowls is played on a flat green. In the Midlands, the north of England
and north Wales a variation called crown green bowls is played, so named
because the centre of the green is higher than its boundaries. Lawn and
crown green bowls are mainly summer games; in winter indoor bowls takes
place on synthetic greens and is growing in popularity. Once regarded as a
pastime for the elderly, bowls is increasingly enjoyed by adults of all ages.
About 4,000 lawn bowling clubs are affiliated to the English, Scottish,
Welsh and Irish (Northern Ireland Region) Bowling Associations, which,
together with the Women’s Bowling Associations for the four countries, play
to the rules of the International Bowling Board. Other associations,
including the English Bowling Federation, are not under the Board’s
control. The British Crown Green Bowling Association is the governing
body of crown green bowls, and has 2,500 affiliated clubs.
The outstanding player is David Bryant, who has won six world
championships.
Boxing in its modern form, which has been adopted in many overseas
countries, dates from 1865, when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a
set of rules eliminating much of the brutality that had characterised prize¬
fighting and making skill the basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and
professional, and in both strict medical regulations are observed.
All amateur boxing in England, including schoolboy, club, association and
combined services boxing (in the armed forces), is controlled by the Amateur
Boxing Association. England is divided into eight associations; there are
separate associations in Scotland and Wales. Northern Ireland forms part of
the Irish Boxing Association. The associations organise amateur boxing
championships as well as training courses for referees, coaches and others.
Teams take part in international meetings including the Commonwealth and
Olympic Games, and European and World championships. Richard
Woodhall won a bronze medal in the light-middleweight class at the 1988
Olympic Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control.
The Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and representatives to
ensure that regulations are observed and to guard against overmatching and
exploitation. British boxing has a distinguished record and at various times
British boxers have held European, Commonwealth and world cham¬
pionship titles. Dave McAuley is the current International Boxing
Federation (IBF) world flyweight champion, Dennis Andries the World
Boxing Council world light-heavyweight champion and Nigel Benn the
World Boxing Organisation world middleweight champion.
504
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chess
Cricket
Chess is growing in popularity and England now ranks second among chess¬
playing nations, having taken silver medals at the last three chess Olympics.
Scotland, Wales and Ireland are separately represented. There are local
chess clubs and leagues throughout Britain and the game is widely played in
schools and colleges. Important domestic competitions include the British
Championships (for all ages), the National Club Championships, the County
Championships and the Leigh Grand Prix. Britain now hosts more major
international chess events than ever before, recent events including the
Pilkington Glass World Championships quarter- and semi-final matches in
1988 and 1989. The Hastings Chess Congress, dating from 1895, is the
world’s longest running annual international chess tournament.
The governing bodies of the game are the British Chess Federation
(responsible for England and for co-ordinating activity among the home
nations), the Scottish Chess Association and the Welsh and Ulster Chess
Unions.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called
the English national game, having been played as early as the 1550s. Among
the many clubs founded in the eighteenth century is the Marylebone Cricket
Club (MCC), which continues to frame the rules of the game. The Club is
based at Lord’s cricket ground in north London, the administrative centre of
the world game. Men’s cricket in Britain is governed by the Cricket Council,
consisting of representatives of the Test and County Cricket Board
(representing first-class cricket), the National Cricket Association (rep¬
resenting club and junior cricket), the Minor County Cricket Associ¬
ation, the Scottish Cricket Union, the Irish Cricket Union and the MCC.
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in towns and
villages amateur teams play weekly games from late April to the end of
September. Throughout Britain there is a network of league cricket
contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players.
The main competition in professional cricket is the Britannic Assurance
County Championship of three-day and four-day games played by 17 county
teams, which also take part in three one-day competitions—the Benson and
Hedges Cup, the National Westminster Bank Trophy, and the Refuge
Assurance League, played on Sundays. Some of the best supported games
are the annual series of five-day Cornhill Insurance Test matches played
between England and a touring team from Australia, India, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka or the West Indies. A team representing England usually
tours one or more of these countries in the British winter. Texaco Trophy
one-day international games also attract large crowds. A World Cup
competition takes place every four to five years, with some of the smaller
cricketing nations as well as the major countries competing; India and
Pakistan jointly staged the last one in 1987.
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women’s cricket clubs have
regular local fixtures, usually played at weekends, and may participate in the
national league and club knock-out competitions. There are regular county
matches as well as an area championship and a territorial competition. Test
match series and a World Cup competition are played, with both major and
minor cricketing nations taking part.
The ice sport of curling originated in Scotland, where it is played by men and
women now almost exclusively indoors. The governing body of the sport in
Scotland is the Royal Caledonian Curling Club, which was formed in 1838; it
has over 22,000 members. Curling is played in 24 other countries, including
Curling
SPORT AND RECREATION
505
Cycling
Darts
Equestrianism
England and Wales. European and World championship competitions take
place annually.
Since the 1970s there has been a resurgence of interest in cycling, both as a
means of transport and as a sport and recreation, and this has led central and
local government to make greater provision for cycling. Activities include
road and track racing, cycle speedway, time-trialling, cyclo-cross, mountain
biking, touring, bicycle polo and bicycle moto-cross.
The British Cycling Federation is the governing body for cycling as a
sport, with 900 affiliated clubs. The Cyclists’ Touring Club, formed in 1878,
is the national association for recreational cycling and represents cyclists’
interests in general. The Scottish Cyclists Union controls the sport in
Scotland. r
Ehe British cyclist Robert Millar won the Kellogg’s Tour of Britain in 1989
and Shane Sutton was the winner of Britain’s 33rd Milk Race in 1990.
Darts, an indoor game which has its origins in medieval archery, is played
mainly in public houses and gained in popularity as a result of widespread
television coverage of the professional game. It is estimated that around 5
million people play the game regularly. Darts is organised in Britain by the
British Darts Organisation, which forms part of the World Darts Federation;
its rules have become the code for the world sport. The Organisation
arranges events in Britain which bring entrants from as many as 45
countries. A World Cup tournament is staged every two years; England won
the 1989 competition, held in Toronto. The main individual title in the game
is the Embassy World Professional Championship. British players have
dominated the event and in 1990 the title was won by Phillip Taylor.
Equestrian activities include recreational riding, showjumping and carriage
driving. The art of riding is promoted by the British Horse Society, which is
concerned with the welfare of horses, road safety, riding paths and training.
It runs the British Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire. With
some 51,000 members, the Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and
the Riding Club movements, which hold rallies, meetings and competitions
culminating in annual national championships. Leading horse trials,
comprising dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping, are held every
year at Badminton (Avon), Windsor (Berkshire), Bramham (West York¬
shire), Burghley House (Lincolnshire) and Blair Castle (Tayside).
Showjumping is regulated and promoted by the British Show lumping
Association, winch has over 15,000 members and some 2,500 shows
affiliated to it. The major showjumping events each year include the Royal
International Horse Show at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham;
the Horse of the Year Show at Wembley in London; the Olympia
International Showjumping Championships in London; and the Hickstead
Nations Cup and Derby meetings at Bolney in West Sussex.
The authority responsible for equestrian competitions (other than racing)
at international and Olympic level is the British Equestrian Federation,
which co-ordinates the activities of the British Horse Society and the British
Show Jumping Association. British equestrian teams have an outstanding
record in international competitions. The British three-day event team
gained a silver medal at the 1988 Olympic Games, while Ian Stark won the
silver medal and Virginia Leng won the bronze medal in the three-day
individual competition. At the World Equestrian Games held in Stockholm
in 1990 Great Britain gained one gold, four silver and one bronze medal.
506
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Field Sports
Golf
Gymnastics
Highland
Games
Hockey (Field
and Indoor)
British field sports include hunting (on horseback and on foot), fishing,
shooting, stalking, falconry and coursing. Fox hunting on horseback with a
pack of hounds is the most popular British hunting sport, and there are over
350 packs of hounds of all kinds in Britain.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early
nineteenth century, and takes place in many parts of Britain. Game consists
of grouse, black-game, ptarmigan, partridge and pheasant, species which are
protected by law during a close season, when they are allowed to breed on
numerous estates supervised by gamekeepers. It is necessary to have a
licence to kill game and a certificate issued by the police to own a shot-gun.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports.
Public opposition to field sports is considerable and is organised through
such bodies as the League Against Cruel Sports.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has carried the title of
the Royal and Ancient Game. The oldest golf club in the world is the
Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers. The Royal and Ancient Golf
Club, the ruling authority of the sport for most of the world, is situated at St
Andrews on the east coast. Golf is played throughout Britain and there are
golf courses near most towns, a few of them owned by local authorities.
The main event of the British golfing year is the Open Championship, one
of the world’s leading tournaments. Other important events include the
Walker Cup and Curtis Cup matches for amateurs, played between Great
Britain and Ireland and the United States, and the Ryder Cup match for
professionals, played between Europe and the United States. Among the
leading British professional players are Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Ian
Woosnam and Sam Torrance. Sandy Lyle won the United States Masters golf
tournament in 1988 and Nick Faldo was the winner in 1989 and 1990. In
1987 Laura Davies became the first British woman to win the United States
Open Championship for women.
Gymnastics is divided into three main disciplines: artistic or Olympic
gymnastics, rhythmic gymnastics and sports acrobatics. Both men and
women compete in artistic gymnastics, although the apparatus used differs.
Men use the floor, pommel horse, rings, vault, parallel bars and horizontal
bar, while women exercise on the vault, asymmetric bars, beam and floor.
Rhythmic gymnastics is for women only and consists of routines performed
to music with ribbon, balls, clubs, hoop or rope. Sports acrobatics is
gymnastics with people rather than apparatus.
In recent‘years there has been a significant rise in participation in the
sport, particularly among schoolchildren, and there are now about 1,000
clubs with some 79,000 members. The British Amateur Gymnastics
Association is the governing body for men and women gymnasts in Britain;
the Welsh, Scottish and Northern Ireland Associations are affiliated to it.
There are independent English and British Schools’ Gymnastic Associations.
Scottish Highland Games, at which sports, dancing and piping competitions
take place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world. The
sports include tossing the caber, putting the weight and throwing the
hammer. Among better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar
Gathering, the Argyllshire and Cowal Gatherings and the meeting at
Aboyne.
Variants of hockey have been played in Britain for at least five centuries, and
some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in Scotland, are still played. The
SPORT AND RECREATION
507
Ice Skating
Judo
Keep Fit
modern game was started in the nineteenth century by the Hockey
Association (of England), which was founded in 1886 and acts as the
governing body for men’s hockey. There are parallel associations in
Scotland, Wales and Ireland. Throughout England there are 820 men’s
hockey clubs, many of which have junior sections. Large numbers of schools
also play the game (500 are affiliated to the Hockey Association). Cup
competitions and leagues are played at national, divisional or district, and
club levels both indoors (six-a-side) and outdoors, and there are regular
international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey in England is the All England
Women’s Hockey Association (founded in 1895), to which are affiliated some
950 clubs and about 2,500 schools; there are separate associations in
Scotland, Wales and Ireland. League, county, club and school cham¬
pionships for both outdoor and indoor hockey are played annually in
England. The first international women’s hockey match took place in 1896.
There are now regular international matches, one of which is played each
year at Wembley Stadium.
Men’s and women’s hockey are Olympic sports, and the British men’s team
won a gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Ice skating became popular in Britain in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries and takes three main forms: ice dancing, figure skating
and speed-skating. The governing body for the sport is the National Skating
Association of Great Britain, founded in 1879. Participation in ice skating is
concentrated among the under-25s. There are over 55 ice rinks in Britain, a
small number compared with many other European countries. In spite of
this, British couples have won the world ice dance championship 17 times.
Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean were world ice dance champions for
four successive years between 1981 and 1984, and gold medal winners at the
Sarajevo winter Olympic Games in 1984.
Judo, a modern combat sport derived from the ancient Japanese arts of ju¬
jutsu, is growing rapidly in popularity in Britain, both as a sport and general
fitness training method and as a self-defence technique. Men and women
take part in judo at all levels. Dennis Stewart won a bronze medal in the
under 95 kg class at the 1988 Olympics, and at the Commonwealth Games in
Auckland in 1990 England won 14 gold and 2 bronze medals and Scotland
one gold, three silver and four bronze medals. Recent leading British
exponents of the sport include Karen Briggs, Brian Jacks, Neil Adams, Neil
Eckersley, Ann Hughes and Diane Bell. More than 900 judo clubs are
registered with the British Judo Association, which is the official governing
body of the sport throughout Britain.
Keep fit classes aim to improve stamina, strength and suppleness through a
variety of fitness and creative movement activities. The Keep Fit Association,
formed in 1956, receives funding from the Sports Council to promote
physical fitness and a positive attitude to health in England. Its national
certificated training scheme for keep fit teachers is recognised by local
education authorities throughout Britain. There are autonomous
associations for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
A broad range of martial arts, mainly derived from Japan, the People’s
Republic of China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Korea, has been introduced
into Britain during the twentieth century; these include karate (the most
popular of the martial arts), kung fu, aikido and kendo. Following the
Martial Arts
508
Motor and
Motor-cycle
Sports
Mountaineering
and Rock-
Climbing
Netball
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
increase in interest in the 1960s and 1970s, the Martial Arts Commission was
established in 1977 to develop and control martial arts and maintain high
standards of safety. The Commission is made up of 16 national governing
bodies and has 130,000 members affiliated to it.
Motor racing and rallying, and motor-cycle racing, are popular spectator
sports in Britain. The governing body for four-wheeled motor sport is the
RAC (Royal Automobile Club) Motor Sports Association. The Association
issues licences for a variety of motoring competitions and organises the
Lombard RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Champion¬
ship, and the Foster’s British Grand Prix, held at the Silverstone racing
circuit as part of the Formula One World Motor Racing Championship.
British car constructors including Lotus, McLaren and Williams have
enjoyed outstanding successes in Grand Prix racing, and Britain has had six
world champion motor racing drivers. The British driver Nigel Mansell has
won a total of 16 Grand Prix races. Other popular types of motor-car sport
include autocross, drag racing and karting.
Motor-cycle sport, governed by the Auto-Cycle Union in England and
Wales and the Scottish Auto-Cycle Union and Motor Cycle Union of Ireland
(in Northern Ireland), caters for all forms of competition on two or three
wheels, from low-speed trials to Grand Prix road racing. The major events of
the year are the Isle of Man TT races, the British Road Race Grand Prix and
other world championship events for trials, moto-cross, speedway and track
racing. The Auto-Cycle Union provides off-road training by approved
instructors for riders of all ages.
The popularity of mountaineering and rock-climbing has increased steadily.
Clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Mountaineering
Council of Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number over
300. They range from national clubs such as the Alpine Club (founded in
1857, the oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish
Mountaineering Club to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. The
National Centres for Mountain Activities, run by the Sports Council, are at
Plas-y-Brenin in north Wales, Glenmore Lodge, near Aviemore, in Scotland
and Tollymore in Northern Ireland. Several local education authorities and
national bodies such as the Outward Bound Trust also have mountaineering
training centres. The most popular areas in Britain for climbing include the
sea cliffs of Devon and Cornwall, the Peak District of Derbyshire, the Lake
District, Snowdonia in north Wales and the Western Highlands of Scotland.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring mountain
ranges and climbing many of the great mountains of the world, achieving,
for example, the First ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, Everest in 1953,
Kangchenjunga in 1955, Everest by its south-west face in 1975, the west wall
of Changabang in 1976, Kongur in 1982 and Jitchu Drake in 1988.
British rock climbers have long been recognised as among the foremost in
the world; in recent decades Joe Brown, Don Whillans, Ron Fawcett, Jerry
Moffatt and Johnny Dawes have all pioneered difficult routes. Britain is also
at the forefront of competition climbing, where events take place on artificial
walls. Simon Nadin of Britain won the first ever climbing world cup, held in
1989.
Netball derives from basketball, which was invented in the United States at
the end of the nineteenth century. It is estimated that more than 60,000
adults in England play netball regularly and that a further one million
participants come from schools. The sport is played almost exclusively by
women and girls both indoors and outdoors.
SPORT AND RECREATION
509
Racing
Rowing
Rugby Football
The All England Netball Association, formed in 1926, is the governing
body for the sport in England; the English Schools’ Netball Association is
affiliated to it. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own
governing bodies.
Horse racing takes two forms—flat racing (throughout the year) and
steeplechasing and hurdle racing (normally from August to early June). The
Derby, run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing calendar.
Other classic races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand
Guineas, both run at Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St Leger,
run at Doncaster. The most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting
is the National Hunt Festival Meeting held at Cheltenham in March. The
Grand National, run at Aintree near Liverpool, is the world’s best-known
steeplechase and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse racing in Britain. Its rules are the
basis of turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place on
most days (excluding Sundays) throughout the year and about 14,000 horses
are in training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s
best bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare, one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports, takes place at 90 tracks licensed by local authorities.
Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track, with at
least ten races a meeting. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the
National Greyhound Racing Club, the sport’s judiciary body. The Stewards
of the Club are also responsible for overall administration and organisation.
The representative body is the British Greyhound Racing Board.
Rowing is taught in many schools, colleges and rowing clubs (including
women s clubs) throughout Britain. The governing body of the sport in
England is the Amateur Rowing Association; similar bodies regulate the
sport in Scotland, Wales and Ireland. There are about 500 rowing clubs, and
each year over 300 regattas and head races are held in England, Wales and
Scotland under Association rules.
The University Boat Race, between eight-oared crews from Oxford and
Cambridge, has been rowed on the Thames almost every spring since 1836.
The Head of the River Race, also on the Thames, is the largest assembly of
racing craft in the world, with more than 420 eights racing in procession. At
the Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire, founded in 1839, crews from all over the
world compete each July in various kinds of race over a straight course of 1
mile 550 yards (about 2-1 km).
The National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, near Not¬
tingham, has a rowing course of Olympic 2,000-metre standard, as does
Strathclyde Park in west-central Scotland. Britain won the gold medal in the
men’s coxless pairs and a bronze in the men’s coxed pairs events at the 1988
Olympic Games.
Rugby football takes its name from Rugby School, in Warwickshire, where it
is believed to have originated in 1823. Since 1893 the game has been played
according to two different codes: rugby union (a 15-a-side game) is played by
amateurs and rugby league (a 13-a-side game) by professionals as well as
amateurs.
Rugby union is played under the auspices of the Rugby Football Union in
England and similar bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. Important
domestic competitions include the divisional and county championships in
England, the league and national club knock-out competitions in England
510
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sailing
Skiing
Squash Rackets
Sub-Aqua
and Wales; and the National League and Inter-District Championships in
Scotland. The Five Nations Tournament between England, Scotland, Wales,
Ireland and France is contested each year and there are overseas tours by the
national sides and by the British Lions, a team representing Great Britain
and Ireland. In 1987 teams from 16 countries competed for the first time in
a world cup competition held in Australia and New Zealand. The final
rounds of the next one, which will involve 37 countries, will be staged in
Britain and France in autumn 1991.
Rugby league, played mainly in the north of England, is enjoying
unprecedented popularity as a spectator sport. The governing body of the
professional game is the Rugby Football League, which sends touring teams
representing Great Britain to Australia, New Zealand and Papua New
Guinea; annual matches are also played against France. The Challenge Cup
Final, the major club match of the season, is played at Wembley Stadium in
London. The amateur game is governed by the British Amateur Rugby
League Association. Matches between England and France are held each
year and tours are arranged to Australia and New Zealand. A national league
consisting of ten leading clubs was formed in 1986, and a second division
came into existence in 1989.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain, and the Royal Yachting
Association, the governing body for the sport, has more than 70,000
members and 1,500 clubs and classes. Sailing in dinghies, motor yachts,
windsurfers, powerboats and cruisers takes place at clubs throughout
Britain. At the 1988 Olympics Mike McIntyre and Bryn Vaile gained a gold
medal in the ‘Star’ class and in 1989 Britain won the offshore racing
Admiral’s Cup.
When there is sufficient snow, skiing takes place in several parts of Britain.
The governing body of the sport is the British Ski Federation and there are
separate national councils. Skiing in Scotland has become very popular,
especially at the winter sports centres established in the Cairngorms,
Deeside, Glencoe and Glenshee, where ski-runs equal to those in other areas
of Europe have been developed. Ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional
instruction of a high quality are now available. There are also some 115
artificial ski-slopes throughout Great Britain. Interest in cross-country skiing
has been increasing. There are nearly 300 ski clubs in Britain, and it is
estimated that about L5 million people take part in the sport.
Squash rackets originated at Harrow School in the 1850s. There are separate
governing bodies for England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland. The governing
body in England for men’s and women’s squash is the Squash Rackets
Association, formed in 1989. Squash enjoyed a period of very rapid growth
during the 1970s and remains a popular sport. There are 9,250 squash
courts in England, and the estimated number of players in Britain is 2-6
million. The main tournament held in Britain is the British Open
Championship. England currently holds the world title for women’s team
squash, and Martine le Moignan is the present women’s world champion.
Underwater activities include wreck and reef exploration, underwater
photography, marine life study and nautical archaeology. The British Sub-
Aqua Club is the governing body for all underwater techniques. It promotes
safe diving, training, science and sport. The Club is the largest of its kind in
the world, with over 36,000 members and more than 1,250 branches in
Britain and overseas.
SPORT AND RECREATION
511
Swimming
Table Tennis
Tennis
Tenpin Bowling
Volleyball
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn
to swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching
are provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the
Amateur Swimming Associations in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland, to which nearly 2,000 clubs are affiliated. Northern Ireland forms
part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association. The Associations control
swimming, diving, synchronised swimming and water polo championships
and competitions.
For major international competitions, such as the Olympic Games and the
World and European Championships, England, Scotland and Wales
compete together as one team under the auspices of the Amateur Swimming
Federation of Great Britain. At the 1988 Olympics, Britain won a gold, a
silver and a bronze medal. The British swimmer Adrian Moorhouse broke
the 100-metre breaststroke world record in 1989.
The origins of table tennis are uncertain, but it developed in Britain from
around the middle of last century, becoming an Olympic sport in 1988. As
well as being one of the most popular indoor sports for young people, it is
played by a broad age range of adults, with men outnumbering women.
Requiring relatively simple and inexpensive equipment, table tennis is
played in schools, youth clubs and private clubs. Britain’s leading
professional player is Desmond Douglas.
The governing body for men’s and women’s table tennis in England is the
English Table Tennis Association, to which some 8,000 clubs are affiliated.
There are separate governing bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland.
The modern game of tennis originated in England in 1872 and the first
championships were played at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in
Great Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888; Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association. The main event of
the season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as the most
important tennis event in the world. This draws large crowds, with the
ground at the All England Club accommodating around 30,000 spectators.
T here are also national and county championships and national com¬
petitions for boys’ and girls’ schools.
Tenpin bowling is played at some 1,500 indoor bowling centres throughout
Britain. More than 25,000 people belong to the sport’s governing body, the
British Tenpin Bowling Association.
Volleyball was established in Britain in the 1950s, having first been played in
the United States at the end of the nineteenth century. The number of
registered players in Britain grew substantially in the 1980s, with men at first
far outnumbering women; today, of the total of 25,000 registered players,
about 11,000 are women. Volleyball is popular among schoolchildren and
university and college students. Mini-volley is a version of the game adapted
to the abilities of children under 13. Although volleyball can be played
outdoors, it is normally played in indoor sports halls.
The English Volleyball Association (formed in 1971), the Scottish
Volleyball Association (formed in 1964), the Welsh Volleyball Association (re¬
established in 1981) and the Northern Ireland Volleyball Association
(formed in 1970) act as the sport’s governing bodies for both men and
women.
512
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GAMBLING
Various forms of commercial betting and gaming are permitted in Britain
under strict regulations. In 1989-90 the total money staked, excluding
gaming machines, was estimated at £9,600 million.
Betting takes place mainly on horse or greyhound racing, and on football
matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be made at
racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some 10,000 licensed off-
course betting offices which take some 90 per cent of the money staked. A
form of pool betting—totalisator betting—is organised on course by the
Horserace TotalisatoV Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a
levy to the Horserace Betting Levy Board, which promotes the improvement
of horse racing and breeding and the advancement of veterinary science.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines
and bingo. There are 119 licensed casinos operating in Britain, 21 of them in
London. An estimated 3 million people, mainly women, play bingo in
commercial bingo halls.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to
hold lotteries.
Appendix 1
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p).
There are seven coins: £1; 50p; 20p; lOp; 5p; 2p and Ip.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures
1 inch = 2-54 centimetres
12 inches = 1 foot = 30-48 centimetres
3 feet = 1 yard = 0-914 metre
1,760 yards = 1 mile = T609 kilometres
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
1 square inch = 6-452 square centimetres
1 square foot = 929-03 square centimetres
1 square yard = 0-836 square metre
1 acre = 0-405 hectare
1 square mile = 2-59 square kilometres
1 pint
2 pints = 1 quart
4 quarts = 1 gallon
8 gallons = 1 bushel
8 bushels = 1 quarter
16 oz
141b
1121b
20 cwt (2,240 lb)
2,000 lb
= 0-568 litre
= T136 litres
= 4-546 litres
= 36-37 litres
= 2-909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz)
1 pound (lb)
1 stone (st)
= 28-35 grammes
= 0-454 kilogramme
= 6-35 kilogrammes
1 hundredweight (cwt) = 50-8 kilogrammes
1 long ton = TO 16 tonnes
1 short ton = 0-907 tonne
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
(Use the figures in the central column with those to the left or right, depend¬
ing on which conversion is required. For example, 1 centimetre = 0-394
inch, and 1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres Inches
Metres Yards
kilo¬
metres Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540 1 0-394
5-080 2 0-787
7-620 3 1-181
10-160 4 1-575
12-700 5 1-969
15-240 6 2-362
17-780 7 2-756
20-320 8 3-150
22-860 9 3-543
25-400 10 3-937
0-914 1 1-094
1- 829 2 2-187
2- 743 3 3-281
3- 658 4 4-374
4- 572 5 5-468
5- 486 6 6-562
6- 401 7 7-655
7- 315 8 8-749
8- 230 9 9-843
9- 144 10 10-936
1-609 1 0-621
3- 219 2 1-243
4- 828 3 1-864
6-437 4 2-485
8- 047 5 3-107
9- 656 6 3-728
11- 265 7 4-350
12- 875 8 4-971
14-484 9 5-592
16-09310 6-214
0-405 1 2-471
0-809 2 4-942
1-214 3 7-413
1- 619 4 9-884
2- 023 5 12-355
2-428 6 14-826
2- 833 7 17-298
3- 237 8 19-768
3- 642 9 22-239
4- 047 10 24-711
514
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo¬
grammes
Av.
Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19- 842
20- 046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
MOO
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
Thermometrical Table
0° C = 32° F
100° C = 212° F
To convert degrees Fahrenheit into degrees Celsius: subtract 32, then
multiply by Yg; degrees Celsius into degrees Fahrenheit: multiply by %, then
add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays
Tuesday 1 January
Wednesday 2 January
Monday 18 March
Friday 29 March
Monday 1 April
Monday 6 May
Monday 27 May
Friday 12 July
Monday 5 August
Monday 26 August
Wednesday 25 December
Thursday 26 December
in Britain, 1991
New Year’s Day
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Bank Holiday (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and
Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales
and Northern Ireland only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Appendix 2
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition
are given below:
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, General Household Survey, Family
Expenditure Survey
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics, British Overseas Aid, Arms Control and Disarmament Quarterly
Review, Developments in the European Community
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales; Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Education
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom
Planning, Housing and Urban Regeneration
General Household Survey, Housing and Construction Statistics
Environmental Protection
Digest of Environmental Protection and Water Statistics
National Economy
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book’), Employment Gazette
Framework of Industry
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book’), Monthly Digest of Statistics
Manufacturing Industry
Size Analyses of United Kingdom Businesses, Business Monitors, United Kingdom
National Accounts (the Blue Book’), Monthly Digest of Statistics, Employment Gazette
Construction and Service Industries
Size Analyses of United Kingdom Businesses, Employment Gazette, Business Monitors
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of
the United Kingdom (the Brown Book’), United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook
516
Chaper 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 21
Chapter 25
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture in the United Kingdom
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government’s Expenditure Plans (the public
expenditure White Paper)
Overseas Trade
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the
Pink Book’), Business Bulletins
Television and Radio
BBC’s Annual Report and Accounts, IBA’s Annual Report and Accounts
Full purchasing details of British Government publications can be obtained from
the annual list Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
(HMSO), which has agents overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of
Parliament and the official parliamentary report Hansard, White Papers, annual
reports, reports of official committees and most publications of government
departments including the Central Statistical Office, which publishes a Guide to
Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain many titles published by international
organisations such as the United Nations, the European Community and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not Published by HMSO, published by
Chadwyck-Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details
of this and other commercial publications are available from bookshops or,
overseas, from the British Council.
Index
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they
are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the relevant
subject headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Abortion 154
Accidents 75, 354
fire casualties 75, 354
road 354
Administrative tribunals 141
Advertising 307, 479, 489
broadcasting 489
industry 307
press, practice 479
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 437
Advisory bodies 56
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 392—3
Aerospace industry 292-4
Agriculture 57, 61,63, 84—5,
335-49,444-5
Agriculture and Food Research
Council 345—6, 444—5
Agriculture Development and
Advisory Service 343
and Fisheries, Department of, for
Scotland 61
animals 336—8
diseases, control of 344
welfare 337—8
Common Agricultural Policy 341
crofts 342
crops 338-9
Department of
(Northern Ireland) 63
diseases and pests, control of 344
European Community policies 84—5
exports 340
farming 335—6
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 57
food safety 340
government policy 340—1
grants and subsidies 342
horticulture 339
land use 335
livestock 336—8
cattle 336—7
pigs 337
poultry 337
sheep 336—7
welfare 337—8
marketing 340
co-operatives 340
organic farming 339
pesticides 344
plant diseases and pests,
control of 344
price guarantees 342
production 336—40
professional, scientific and technical
services 343
protection of countryside 342-3
research 345—6, 444—5
smallholdings 342
tenancy legislation 342
veterinary medicinal products 334—5
Aid to developing countries 88, 90,
99-104
bilateral aid 100
European Community 88
financial aid 101
multilateral aid 103
official and other flows 100
projects 101-2
technical co-operation 90, 102—3
voluntary agencies 103—4
AIDS 157-8
Aircraft 110-11,292-4, 366-9
aerospace industry 292—4
civil 366—9
military 110—11
Alcoholic drinks 294—6
Alcohol misuse 156—7
Ambulance services 152
Ancient monuments 223—4
Arbitration Committee, Central 393
Architecture 207—8
Armed forces 108-11
Arms control and
disarmament 94—7
chemical and biological weapons 96
conventional weapons 96—7
518
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
nuclear weapons 95
Army 110
combat forces 110
see also Defence
Arts 57, 451-68
administration 451—2
and design, training 464
and Libraries, Office of 57
art market 464
British Council 454
broadcasting and 454—5
centres 454
Councils 452—3
crafts 464
dance 457,458—9
drama 455—7
ethnic minorities 454
festivals 455
films 459—61
finance 452
government policies 451
literature and libraries 465—8
local arts councils 453
museums and art galleries 462—4
music 457-8, 459
opera 457—8, 459
promotion of 451—68
Regional Arts Associations 453—4
visual 461—5
Atomic energy
see Nuclear energy
Auction houses 308
B 
Balance of payments 431—3
capital flows 432
external assets and liabilities 432—3
Bank of England 410—11
Banking 409—16
see also Financial institutions
Beverages industry 294—6
Birth rates 21-2
Blood transfusion 152
Books 468
Botanical gardens 447
Britain 1-4, 21-33
economic and social pattern 26—34
historical outline 2^1
physical features 1
population 21—6
social framework 21—32
see also England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales
British Airways 367
British Broadcasting Corporation
482-3,484, 487-8,488-9
see also Broadcasting
British Coal Corporation 319
British Council 78,454
British Film Institute 460
British Nuclear Fuels 325—6
British Olympic Association 497
British Rail 357-62
British Technology Group 277—8
see also Science and technology
British Telecom 370—2
see also Telecommunications
Broadcasting 373,454—5, 481—92
advertising 489
arts, broadcasting of 454—5
audience research 490—1
British Broadcasting
Corporation 482-3, 484, 487-8,
488-9
radio 487—8
television 484
World Service 488—9
cable services 373, 486
educational 488
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 483-4
programme companies 483-4
television 485
international relations 491—2
parliamentary 490
policy 481
political 490
satellite broadcasting 487
technical developments 491
Budget 401
Building
see Construction industry
Building societies 216,414—15
Bus services 356—7
Business and Technician
Education Council 196
Business services 307—8
C 
Cabinet 54
meetings 54
Office 54
Cable TV 373, 486
Cancer screening 159
Capital 403-5, 432
flows 432
INDEX
519
taxes on 403-5
see also Taxation and duty
Cars
see Motor vehicles
Catering trades 306-7
Central Statistical Office 60
Ceramics 284
Channel Islands 4
historical outline 4
Charities 168, 446
research sponsored by 446
Chemicals industry 285-7
Children 136-8, 153, 165-7, 173,
191,460,497
child benefit 173
child care 165-7
adoption 167
custodianship 167
children’s play 497
films for 460
health services for 153, 191
in trouble 136-8
Churches 240-3, 244
Anglican Communion 241
co-operation among 243
England, Church of 240-1
Free Churches 242
non-Christian religious
communities 243-4
Roman Catholic Church 242-3
Scotland, Church of 241
City Action Teams 209
City Grant 209-12
Civil aviation 366-9
air traffic 366—7
airports 368-9
development 369
ownership and control 368—9
Authority 366
government responsibilities 366
helicopters 367
navigation services 368
safety 368
structure of airline industry 367
British Airways 367
traffic control 368
Civil defence 112-3
Civil engineering 300—2
overseas consultancy 301
Civil Service 63—7
central management 64-5
conditions of service 66
Diplomatic Service 65
political and private activities 66-7
promotion 66
recruitment and training 65-6
security 67
structure 64—5
Clothing industry 296-7
Coal 269, 319-21
British Coal Corporation 319
consumption 321
development 321
European Coal and Steel
Community 269
industry 319-21
production 319
research 321
Commission for Racial Equality 32
Commodity, shipping and freight
markets 422
Commons, House of
see Parliament
Commonwealth 58, 88-92
consultation 89-90
dependencies 91
Foreign and, Office 58
organisations 90-1
Secretariat 90
technical co-operation 90
Communications see Post Office
and Telecommunications
Companies 262-3, 275, 307-8, 403,
419
advertising 307
company law 275
computer services 307
corporation tax 403
factoring 419
management consultancy 307
market research 307-8
small firms 262-3
Competition policy 141,269-72
anti-competitive practices 272
European Community policy 271-2
financial services 271
monopolies and mergers 270-1
Restrictive Practices Court 141
restrictive trade practices 272
Comptroller and Auditor
General 400
Computers 190-1,307
in schools 190-1
services 307
Confederation of British Industry
259, 389
Conference centres 308
Conservation 207-8, 212,
213,223-9,342-3,
447,496-7
520
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
agriculture and protection of
countryside 342—3
ancient monuments 223—4
architectural standards 207—8
areas 223^1
areas of outstanding natural beauty
226-7
coastal 225
Countryside Commissions 225—6,
496-7
derelict land, reclamation 212
environmental improvement 228
green belts 225
historic buildings 223-4
national parks 226—7
national scenic areas 226—7
nature conservation 227—8
open country 227
public rights of way 227
registers of unused and under-used
land 213
tree preservation 225
World Heritage Sites 229
zoological gardens 447
Construction industry 300—2
civil engineering projects 301
housing construction 301
overseas construction 301-2
research and advisory services 302
structure 300—1
Consumer protection 273—4
consumer advice and information
273-4
Copyright, authors’ 465—6
Coroners’ courts 129
Council for National Academic
Awards 196
Countryside Commissions 225—6,
496-7
Courts 62, 123, 124-9, 138-41
civil 138—41
coroners’ 129
criminal 124—9
grant of bail by 123
Restrictive Practices Court 141
Scottish Courts Administration 62
Crafts 464
Crime 115—38, 144
criminal courts 124—9
appeals 126—7
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 117—8
criminal justice 115—38
criminal proceedings, aid in 144
offenders, treatment of 129—38
prevention 116—17
statistics 115—16
Crown Office 62
Crown Prosecution Service 57
Crown, The
see Monarchy and Royal family
Cultural and social life 10, 12—13,
15-16,20-1
HM Customs and Excise 57,405—6
duties 405-6
D 
Dance 457, 458-9
dance companies 458
training 458—9
Defence 57, 105-13,440
armed forces 108
Army 110
civil 112-13
combat forces 109—11
commitments outside NATO area
107-8
changes in Europe 105
contribution to NATO 106—7
Europe and NATO 107
finance 111
Ministry of 57
NATO co-operation 112
NATO policy 105—6
Northern Ireland 108
organisation and management 111
overseas commitments 107—8
personnel 108
procurement 111—12
research and development 112, 440
reserve and auxiliary forces 108—9
Royal Air Force 110—11
Royal Navy 109-10
sales 112
strategic nuclear forces 109
see also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Dependencies 91
Deposit-taking institutions 411-16
Design 264—5, 464
industrial 264—5
training in 464
Development see Economy and
Regional development
Diplomatic Service 65
Disabled people 163—4, 173—4, 384,
497-8
benefits and pensions 173—4
INDEX
521
employment services for 384
social services for 163—4
sport for 497-8
Discount houses 416
Divorce 22-3
Drama 455—7
amateur theatre 456-7
professional theatre 455-6
training 456
young people, theatre for 456
Drugs 154-5,494
drug abuse in sport 494
E 
East—West relations 85, 93
Economy 7-10, 11-12, 14—15,
19-20, 26-33, 245-53, 255-7
background 245-9
economic growth 246
employment 247
inflation and competitiveness 246
investment 247
oil, offshore 248—9
output, industrial 246—7
productivity 247, 255—6
trade 247—8
economic and social pattern 26-33
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 63
government policy 249-51
economic management 251
exchange rate 249—50
fiscal policy 250
monetary policy 249
supply side policies 250
national income and expenditure
251-3
see also Balance of payments,
Industry, Public finance, and
Trade, overseas
Education 57, 61,63,134-5, 159,
177-204, 264, 439-40, 445, 456,
458,461,464,488
administration 180-1
adult and continuing 198-9
aids in 191
and Science, Department of 57,
439-40
art and design 464
Business and Technician Education
Council 196
business links, and 179-80
careers education and guidance 191
Council for National Academic
Awards 196
curriculum 186-7
dance 458
Department of (Northern
Ireland) 63
drama 456
educational broadcasting 488
English (as foreign language)
teaching 201
examinations, secondary school
188-9
examining bodies 196-7
film production 461
finance 181-2
health 159
information technology in schools
190-1
management development 183-4
music 458
Open University 195
overseas links 200—2
English (as foreign language)
teaching 201
exchanges 201—2
overseas students in Britain 200—1
policies 177-9
polytechnics 195-6
post-school 191-9
prison, education in 134-5
progress reports 190
reforms 177—9
religious 188
research on 199—200
schoolchildren, health
and welfare 191
schools 182—191
Scottish Education Department 61
special educational needs 185
standards of 190
students 193-4, 200
teacher training 197—8
teachers 185, 197-8, 199
I echnical and Vocational Education
Initiative 187-8
universities 194—5,445
Vocational Qualifications, National
Council for 196
youth service 202—4
see also Students, Training and
Universities
Elderly people 163, 172
retirement pension 172
social services for 163
522
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Elections 42
local government 69—70
parliamentary 42—3, 69—70
Electrical engineering 288—91
Electricity supply industry 321—7
consumption 322
generation 322—5
nuclear energy 325—7
research 327
structure 321—2
Electronic engineering 288—91
Employers’ organisations 388—9
Confederation of British Industry
389
Employment 58, 83—4, 173, 174,
247,377-95
additional benefits 390
conditions of 389—91
Department of 58
earnings 389-90
employee share schemes 390
Employment Training 380
equal opportunities 391—2
European Community policies 83—4
health in 393—5
holidays 390
industrial relations 384—9
law 387-8, 391-2, 393-4
patterns of 378
safety in 394
services 383—4
sickness benefit 173
trade unions 385—7
training services 379—83
Business Growth Training 380
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 381
National Training Task Force 380
Training and Enterprise Councils
379-80
Youth 381
trends 247
unemployment 174, 379
work, hours of 390
see also individual industries
Employers’ organisations,
Industrial relations, Trade unions
and Unemployment
Energy 58, 311-33
coal 319-21
consumption 312,316,317—8, 321,
322
Department of 58
efficiency 312—3
electricity 321—7
gas 316-19
natural resources 311—33
Offshore Supplies Office 313
oil 313-16
policy 312
renewable sources 327—9
see also Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Gas, Nuclear energy and
Petroleum
Engineering 261, 287-8, 288-91
291-2,301,442-3
civil engineering projects 301
Council 261
electrical 288-91
electronic 288-91
instrument 288—91
marine 291-2
mechanical 287—8
Science and Engineering Research
Council 442-3
see also individual industries
England 1-2, 5-10, 124-5, 125-7,
136-7, 138-9, 141-2, 331,472
Church of 228-9
civil courts 138—9
appeals 139
criminal courts 124—5, 125—7
appeals 126—7
criminal prosecutions 124—5
cultural and social life 10
economy 7—10
government 7
historical outline 2
law, government responsibility in
administration of 141—2
regional newspapers 472
water resources 331
young offenders, treatment of
136-7
Enterprise Initiative 261—2
Enterprise zones 212
Environment 26—7, 58, 63, 84,
215-21,223-38, 342-3, 444
agriculture and protection of
countryside 342—3
air, control of pollution of 233—6
architecture 207—8
coast 225
conservation 223—9
Countryside Commissions 225—6,
496-7
Department of 58
Department of (Northern
Ireland) 63
environmental improvement 228
European Community policies 84
INDEX
523
green belts 225
housing 26—7, 215—21
land 213, 230-1
Natural Environment Research
Council 444
nature protection 227-8
noise 236—7
open country 227
pollution control 229—38
public rights of way 227
radioactive waste disposal 237
radioactivity 237
recycling and materials reclamation
231
research 238
sea, control of pollution in 232-3
trees and woodland 225
water quality 231-2
see also Planning, Housing, Urban
Regeneration
Equal opportunities 30, 391-2
Ethnic minorities 30-1, 391,454,
473
arts of 454
employment 391
publications 473
see also Race relations
European Community 78—88, 162,
176, 268-9, 271-2, 341, 347,428
Common Agricultural Policy 84-5,
341
competition policy 271-2
European Coal and Steel
Community 269
European Investment Bank 269
European Regional Development
Fund 268-9
finance 81
fisheries policy 347
health arrangements 162
institutions 79—81
insurance, directives 392
internal policies 81-5
agriculture 84—5
employment 83
environment 84
fisheries 85
monetary 82
single market 81—2
transport 82
political co-operation 85-7
aid 88
Central America 86
East—West relations 85
Middle East 85—6
South Africa 86
terrorism and crime 86—7
regional policy and aid 268-9
social security 176
trade policy 87-8, 428
Exchange 421
foreign exchange market 421
Excise duties
see Taxation and duty
Exhibition and conference centres
308
Expenditure 251-3, 399-401,
405-6
personal 252-3
public 251-2, 253
taxes on 405-6
see also Public expenditure
Exports 58, 430, 431
controls 430
credit insurance 431
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 58, 431
see also individual industries and
Trade, overseas
F 
Factoring companies 419
Families 149, 165, 175
family credit 175
health services for 149
social services for 165
Family planning 154
Farming see Agriculture
Films 308-9,459—61
British Film Institute 460
children’s 460
cinema licensing 461
film classification 461
government support 459-60
industry 308-9
training in production of 461
videos 461
Finance and Personnel,
Department of (Northern
Ireland) 63
Financial institutions 216, 269, 271
409-22
Bank of England 410—11
British overseas banks 415-16
building societies 216
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 422
deposit-taking institutions 411-16
524
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
discount houses 416
euromarkets 421
European Investment Bank 269
factoring companies 419
finance houses 418
financial futures 421—2
financial markets 419—22
financial services 271,409—10
supervision 409—10
foreign exchange market 421
insurance companies 416—17
investment and unit trusts 418
leasing companies 418-19
London bullion market 422
merchant banks 415
money markets 420—21
National Savings Bank 415
overseas banks 415
pension funds 417—18
retail banks 412—14
assets 413
branches and accounts 413
deposits 413
payment systems and services
413-14
securities markets 420
Stock Exchange, International
419-20
venture capital companies 419
see also Insurance
Fire services 73—75
fire casualties 75
fire losses 75
fire prevention 74
research 74—5
special services 75
Fisheries 346—9
administration 347
European Community policy 347
farming 347
fleets 346—7
freshwater 329
landings 346
limits 347
research 347-8
Food 160, 294-6, 336-9, 340, 345-6
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 345—6, 444—5
exports 340
home production 336—9
industries 294—6
marketing 340
research 345—6, 444—5
safety of 160, 339
Footwear industry 296—7
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
58
Forestry 348—9
Commission 348—9
Northern Ireland 349
policy 348-9
research 349
Freight services 355, 360, 364,
366-7
Fuel see Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Energy, Gas, Nuclear
energy and Petroleum
G 
Gambling 512
Gas 58, 313, 316-19
Office of Gas Supply 58, 317
offshore 313, 316-319
consumption 317—19
production 317
research 319
structure 317
transmission and storage 317
Government 7, 11, 13—14, 16—19,
35-75
advisory bodies 56
Cabinet 54
meetings 54
Office 54
composition 52—3
departmental ministers 53
junior ministers 53
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers 53
Ministers of State 53
non-departmental ministers 53
Prime Minister 52—3
departments of 55—63
functions 57—63
information services 57
see also Civil Service, Local
government, Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Public expenditure and
Public finance
Great Britain see Britain, England,
Scotland and Wales
Green belts 225
II 
Handicapped people
see Disabled people
Health 58, 62, 135, 145-62, 191,
393-5, 443-4
INDEX
525
AIDS 157-8
alcohol misuse 156
and Safety Commission 394
and Safety Executive 394
and Social Services, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 63
arrangements with other countries
162
centres 149
Department of 58
diet and 160
district nurses 149-50
drug misuse 154
education 159
employment, health in 393-5
environmental 160
family practitioner services 149
group practices 149
infectious diseases, control of 159
midwives 149-50
National Health Services 142—62
administration 147—8
finance 147—8
health service commissioners 148
hospitals and specialist services
150-60
primary health care 148—50
proposed legislation 145—6
specialist services 150—60
organ transplants 151-2
parents and children 153
primary health care 148-50
prisoners, health services for 135
private medical treatment 151
professions 161—2
rehabilitation 152
research 161,443-4
safety of medicines 160-1
schoolchildren, health services for
191
Scottish Home and Health
Department 62, 63
smoking and 156
solvent misuse 149—50
visitors 149-50
see also Safety
Health and Safety Commission 394
Health and Safety Executive 394
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Pollution 229-30
Historic buildings 223—4
Home and Health Department,
Scottish 62
Home Office 58
Horticulture 339
Hospices 153
Hospitals 150—60
and specialist services 150-60
rehabilitation 152
Hotels and catering 306—7
House of Commons 41—2
see also Parliament
House of Lords 40—1
see also Parliament
Housing 26-7, 175,215-21,301,
414-15
administration 215-16
associations 218-19
benefit 175
building societies 216, 414-15
construction 301
home ownership 216
mortgage loans 216
improvements 219-21
privately rented 218
public sector 216-18
Human fertilisation and
embryology 153
Human rights 18-19,97-8
I 
Immigration 25-6
Imports 429-30
controls 429-30
see also Trade, overseas
Income 38-9, 175,251-3,390-1,
402-3
Manpower Economics, Office of
390-1
national, and expenditure 251—2
personal, and expenditure 252-3
royal 38-9
sources of 253
support 175
taxes on 402-3
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 483-4
programme companies 483-4
Industrial relations 384—93
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 392-3
Central Arbitration Committee 393
collective bargaining 384-5
joint consultation 384-5
legislation 387-8
Manpower Economics, Office of 368
trade unions 385-7
wages councils 391
526
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industry 60, 62, 63, 134—5, 246—7,
253, 255-78, 279-98,299-310,
437-9, 446, 475
British Technology Group 277—8
construction industry, 300—2
Department for Scotland 62
deregulation 263
design 264—5
development agencies 268
Economic Development,
Department of (Northern
Ireland) 63
European Community and 268—9
government policies for 260—1,
261-9
gross domestic product, by industry
253
industrial and intellectual property,
protection of 275
industrial associations 247
industrial awards 266
industrial design 264—5
industrial financing 259—60
industrial production 246-7
industrial performance 255-7
innovation, research and 275—8
investment in 247, 256—7, 259—60
management development and
industrial training 264
manufacturing 282—98
nationalised industries 258—9
organisation 257—61
prison industries 134—5
privatisation 263
productivity 247
profitability 257
quality and standards 265—6
regional development 266—9
research and innovation 275—8, 446,
475
rural industries 268
science parks 445—6
service industries 302—310
small firms 262—3
technological advance 281—2, 475
Trade and Industry, Department of
60, 277,437-9
training 264
see also individual industries,
Employment, European
Community and Research and
development
Inflation 246
Information, Central Office of 58
Inland Revenue, Board of 58
see also Taxation and duty
Inner cities see Urban Regeneration
Inspectorate of Pollution, Her
Majesty’s 229
Instrument engineering 288—91
Insurance industry 416—17
brokers 417
companies 416—7
Lloyd’s 417
International Stock Exchange
see Stock Exchange, International
Investment 247, 256-7, 259-60, 269
European Investment Bank 269
in industry 247, 256-7, 259-60
investing institutions 417—19
insurance companies 391—2
pension funds 417—18
unit trusts 418
overseas 432—3
Invisible trade 426—8
see also Trade, overseas
Ireland: historical outline 3-^f
Iron and steel 269, 282
European Coal and Steel
Community 269
products 282
Isle of Man 4
historical outline 4
J 
Jewry 243
Judges 137
Justice 115—44
and the law 115—44
civil 138-44
criminal 116—38
Crown Prosecution Service 57
L 
Land 1-33, 212-13, 230-31,335
and people 1—33
pollution control 230—1
reclamation 212—13
registers of unused and under-used
land 213
213 335
Law 46^8, 53, 59, 115-44, 275, 342,
387-8,391-2,479-80
administration of the 141—4
agricultural holdings 342
centres 144
INDEX
527
civil courts 138-41
appeals 139
civil justice 138-41
civil proceedings 139-41
legal aid 143
company 275
coroners’courts 129
criminal courts 124—9
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 117—18
criminal justice 115-38
criminal trials 128-9
jury 128-29
legal aid 144
employment 387-88, 391-2
government responsibilities, in
administration of 141
judges 142
legal aid, advice and assistance
143-4
legal profession 142-3
legislative proceedings,
parliamentary 46—8
delegated legislation 47—8
Officers 53
Officers’ Department 59
press, legal requirements 479—80
prosecution 124—5
reform 144
terrorism, measures to combat
118-19
trade unions, legal framework
387-88
Learned societies 446-7
Leasing companies 418—19
Leather industry 296-7
Legal profession 142-3
Leisure trends 32-3
Libraries 466-8
Arts and, Office of 57
public 467
special 467
university 467
Life, expectation of 22
Literature 465—6
literary and philological societies 466
Living standards 27-9
Lloyd’s insurance market 417
Local government 67-73, 216-18
authorities, types of 68-9
complaints system 73
elections 69—70
finance 71—3
capital expenditure 72
community charge 72
control of 1 ?>
current expenditure 72
loans 7 3
rates 69—70
functions and services 70
housing 216-18
internal organisation 70—1
officers and employees 71
public access 71
London 417, 419—20, 421-2
Financial Futures Exchange,
International 421—2
gold market 422
Lloyd’s insurance market 417
Stock Exchange, International
419-20
Lord Advocate’s Department 62
Lord Chancellor’s Department 59
Lords, House of
see Parliament
Lorries 355
M 
Management consultancy 307
Man-made fibres 285-7
Manpower Economics, Office of
390-1
Manufacturing 279—98
advanced technology, take-up 281-2
growth 279-81
high-technology industries 281
industries 282-98
structure 279
Marine engineering 291—2
Market research 307-8
Marriage 22—3
Mechanical engineering 287—8
Medicine and medical equipment
160-1,443-4
medical research 161
Medical Research Council 443-4
safety of medicines 160-1
Mental health services 135, 164—5
Merchant banks 415
Mercury 372—3
see also Telecommunications
Metal manufacture 273-4, 277-8
iron and steel 282-4
metal products 287-8
non-ferrous metals 284
Migration 24
Minerals 282-5, 329-31
mineral products 282-5
528
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
non-fuel 329—31
exploration 329
production 329—31
Mines and quarries 319—21
coal 319-21
research 321
see also Coal
Ministers 52—5
departmental 53
junior 53
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers
53
ministerial responsibility 54-5
ministerial salaries 53
non-departmental 53
of State 53
Prime Minister 52—3
Monarchy 35—9
accession 37
acts of government 37—8
ceremonial 38
coronation 37
royal income and expenditure 38—9
royal visits 38
succession 37
Monopolies and mergers 270-1
see also Competition policy
Motor vehicles 291—2, 306, 406
car tax 406
industry 291-2
retail distribution 306
Museums and galleries 448, 462-4
Museums Association 462—3
national and other collections 463^1
scientific museums 448
Music 457—8, 458—9
choirs 457
jazz 458
orchestral and choral 457
pop and rock 457—8
training in 458—9
N 
National Council for Vocational
Qualifications 196
National Health Service 142—62
see also Health
National income 251—2
gross domestic product, by industry
253
National Insurance 170—4, 406
benefits and allowances 171^4
contributions 171,406
National parks 226—7
National Playing Fields Association
497
National Rivers Authority 332
National Savings Bank 415
Nationalised industries 258—9
see also individual industries
Nationality 24—5
NATO
see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 444
Natural resources 311—33
Navy
see Royal Navy
Net public sector debt 407—8
New towns 207
News agencies 475—6
Newspapers 471—3
see also Press
Non-departmental public bodies 56
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 105-8, 112
Britain’s contribution 106—7
co-operation 112
Europe and 107
policy 105—6
Northern Ireland 16—21, 63, 108,
118-19, 125, 127, 133, 137, 139,
142, 215, 266-8, 332, 349, 387, 473
civil courts 139
criminal courts 125, 127
cultural and social life 20—1
defence 108
economy 19—20
employment, health and safety in
364
forestry 349
government 16—19
Anglo-Irish Agreement 17—18
background to civil disturbances 16
direct rule and political initiatives
16-17
human rights and security policy
18-19
government departments 63
Agriculture 63
Economic Development 63
Education 63
Environment 63
Finance and Personnel 63
Health and Social Services 63
INDEX
529
industrial development measures
266-8
inner cities policy 215
law, government responsibility in
administration of 142
press 473
prisons 133
terrorism, measures to combat
118-19
trade unions 387
water resources 332
young offenders, treatment of 137
Nuclear power 325—7
British Nuclear Fuels 325—6
emergency plans 327
nuclear power programme 325
research 326
safety 326—7
Nuclear weapons 95-6, 109
O 
Offenders, treatment of 129-38
custody 129—30
non-custodial treatment 130-2
compensation and reparation 131—2
community service 131
fines 130
probation 130—1
prisons 132-6
young offenders 136-8
Offshore Supplies Office 313
Oil
see Petroleum
Old people
see Elderly people
Open University 195
Opera 457, 458-9
training 458-9
Ordnance Suvey 59
Overseas Development
Administration 59
Overseas relations 77-104
administration 77—8
British Council 78, 454
Commonwealth 58, 88-92
development co-operation 99—104
international organisations,
membership of 98-9
international peace and security
92-7
United Nations 97-8
see also European Community
P 
Parliament 39-51, 59, 400-1,490
broadcasting of proceedings 490
functions 39-40
House of Commons 41—2
House of Lords 40-1
legislative proceedings 46—8
delegated legislation 47—8
meeting of 40
parliamentary committees 48-9
joint committees 49
of the whole House 48
party committees 49
select committees 48—9, 400—1
standing committees 48
parliamentary control 49-51
Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration 51
Parliamentary Counsel 59
parliamentary electoral system 42-3
parliamentary privilege 51
parliamentary procedure 45—6
political party system 43-5
Parliamentary Counsel 59
Patents 275
Paymaster General’s Office 56
Pension funds 417-18
Pensions 172, 173, 175-6
retirement 172
war 175—6
widow’s 173
Periodicals 474—5
Petroleum 248-9, 306, 313-16, 403
consumption 316
land-based oilfields 316
North Sea fields 314
offshore 248-9, 313-16
effect on economy 248—9
offshore supplies 313
oilfields 314, 316
petrol retail trade 306
pipelines 316
refineries 316
research 316
revenue tax 403
structure of industry 314
trade 316
Planning 205—8
development plans 206
land registers 213
major schemes 207
new towns 207
public participation 206-7
simplified planning zones 212
530
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
see also Housing, Urban
Regeneration
Police 119-24
authorities and chief constables 120
central authorities 120
charging 123
common services 121—2
detention, treatment and
questioning 122
in Scotland 124
forces 119
grant of bail 123—4
powers of arrest 117
status and duties 120—1
Political parties 43—5,490
broadcasts 460-1
party system 43-5, 490
Pollution control 229—38
administration 229—30
air 233—6
acid rain 234
chlorofluorocarbons 235
climate change 235—6
nitrogen oxide 234
ozone layer 235
sulphur dioxide 234
vehicle emissions 234—5
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate 229—30
land 230-1
marine 232—3
noise 236—7
radioactive waste disposal 237
radioactivity 237
recycling and reclamation 231
water 231—2
Polytechnics 195—6
Population 21—6, 30—2, 59
age distribution 23
birth rates 21-2
Censuses and Surveys, Office of 59
distribution 23—4
divorce rates 22—3
ethnic minorities 30—2
immigration 25—6
marriage rates 22-3
migration 316
mortality, causes of 22
nationality 24—5
sex ratio 23
Ports 362—4
development 363-4
traffic 363
Postal services 374
specialist services 374
Power stations 322—5
Press 469—80
advertising practice 479
Council 478
England 472
ethnic minority publications 473
free distribution newspapers 473
institutions 477—8
journalism, training for 476
legal requirements 479-80
national 469-72
new technology 475
news agencies 475—6
newspapers 469—73
Northern Ireland 473
ownership 471
periodical 474—5
regional 472—3
Scotland 473
Wales 473
Prime Minister 52—3
Printing and publishing 468, 475
newspapers, new technology 475
Prisons and prisoners 132—8
after-care 136
education 134—5
industries 134—5
life sentence 134
medical service 135
parole 133
privileges and discipline 135
psychological service 135
remission of sentence 133
repatriation 134
welfare 135
Privy Council 51—2
committees 52
Probation 130—1
Procurator General 59
Public expenditure 251—2, 397—401
audit and examination of 400—1
Comptroller and Auditor General 400
Public Accounts Committee 400—1
cash limits 400
central government financial funds
401
Estimates 400
reserve 399
Public finance 251—3, 397^108
Budget 401
financial control 407—8
government planning 397—9
planning cycle 398—9
public expenditure 251—2, 397-401
revenue, sources of 401—7
see also Balance of payments,
INDEX
531
Public expenditure and Taxation
and duty
Publishing 465-6, 468
authors’ copyright 465-6
books 468
printing and publishing industries
440, 475
Q 
‘Quangos’ 56
R 
Race relations 30—2, 391-2
Commission for Racial Equality 32
employment, equal opportunities in
391-2
Race Relations Act 32
Radio 487-8, 488-9
BBC World Service 488—9
COI Overseas Radio Services 489
see also Broadcasting
Railways 357-62
British Rail’s subsidiary activities 357
Channel Tunnel 361-2
freight 360
operations 358
passenger services 358-60
private 361
urban 360-1
Recreation see Sport
Refineries see Petroleum
Regional development 61,63,
266-9
assisted areas and related measures
266
development agencies 268
European Community policy and
aid 268-9
European Regional Development
Fund 268—9
Northern Ireland 63, 266-8
rural industries 256
Scottish Development Department
61
Religion 239-44
Churches 240-3, 244
co-operation among the churches
244
Jewry 243
non-Christian religious communities
243-4
Renewable sources of energy 327-9
Research and development 74—5,
112, 161, 199-200, 238, 275-8, 302,
316, 319, 321,325-6, 333, 345-6,
347-8, 349, 435-50,490-1
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 345-6, 444—5
broadcasting 490-1
charitable foundations 446
coal industry 321
construction 302
defence 112, 440
educational 199-200
electricity supply industry 327
environmental 238
expenditure 435-7
fire prevention 74-5
fisheries 347—8
food 345—6
forestry 349
gas supply and use 319
government responsibilities 437-41
industrial 275-8
medical 161
Medical Research Council 443—4
Natural Environment Research
Council 444
nuclear energy 325-6
petroleum technology 316
professional institutions 446
Research Councils 441—5
Advisory Board for the 440
Science and Engineering Research
Council 442-3
astronomy 442
engineering 443
nuclear physics 442
space 449-50
university 445
water industry 333
Restrictive Practices Court 141
Retail trades 303-7
hotels and catering 306—7
trends 304—6
diversification 305
promotions 305
shopping centres 304-5
technology, use of 305-6
vehicle and petrol retailing 306
Roads 352-7
developments 353
government responsibilities 352
haulage 355
532
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
international 355
licensing 355
structure of industry 355
passenger services on 356
safety 354
traffic in towns 354—5
Royal Air Force 110—11
see also Defence
Royal family see Monarchy
Royal Navy 109-10
see also Defence
Royal Society 346—7
S 
Safety 74, 160-1,237, 326-7, 340
civil aviation 368
employment, safety in 394
Northern Ireland 394
fire services 74
food, safety of 340
Health and Safety Commission 394
Health and Safety Executive 394
medicines, safety of 160—1
nuclear industry 326—7
radioactive waste disposal 237
radioactivity 237
roads 354
sea, safety at 365-6
Schools 182-91, 456,458-9, 461
careers education and guidance 191
curriculum 186—7
dance schools 458—9
drama schools 456
educational aids 191
educational standards 190
examinations 188—9
film schools 461
health and welfare in 191
information technology 190—1
independent 185
management of 183—4
nursery 184
primary 184
progress reports 190
religious education and collective
worship in 188
secondary 184—5
special educational needs 185
teachers 185, 197—8, 199
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 187—8
see also Education
Science and technology 57, 275-8,
435-50,475
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 440
astronomy 442
botanical gardens 447
British Technology Group 277—8
Education and Science, Department
of 57
government responsibilities 437—41
international co-operation 448—50
learned societies 446—7
newspaper production, new
technology in 475
nuclear physics 442
professional institutions 446
promotion of 435—50
research and innovation, industrial
275-8
Research Councils 441—5
retail trades, use of technology in
305-6
Royal Society 346—7
Science and Engineering Research
Council 442—3
science parks 445—6
scientific museums 448
space technology 449—50
technology and industry 275—8,
281-2,475
zoological gardens 447
see also Research and development
and Universities
Scotland 3,13-16,61-2, 124, 125,
137, 139, 142, 183, 186, 189,
214-15, 226-7, 241,332, 387,473
Church of 241
civil courts 139
criminal courts 125
cultural and social life 15—16
economy 14—15
education 183, 186, 189
government 13—14
government departments 61—2
Agriculture and Fisheries 61
Central Services 62
Crown Office 62
Development 61
Education 61
Home and Health 62
Industry 62
Lord Advocate’s 62
Scottish Courts Administration 62
historical outline 3
inner cities policy 214—15
law, government responsibility in
administration of 142
INDEX
533
national scenic areas 226—7
police 124
press 473
trade unions 387
water resources 332
young offenders, treatment of 137
Sea 232-3, 364-6
marine pollution, control of 232—3
safety at 365-6
transport 364—6
Serious Fraud Office 59
Service Industries 302—10
advertising 307
auction houses 308
business services 307-8
computing services 307
distribution 302
exhibition and conference centres
308
film and TV 308-9
hotel and catering 291—2
management consultancy 307
market research 307-8
petrol retailing 306
retail trades 303—7
tourism 309—10
vehicle retailing 306-7
wholesale trades 302-3
Shipbuilding and marine
engineering 291-2
Shipping 362-4, 364-6, 422
cargo services 364
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 422
merchant shipping legislation 365
passenger services 364—5
ports 362-4
safety 365—6
Simplified planning zones 212
Small firms 262-3
Smoking 156
Social life 10, 12-13, 15-16, 20-1
Social security 59, 170—6
arrangements with other countries
176
benefits 171—6
contributions 171
Department of 59
family credit 175
housing benefit 175
income support 175
National Insurance 171—4
reform 164—5
social fund 175
taxation 176
war pensions 175—6
see also Children, Disabled people,
Employment, Health, Housing,
National Insurance, Pensions and
Women
Social services 63, 162—70
Health and. Department of
(Northern Ireland) 63
personal 162-7
children 165—7
disabled people 164
elderly 163
families 165
mentally ill people 164—5
people with mental handicaps 164
social workers 167
voluntary 167—70
Social welfare 145-76
see also Health, Social security,
Social services and Voluntary social
services
Solvent abuse 155
Space activities 449—50
Sport 493-512
British Olympic Association 497
children’s play 497
Countryside Commissions 496—7
disabled people, sport for 497—8
drug misuse in 494
facilities, provision of 499-500
gambling 479
Gleneagles agreement 495
National Playing Fields Association
497
organisation and promotion 495—9
popular sports 501—11
angling 501
association football 501—2
athletics 502
badminton 502
basketball 502
billiards and snooker 502—3
bowls 503
boxing 503—4
chess 504
cricket 504
curling 504—5
cycling 505
darts 505
field sports 505
golf 506
gymnastics 506
Highland Games 506
hockey 506—7
horse racing 509
534
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ice skating 507
judo 507
keep fit 507
martial arts 507—8
motor sports 508
mountaineering and rock climbing
508
racing 509
riding 505
rowing 509
rugby football 509—10
sailing 510
skiing 510
snooker 502—3
soccer 501—2
squash rackets 510
sub-aqua 510
swimming 511
table tennis 511
tenpin bowling 511
tennis 511
volleyball 511
private sponsorship 498—9
spectator violence 494—5
sports centres 500
Sports Councils 496
Standards 265-6
measurement 265—6
quality and 265—6
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 57
Steel see Iron and steel
Stock Exchange, International
419-20
Students 193, 200
overseas, in Britain 200
I 
Tariffs and Trade, General
Agreement on 428
Taxation and duty 176, 402—6
capital gains tax 403—4
car tax 406
corporation tax 403
customs duties 405
excise duties 405—6
income tax 402—3
inheritance tax 403
petroleum revenue tax 403
social security benefits and 176
stamp duty 406
value added tax 405
Teachers 185, 197-8, 199
teaching methods 199
training 197—8
Technology
see Science and technology
Telecommunications 60, 370-4
British Telecom 370—2
general services 371
international services 371—2
network modernisation 371
Cable and Wireless 373-4
Mercury 372—3
mobile communications 373
Office of 60
Television 308—9, 484—7
cable 486-7
industry 308—9
satellite television 487
see also Broadcasting
Terrorism 86—7, 118—19
Textiles 287, 296-7
industries 296—7
man-made fibres 287
Theatre see Drama
Tobacco industry 294—6
Tourism 309—10
Trade, overseas 60, 87—8, 247—8,
316,423-33
and Industry, Department of 60
balance of payments 431—2
commodity composition 424—5
controls on 429—30
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 431
European Community policy 87—8
export promotion services 430—1
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 428
geographical distribution 425—6
government services 430—1
invisible 426—8
oil 316
policy 428-9
single European market 428
trends 247—8
visible 423—6
see also Balance of payments,
European Community, Exports,
Imports and Visible trade
Trade unions 385—8
legal framework 387—8
Northern Ireland 387
Scotland 387
Trades Union Congress 386—7
see also Industrial legislation
INDEX
535
Training 65-6, 187-8,197-8,260-1
379-83, 456, 458-9, 464, 476
Agency 379
Business Growth 380
Civil Service 65—6
dance 458-9
dramatic 456
Employment Training 380
Enterprise Councils, and 379
film production 461
journalism 476
musical 458
National Task Force 380
operatic 458
services 379-83
teachers 197—8
technical and vocational 260-1
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 187—8
visual arts and design 464
vocational qualifications 382
youth 381
Transplant surgery 151—2
Transport 60, 82, 291-2, 292-4,
351-69
air 366-9
bus services 356-7
Channel Tunnel 361-2
Department of 60
equipment manufacturing 291-2,
292-4
European Community policies
82
Eurotunnel Services 361-2
inland 351-64
merchant shipping legislation 365
passenger services 356-7, 358-60,
364-5
policy 366
ports 362-4
railways 357-62
urban 360—1
roads 352—7
haulage 355
safety measures 354, 365-6, 368
shipping 364—6
taxis 357
traffic in towns 354
waterways, inland 362
see also Civil aviation, Waterways,
inland, Ports, Railways, Roads, and
Shipping
Travel see Tourism
HM Treasury 60
Solicitor’s Department 59
U 
Ulster see Northern Ireland
Unemployment 174, 379, 377-84
benefit 174
careers service 384
employment services 383-4
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 381
incentives to work 384
Jobclubs 383—4
Restart Programmes 383
services for people with disabilities
384
Unit trusts 418
United Nations 97—8
economic and social affairs 98
human rights 97—8
international peace and security
92-7
Universities 195, 445, 467
libraries 467
Open University 195
research 445
Urban Development Corporations
201
Urban Regeneration 208—15
City Action Teams 209
City Grant 209-10
Enterprise Zones 212
Northern Ireland 215
Scotland 214-15
Task Forces 209
Urban Development Corporations
209
Urban Programme 208
see also Planning, Housing
V 
Venture capital companies 419
Visible trade 423-6
commodity composition 424-5
geographical distribution 425-6
see also Trade, overseas
Visual arts 461-5
crafts 464
museums and art galleries 462-4
training in 464
Voluntary social services 167-70
organisations 169-70
young people 204
youth services 202—4
536
BRITAIN 1991: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
W 
Wages councils 391
Wales 2, 10-13,60, 124-6, 136-7,
138-9, 141-2, 214, 331-2, 473
civil courts 138—9
criminal courts 124—5, 125—6
criminal prosecutions 120, 124—5
cultural and social life 12—13
economy 11—12
government 11
historical outline 2
urban regeneration policy 214
law, government responsibility in
administration of 141—2
press 473
water resources 331
Welsh Office 60
young offenders, treatment of
136-7
War pensions 175—6
Water resources 231—2, 331—3
development projects 333
England and Wales 331—2
water service companies 331
supplies 332
National Rivers Authority 332
Northern Ireland 316
pollution control 231—2
research 333
Scotland 332
Waterways, inland 362
Welsh Office 60
Wholesale trades 302—3
Widows 173
Women 29-31, 159, 172-3, 392
benefits and pensions 172—3
cancer screening 159
equal opportunities 392
World Heritage Sites 229
Y 
Youth 136-8, 381,456
theatre for 456
training services 381
young adult offenders 136—8
Youth service 202-4
organisations 203
voluntary service 204
workers 204
z 
Zoological gardens 447
Acknowledgments for photographs
Press Association (facing p 70). Overseas Development Administration
(facing p 134). Ministry of Defence Public Relations (between pp 134 and
135). Scottish Tourist Board (between pp 230 and 231). Country Life and
Syndication International (between pp 326 and 327). Dave Wilson (facing
p 327). Line-up/Jazz FM and British Broadcasting Corporation (facing
p 455).
Cover illustration by John Clementson.
Printed in the United Kingdom for HMSO
Dd 291968 C100 1/91
Written and prepared for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office by
Reference Services, Central Office of Information.
5
Shetland
Islands
Orkney
Islands
Major conservation and
recreation areas
National Parks
Forest Parks
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
(National Scenic
Areas in Scotland)
Heritage Coast
(Coastal Conservation
Zones in Scotland)
National Trails
World Heritage Sites
\ West Highland
VWay
Southern Uplands
Way/vy
Northumberland
North York
□ Moors ,
) Wolds
VWay
L Yorkshire
\ Dales
Pennine (
Way \
Peak
District
Snowdonia
Peddars Way,
and Norfolk
Coast Path
^ The
\ Broads
Pembrokeshire
Ridgeway,
Pembrokeshire
Coast Path
□□ "
North Downs
Wav
Somerset and North Devon
Coast Path „*.»•-
South Downs Way
Dartmoor
Cornwall /1
Coast Path W
(South Devon
Coast Path
0
20 40 60 miles
Ullapool
Inverness
'le of Lochalsh
:ort William
Perth
lawick
lolerair
Dumfries
Penrith
intrim Ts
Darlingti
Workington'
Enniskill
irmagh
Liverpool
Holyhead
Chester
Shrews!
lorthampton
lolchester.
'fe, Hanwich
Oxford •
^windc n
Readii
itwick
[aunton
'mouth
Motorways and major
trunk roads
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Thurso
Motorways
completed mma—m
under construction
proposed mmmmmtm
Other trunk roads
Note: Many existing motorways have
widening schemes in construction
or under preparation.
^V„-VSt Andrews
ick-upon-Tweed
upon Tyne
and
Barrow-in-Furness
1 Burnley Brae
Blackpool # #
P “siK?S!T .Ji
Milford
V Folkestone
Brighton
0
20 40 60 miles
Now in its 42nd edition, this well-known handbook
is prepared by the Central Office of Information
with the co-operation of other government depart¬
ments and many national organisations. Updated
every year to include all the latest facts and figures
on most aspects of our way of life, Britain 1991
looks at history, politics and law, economic and
social affairs, arts and sport. Illustrated with colour
plates, maps and diagrams, it’s an invaluable
source of information for visitors as well as a
useful reference work for residents.
£15.95 net
ISBN 0-11-701550-4
78
01
7 0
5500
9
