ax I. //.
Sir William
Bragg,
Science,
1915
Francis
William
Aston,
Science,
1922
J. J. R.
Macleod,
Medicine,
1923
Charles
Glover
Barkla,
Science,
1917
C. T. R.
Wilson,
Science,
1927
Sir Owen
Richardson
Science,
1928
SirFrederic
Gowland
Hopkins,
Medicine,
1929
Frederick
Soddy,
Science,
1921
Archibald
Vivian Hill,
Medicine,
1922
BRITAIN
The Department
of Economic
Affairs
The Ministry
of Technology
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
i965
SUPPLEMENT
Britain: An Official Handbook is published annually in January and covers
events up to the previous September. To meet this schedule the 1965 edition
went to press before the general election held in October 1964. In this
supplement are set out important changes introduced or announced by the
new Government in the first few weeks after it had taken office. The page
references are to the text of the Handbook.
Machinery of government
Five new departments have been created, as follows:
The Department of Economic Affairs, under the First Secretary of State and
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, is responsible for framing and
supervising the plan for economic development (including regional develop¬
ment, see p. 264), and for the general co-ordination of action to implement
the plan, including, in particular, policies for industry, the regions, incomes
and prices, and economic growth generally. This work is carried out in close
co-operation with the Treasury (see p. 50) and other Government departments
concerned.
The Ministry of Technology is generally responsible for furthering the
applications of technology in industry. In this connection it is responsible for
work in this field previously undertaken by the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research (see p. 59), at its headquarters and in the research
stations. The Ministry has also assumed responsibility for the Atomic Energy
Authority (see p. 216) and the National Research Development Corporation
(see p. 220). An Advisory Council on Technology has been set up, with the
Minister as chairman; its membership includes representatives of industrial,
scientific, economic and trade union interests.
The Ministry
of Overseas
Development
The Ministry
of Land and
Natural
Resources
The Welsh
Office
Changes in
existing
Government
Departments
The Department
of Education and
Science
The Ministry
of Defence
The Ministry of Overseas Development, working in close co-operation with
the Treasury and other departments concerned, is responsible for carrying
out the Government’s policy for development overseas. It will be responsible
for the aid programme as a whole and its make-up between bilateral and
multilateral aid and between capital aid and technical assistance; the terms
and conditions of capital aid and the principles on which technical assistance
is granted; the size and nature of the aid programme for each country; the
management of capital aid and technical assistance; relations with international
aid organisations; the United Kingdom interest in United Nations programmes
of technical assistance; and liaison with voluntary bodies operating in the
same field.
In dealing with these matters the Ministry has absorbed the Department of
Technical Co-operation (see p. 60). It will discharge certain functions
relating to capital aid and technical assistance hitherto exercised by the
Treasury and the overseas departments (the Foreign Office, the Common¬
wealth Relations Office and the Colonial Office), and will assume responsibility
for the Commonwealth Development Corporation (see p. 432).
The Ministry of Land and Natural Resources is responsible for policy
relating to the availability of land to meet national requirements and its
immediate function in this connection will be to establish a Land Com¬
mission with wide powers to acquire land for the community. Other
responsibilities of the Ministry include responsibility (jointly with the
Secretary of State for Scotland) for the Forestry Commission (see p. 53).
The Ministry is also concerned with the Natural Environment Research
Council (see below), and will have certain functions, not yet precisely defined,
connected with natural resources other than land.
The Secretary of State for Wales will be personally responsible to the
Prime Minister for the following in Wales: housing, new towns, town and
country planning, the environmental health services and the entire organisa¬
tion of local government. In unison with the Department of Economic
Affairs the Welsh Office will direct the Development Plan for Wales; it will
also be responsible for road planning and supervision, in Wales, of the Depart¬
ments of Agriculture, Education and Science, Health, Trade and Labour.
Changes in existing Government departments include:
In addition to the Medical and Agricultural Research Councils at present
within the Department of Education and Science (see p. 204), two new
councils are to be set up: the Science Research Council, which will take up
some of the functions formerly carried out by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research; and the Natural Environment Research Council,
which will bring together the activities of various groups of study, including
those relating to nature conservancy, geology and oceanography. A Council
for Scientific Policy is to be set up within the Department to advise the
Secretary of State on the allocation of resources between different fields of
research.
The three Ministers of Defence (see pp. 53 and 112) are to take on increased
responsibility in addition to their special responsibilities for the Services to
which they have been allocated. The Minister of Defence for the Army is also
to act as Deputy to the Secretary of State for Defence, with particular
The Board of
Trade
Special Duties
Trade Policy
and Balance
of Payments
(see p. 427)
Economic
Planning
(see p. 252)
Incomes and
Prices Policy
(see p. 251)
Regional
Development
(see p. 264)
responsibility for the co-ordination of politico-strategic policy other than
day-to-day operations; the Minister for the Royal Navy is to co-ordinate
personnel matters and logistics and to deal with problems of administrative
rationalisation; and the Minister for the Royal Air Force is to co-ordinate
research, development and production, and the defence budget for the
three Services.
The Board of Trade (see p. 60) is to assume the responsibilities hitherto
attached to the Ministry of Transport in relation to shipping and ship¬
building (see p. 61). The Board’s responsibilities for regional development
have been transferred to the Department of Economic Affairs, and its
responsibilities for the National Research Development Corporation to the
Ministry of Technology.
Ministers to whom special duties have been allocated include the Chancellor
of the Duchy of Lancaster (see p. 45), who is to co-ordinate and be the
spokesman in the Cabinet for the social services and who is likely to be
concerned with the principles of their long-term development; and one of the
Ministers without Portfolio, who will work on a programme of law reform.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
Important measures announced by the new Government affecting the
economy and the social services are as follows:
In view of the prospective large deficit in the balance of payments for 1964 and
also of a further deficit, although smaller, in 1965, it was decided to introduce,
with effect from 27th October, 1964, a temporary surcharge of 15 per cent on
imports, with certain exceptions, including foodstuffs, unmanufactured
tobacco, basic raw materials, books and periodicals and large ships and
aircraft. Legislation has also been introduced to provide for repayment to
exporters of sums broadly equivalent to the amounts of certain indirect taxes
which enter into the cost of production of exported goods.
An additional exports council (see p. 425), the Commonwealth Exports
Council, is to be set up.
While the Department of Economic Affairs is responsible for the general
framing and supervision of the plan for economic development, the National
Economic Development Council is to be reconstituted. The Council will
continue to act as a body on which members drawn from both sides of
industry and commerce can participate, under the chairmanship of the First
Secretary of State, both in the formulation and the implementation of the
Government’s economic plans.
A price review body is to be set up as one of the elements of the Government’s
policy for prices and incomes.
Regional planning is to be closely integrated with national planning and
regional interests are to play an active role. In this connection regional
planning boards are to be set up at regional headquarters under the Depart¬
ment of Economic Affairs. They will consist of officials from the main
economic and social departments concerned with essential planning decisions.
The planning boards will work with regional councils, drawn mainly from
both sides of industry, commerce, local authorities, and the universities,
which are being established to advise on regional development. Legislation is
to be introduced to provide for the appointment of a Highland Development
Board. r
Iron and Steel
Industry
(see p. 295)
Social Security
(see p. 133)
The Government has announced that it proposes to introduce legislation to
bring the iron and steel industry under public ownership and control.
The national schemes of social security are being reviewed. Meanwhile it is
proposed to increase the existing rates of national insurance and associated
benefits from the end of March 1965. Prescription charges for medicines
under the National Health Service are to be abolished (see p. 147).
Housing and
Planning
(see p. 192)
Taxation
Changes
(see p. 396)
It has been announced that control of rents will be restored; it is proposed to
introduce legislation to provide for leasehold enfranchisement.
An additional budget was introduced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer on
nth November, 1964. It imposed an immediate increase of 6d. a gallon in
the tax on petrol and certain other hydrocarbon oils, and an increase of 6d.
(to 8s. 3d. in the £) in the standard rate of income tax, to take effect from
6th April, 1965. The Chancellor also announced his intention of proposing,
in his next budget, a full-scale capital gains tax and a corporation tax to
replace the present taxes on company profits.
© Crown copyright 1965
Printed and published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Printed in England
(90010) Wt. 1530/P.8276 K62 12/64 Hw.
Lord
Adrian,
Medicine,
1932
Sir Arthur
Harden,
Science,
1929
BRITISH WINNERS
of
NOBEL PRIZES
for
SCIENCE
Art.,-.,
Sir Charles
Sherrington
Medicine,
1932
P. A. M.
Dirac,
Science,
1933
Sir James
Chadwick,
Science,
1935
Sir Henry
Dale,
Medicine,
1936
Sir George
Thomson
Science,
1937
BRITAIN
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
BRITAIN
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PREPARED BY THE CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMAT.ON
LONDON
1 965 EDITION
London
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office 1965
© Crown copyright 1965
Printed and published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
To be purchased from
York House, Kingsway, London w.c.2
423 Oxford Street, London w.i
13A Castle Street, Edinburgh 2
109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff
39 King Street, Manchester 2
50 Fairfax Street, Bristol 1
35 Smallbrook, Ringway, Birmingham 5
80 Chichester Street, Belfast 1
or through any bookseller
Obtainable in the United States of America
from British Information Services,
845 Third Avenue, New York 22, N.Y.
Price £1 ys. 6d. net
Printed in England
Contents
Page
INTRODUCTION ix
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE i
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 7
2. GOVERNMENT 27
General Survey 27
The Monarchy 28
Parliament 32
The Privy Council 44
Her Majesty’s Government 45
Government Departments 49
The Civil Service 64
Local Government 69
The Fire Service 78
3. LAW AND ORDER 82
The Law 82
Treatment of Offenders 98
The Police Service 106
4. DEFENCE in
Home Defence 127
5. SOCIAL WELFARE 131
State and Voluntary Services 131
Social Security 133
Health 144
6. EDUCATION 156
Youth Service 174
7. PLANNING AND HOUSING 179
Town and Country Planning 179
Housing 187
8. THE CHURCHES 193
9. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 201
The Promotion of the Sciences 201
The Promotion of the Arts 222
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 242
Background 242
The Structure of the Economy 244
v
Page
11. INDUSTRY 254
Organisation and Production 254
Fuel and Power 273
Water Supply 288
Construction 291
Manufacturing Industries 294
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 322
Agriculture 322
Fisheries 344
Forestry 348
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 352
Shipping 352
Inland Transport 360
Civil Aviation 377
The Post Office 385
14. FINANCE 391
Public Finance 391
Banking and Private Finance 402
15. TRADE AND PAYMENTS 413
Overseas Trade 413
The Balance of Payments 427
Internal Trade 433
16. LABOUR 443
Manpower 443
Government Employment and Training Services 447
Terms of Employment, Conditions of Work and Labour Relations 453
17. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 475
18. THE PRESS 485
19. SPORT 494
APPENDIX 511
Notes for Visitors to the United Kingdom 511
British Weights and Measures and their Metric Equivalents 514
BIBLIOGRAPHY 516
INDEX 545
Page
DIAGRAMS Percentage Change in Population since 1901 by Age Group 9
Birth Rates and Death Rates 10
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 11
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 29
Changes in National Expenditure: 1953 compared with 1963 245
Production and National Income Trends 1900-63 246
Public and Private Fixed Investment 1958 and 1963 247
Personal Income and Expenditure 1963 250
Index of Industrial Production 269
The United Kingdom Budget 1964-65 397
Analysis of Bank Advances 1961-64 403
Commodity Composition of Imports and Exports in 1963 415
Area Pattern of Trade in 1963 416
Britain’s Invisible Overseas Transactions 1960-63 418
Earnings, Wage Rates and Retail Prices 1952-1963 455
The sources of the pre-war figures for the graph of Production and National Income Trends are:
Production Index, T. S. Ridley in Economica, February 1955; National Income Index, A. R. Prest in
Economic Journal, March 1948.
MAPS United Kingdom: Physical 3
Density of Population 1961 13
Percentage Change in Population 1951-61 14
Fuel and Power in Great Britain 274
Motorways and Principal Trunk Roads 369
The United Kingdom fold-in map
Acknowledgment for the maps on pp. 13 and 14 is made to Mr. D. J. Sinclair of the London School of
Economics.
PHOTOGRAPHS
Her Majesty the Queen frontispiece
facing page
Democracy in Action: Polling Day 54
The Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst 55
Centres for the Elderly 86
Zoology and Botany in Britain 87
Britain’s New Universities 166
Major Engineering Projects in 1964 between pages 166 and 167
The Royal Marsden Hospital
Tanker arriving at BP’s New Refinery at Belfast
Laying a Section of Methane Pipeline
Scientific Research
Technical Co-operation Abroad
Whisky Distilling
New British Aircraft
Precision Engineering
The Bank of England
Modern Theatres
Students at the Royal Academy School of Art
Performance at the Royal Festival Hall, London
Cross-country Running
Crystal Palace Sports Centre
facing page
167
246
246
247
278
279
358
between pages 358 and 359
359
470
471
502
503
503
Acknowledgment is made to Vickers-Armstrongs Ltd., Owen Organisation, National Coal Board, John Brown
Ltd., Massey-Ferguson (GB) Ltd., British Aircraft Corporation, UK Atomic Energy Authority, British
Broadcasting Corporation and British Travel and Holidays Association for the following photographs on
the cover: Hovercraft, racing car, coal miners, shipbuilding, combine harvester, VC 10, nuclear research
station, ballet dancers, and sailing boats and Welsh girl; and for photographs in the book to Short
Brothers Ltd., for the Belfast aircraft (facing p. 358); to British Aircraft Corporation for the BAC in
aircraft (facing p. 358); to British European Airways for the Trident (facing p. 358); to the Bank of
England for the Bank (facing p. 359); to British Petroleum Ltd. for the tanker at Belfast (facing p. 246);
to the Gas Council for the methane pipeline (facing p. 246); to Robert Matthew, Johnson, Marshal and
Partners and Glasgow University for the model of the new university buildings (facing p. 166); to the
Royal Military Academy for activities at Sandhurst (facing p. 55); to Dorman Productions Ltd. for the
Royal Marsden Hospital (facing p. 167); to Walter Nurnberg for the pictures facing p. 279 and between
pp. 358 and 359; to Mullard Ltd. for electronic equipment (between pp. 358 and 359); to English Electric
Co. Ltd. for the turbine (between pp. 358 and 359); to Grubb Parsons Ltd. for the telescope (facing p. 247);
and to John Dewar & Sons Ltd. for the distilleries (facing p. 279).
Introduction
BRITAIN: an official handbook, 1965, is the sixteenth in the
series prepared and extensively revised each year by the Reference Division
of the Central Office of Information with the co-operation of other Govern¬
ment departments and of many national organisations.
The handbook, which is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided
by the British Information Services in many countries, was at first only
available overseas in a limited free edition. In 1954 it was placed on sale
throughout the world and it has since become widely known as an established
work of reference.
This 1965 edition, which covers events up to September 1964, gives, like
its predecessors, a factual account of the administration and the national
economy of the United Kingdom. It describes the activities of many of the
national institutions, both official and unofficial, and shows the part played
by the Government in the life of the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt
to cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The
factual and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and
other authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to the
United Kingdom as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland,
and Northern Ireland are also given separately when relevant.
Readers who require more detailed information should consult the Annual
Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of Statistics, issued by the Central
Statistical Office, and also other Government publications and standard
works of reference, some of which are listed in the bibliography at the end
of the handbook. Readers are asked to note that the Central Office of
Information reference documents listed in the bibliography as free and
marked with an asterisk are available free of charge only at British Information
Offices overseas; they can, however, be obtained in the United Kingdom
from the Reference Division, Central Office of Information, on payment of
a small charge.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September 1964.
ix
1
I
THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe with
a total area of about 121,600 square miles. The largest islands are Great
Britain proper (comprising the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland)
and Ireland (comprising Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west
are the Isles of Scilly; off North Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is
fringed by numerous islands and to the far north are the important groups
of the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these form administrative counties or parts
of counties of the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the
Channel Islands between Great Britain and France have a large measure of
administrative autonomy and are not part of England, Wales, Scotland or
Northern Ireland.
England (excluding the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border) has a
total area (including inland water) of 50,327 square miles and is divided into
40 geographical or 49 administrative counties; Wales (including Monmouth¬
shire), with a total area of 8,017 square miles, has 13 counties; Scotland,
including its 186 inhabited islands, has a total area of 30,411 square miles
and is divided into 33 counties; and Northern Ireland, consisting of six
counties, has a total area of 5>459 square miles. Together, these countries
constitute the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, with
a total area of 94,214 square miles. The total land area of the United Kingdom
(excluding inland water) is 93,018 square miles: England, 50,051; Wales and
Monmouthshire, 7,966; Scotland, 29,795; and Northern Ireland, 5,206 square
miles.
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they
refer to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together
for many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which com¬
prises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom as a whole.
The position is further complicated by the fact that the county of Monmouth
is sometimes included with England. United Kingdom statistics and other
data sometimes include the Isle of Man, 227 square miles, and the Channel
Islands, 75 square miles, which strictly are not part of the United Kingdom
but are dependencies of the Crown. Since southern Ireland became indepen¬
dent, official statistics do not normally refer to the British Isles as a whole.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British
mainland (the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the
Shetland Islands. The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet
Head, near John o’ Groats, is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o°
passes through the old Observatory of Greenwich (London), while the
easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45' East and the westernmost
point of Ireland is approximately io° 30' West. It is just under 600 miles
in a straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and
2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Geology and
Topography
rather over 300 miles across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous bays
and inlets no point in the British Isles is as much as 75 miles from tidal water.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less
than 50 fathoms (300 feet)—because the islands lie on the continental shelf.
To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly
from 600 feet to 3,000 feet. These shallow waters are important because they
provide excellent fishing grounds as well as breeding grounds for the fish.
The North Atlantic Current, the drift of warm water which reaches the
islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out over the shelf and its ameliorating
effect on the air is thus magnified. The effect of tidal movement is also
increased by the shallowness of the water.
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main
geological periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant
to weather and have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south
and east, and the island can therefore be divided roughly into two main
regions, Lowland Britain and Highland Britain.
In Lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern
England have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and
rising to chalk and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet
above sea level. The boundaries of this region run roughly from the mouth
of the Tyne in the north-east of England to the mouth of the Exe in the
south-west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and
moors of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands,
which extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the
Lake District in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the
Pennines, almost the whole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of
England coinciding approximately with the counties of Devon and Cornwall.
Highland Britain contains all the mountainous parts1 of Great Britain and
extensive uplands lying above one thousand feet. This high ground, however,
is not continuous but is interspersed with valleys and plains. Geologically
the mountains and hills consist mainly of outcrops of very old rocks (archaean
and palaeozoic), while the top strata in the valleys and plains are mainly more
recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those in the northern and western
parts of Lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal
measures which have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion.
The outcrops and shallow seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted
were found on the edge of the plains and up the valleys leading to the high
land. Most of the present deep coal workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors
of present-day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice
Age, and at one period or another during this time the whole of Britain north
of a line joining the river Thames and the Bristol Channel was covered by
ice caps and ice sheets. The ice naturally accumulated on the higher ground
and swept from the mountains of Scotland, northern England and Wales
any loose rock or soil which had previously been formed, so that, when the
ice eventually disappeared, the hills stood out as barren rocky areas, while a
thick mantle of glacial debris—boulders, boulder-clay, sands and gravels—
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet; in Wales, Snowdon,
3,560 feet; and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District, Cumberland), 3,210 feet.
The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
3
UNITED KINGDOM
Physical
Atlantic
Ocean
=1 Land over
fl 600 ft.
A Peaks
A Ben Nevis 4,406 ft.
B Snowdon 3,560 ft.
c Scafell 3,210 ft.
d Slieve Donard 2,796 ft,
North Sea
Thames
ISLES OF:>' I and-
SC I ELY End
The Lizard
4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Climate
Winds
lay distributed widely over the lower ground. The ice had blocked up previous
drainage channels and left large lakes, which have since gradually dried up,
leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of great fertility.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by
the ice sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption
of the previous natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses of Ireland
are irregularly placed around central lowlands; in the higher parts the
moorland vegetation resembles that of the higher parts of Highland Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety
of scenery and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances,
particularly on the coasts. The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach
the coast in towering cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as
along much of the west coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are
notable features in other parts of the varied coastline: the granite cliffs of
Land’s End; the limestone masses and slates of the Pembrokeshire coast in
South Wales; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast;
and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa in the Inner
Hebrides. Even around Lowland Britain there are striking contrasts. In some
parts the soft, white limestone—the chalk—forms the world-famous white
cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight; while other parts of the
south and south-east coastline have beaches of sand or shingle. The eastern
coast of England between the Humber and the Thames estuary is for the
most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches of it have been
protected against the sea by embankments. These have occasionally been
breached, as in the flood disaster of January 1953, which was caused by the
abnormal concurrence of violent gales and exceptionally high tides.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much
of the sand and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries
of the short British rivers1 valuable as natural harbours.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. It lies in middle latitudes
to the north-west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but the
prevailing winds are south-westerly and the weather from day to day is
controlled mainly by a succession of depressions from the Atlantic which,
moving in a generally easterly or north-easterly direction, pass over or near
the British Isles. The climate is subject to frequent changes but to few
extremes of temperature. Although it is largely determined by that of the
eastern Atlantic, occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may
bring a cold, dry, continental type of weather which, once established, may
persist for many days or even weeks. During the summer months the Azores
high pressure system usually extends its influence north-eastwards towards
north-west Europe, and the depressions take a more northerly course, often
passing entirely to the north of the British Isles.
In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from an
easterly quarter the least; such winds occur about one-third as often as
south-westerly ones although easterly winds are appreciably more frequent
in the spring than at any other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction
may differ markedly from the general direction owing to local topography.
Winds are generally stronger in the north than in the south of the British
Isles, stronger on the coasts than inland, and stronger in the west than in the
1 The longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only 210 and
200 miles long respectively.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
5
Temperature
Rainfall
Sunshine
Visibility
east. The strongest winds usually occur in the winter; the average speed at
Lerwick, Shetland Islands, varies from about 22 m.p.h. in January to about
14 m.p.h. in August, while at Kew Observatory, on the western outskirts of
London, the average speed varies from about 10 m.p.h. in January to about
7 m.p.h. in August. The stormiest region of the British Isles is along the
north-west coast, with over 30 gales a year; south-east England and the east
Midlands are the least stormy, with gales occurring on about 2 days a year
inland and on some 15 to 20 days on the Channel coast.
Near sea level the mean annual temperature ranges from 470 F. (8° C.) in
the Hebrides to 520 F. (ii° C.) in the extreme south-west of England; it is
slightly lower in the eastern part of the country in the same latitude. The
mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetlands),
ranges from 390 F. (40 C.) during the winter (December, January and
February) to 530 F. (120 C.) during the summer (June, July and August):
the corresponding figures for Jersey (Channel Islands), in the extreme south,
are 430 F. (6° C.) and 63° F. (170 C.). The average range of temperature
between winter and summer varies from 150 F. to 230 F. (7°-i20 C.), being
greatest inland in the eastern part of the country. During a normal summer,
the temperature occasionally rises above 8o° F. (270 C.) in the south, but
temperatures of 90° F. (320 C.) and above are infrequent. Extreme minimum
temperatures depend to a large extent on local conditions, but 20° F. ( — 70 C.)
may occur on a still, clear winter’s night, io° F. (—12° C.) is rare, and
o° F. ( — 180 C.) or below has been recorded only during exceptionally severe
winter periods.
The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches, while
England alone has about 34 inches. The geographical distribution of annual
rainfall is largely governed by topography and exposure to the Atlantic, the
mountainous areas of the west and north having far more rain than the plains
of the south and east. Between 150 and 200 inches of rain fall on the summits
of Snowdon and Ben Nevis during the average year, whereas some places in
the south-east of England record less than 20 inches. Rain is fairly well
distributed throughout the year, but, on the average, March to June are the
driest months and October to January the wettest, the former period of four
months having about 60 per cent of the rainfall of the latter. A period of as
long as three weeks without rain is exceptional, and is usually confined to
limited areas. In successive years, however, remarkably contrasting weather
conditions are sometimes experienced.
The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general decrease
from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the
mean daily duration of sunshine varies from five and a half hours in western
Scotland to seven and a half hours in the extreme south-east of England;
during the months of shortest daylight—November, December and January—
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of half an hour a day in some parts
of the Highlands of Scotland and in the Peak District (Derbyshire) and two
hours a day on the south coast of England.
In fine, still weather there is often some haze in Britain and mist and fog
are not uncommon, particularly from October to January. In London and
some of the other main centres of population and industry there are occasional
‘smogs’—chemically polluted fogs which are very dense and acrid and
constitute a considerable health risk to the elderly and infirm.
6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Soil and
Vegetation
Fauna
Many parts of the surface of Highland Britain have only thin, poor soils,
with the result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands
of Scotland, the Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in
parts of north-east and south-west England. In most areas the farmer has
cultivated only the valley lands and the plains where soils are deeper and
richer; villages and towns are often separated by uplands with few if any
habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of poor soil or rocky land, almost the
whole of Lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area
except where there are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land
drainage systems have been developed through the centuries to bring under
cultivation the fertile soil of the low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and similar
areas in East Anglia.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of
natural vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably
covered the greater part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands,
forests of Scots pine on higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open
moorland. In the course of the centuries the forest area was progressively
diminished and, in spite of planting by estate owners in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries and the establishment of large forests by the Forestry
Commission in the past forty years, woodlands now occupy only about
7 per cent of the surface of the country. The greatest density of woodland
occurs in the north and east of Scotland, in some parts of south-east England
and in Monmouthshire on the Welsh border. Midland Britain appears to be
well wooded because of the numerous hedgerows and isolated trees. The
most common trees are oak, beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and
birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of
woods, fens and marshes, foreshores and cliffs, chalk downs and the higher
slopes of mountains; the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country,
which consists mainly of heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton
grass in the wetter parts. Most of Britain, however, is agricultural land, of
which about a third is arable and the rest pasture and meadow, a varied
semi-natural vegetation composed of indigenous grasses and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges or stone walls and, especially
in the mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents a pattern of
contrasting colour. The cool temperate climate of Britain and the even
distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry up,
grassland is green throughout the year and full of wild flowers from spring
to autumn; in most years there is scarcely a month in which some flowers
may not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western
Europe, though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals,
including the wolf, the bear, the boar and the reindeer, have become extinct;
but red deer, protected for sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish High¬
lands and on Exmoor in the counties of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are
found in Scotland and in the wooded areas of southern England, and fallow
deer (which are probably not indigenous) have been introduced into parks
and are wild in some districts. The badger, a nocturnal animal, is rarely seen;
there are foxes in most rural areas, and otters are found along many rivers
and streams. Both common and grey seals may be seen on various parts of
the coast, though not usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals include
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
mice, rats, voles, shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey
more numerous than the native red), hares, rabbits (a serious farming pest
before their decimation by myxomatosis in the years 1954 and 1955), weasels
and stoats.
There are about 430 species of birds, including many song-birds. About
230 species are resident and the rest are regular visitors to Britain. The
chaffinch and the blackbird are probably the most numerous and are widely
and evenly distributed, but sparrows usually predominate near houses, and
huge flocks of starlings, which gather at certain seasons, sometimes congregate
in London and other large towns. These and some other species of small
birds have been on the increase for several decades owing to their success in
adapting themselves to a man-made environment, while small birds in
general have benefited by more considerate treatment from the public. The
number of large birds, on the other hand, has tended to decline, except for
game birds which are specially preserved, such as pheasants and partridges,
and the red grouse which is found in moorland areas.
Many species of gulls and other sea-birds nest round the coast and gulls
often fly far inland in search of food or shelter in rough weather. The drainage
and reclamation of marsh lands have diminished the natural habitat of duck,
geese and other aquatic birds. Such birds, however, now frequent reservoirs,
gravel pits and sewage farms in addition to the nature reserves and bird
sanctuaries which have recently been established on an increasing scale.
Nearly all British wild birds are protected; the principal exceptions are those
considered injurious to agriculture and birds shot for sport in the open season.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three
species of snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of
lizards, including the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented
by three species of newts and five species of frogs and toads. Of these, only
one species of newt and the common viviparous lizard are indigenous; the
other species of reptiles and amphibians that are now firmly established came
to Britain from Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
River and lake fish include salmon, trout, sea-trout, perch, roach, dace,
grayling and pike.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small,
in the British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly
(3 to 4 inches) and the stag beetle inches). The insect fauna in Britain is
less varied than that of continental Europe and lacks a number of common
European species. With modern methods of pest control, extensive insect
damage to crops or timber and serious outbreaks of diseases commonly spread
by insect vectors are exceptional in Britain.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who nov/ inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from
the people who inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long
succession of invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of
Europe were the Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian
Vikings who, after settling in northern France, intermarrying with the French,
and assimilating the French language and customs, crossed to England and
conquered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the
relative importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans,
Anglo-Saxons and the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the
8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vital Statistics
and Population
Censuses
present English, Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over
most of England and the Lowlands of Scotland the language which soon
came to predominate was English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and
Norman-French, while the use of Celtic languages persisted in Wales,
Cornwall, the Isle of Man, the Highlands of Scotland and in Ireland (see p. 20).
The available records do not permit of any precise estimates of the size of
population or of the extent or direction of population movement until the
beginning of the nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the end
of the eleventh century the population of Great Britain was about two million,
while at the end of the seventeenth century a reasonable contemporary
estimate put the population of England and Wales at 5^ million and that of
Scotland at about one million. The main factor in this gradual growth of
population was a slow natural increase, the rate of which was retarded in
Britain, as in all countries before the development of medical science, by
high death rates and, in particular, by very high infant and maternal mortality.
Immigration from the continent of Europe was an influence at certain
times, for example, that of Flemish weavers in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the
British people—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births,
deaths, marriages, occupations, language and family structure is relatively
plentiful and reliable. Most of it is derived from two main sources: the regular
flow of vital statistics, i.e. statistical information based on statutory registration
of births, marriages and deaths, and the periodic census of population which
gives a national snapshot at a particular moment of time.
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is
carried out by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as
registrars of marriages. In England and Wales there are about five hundred
superintendent registrars in charge of registration districts and about twelve
hundred registrars in charge of sub-districts. Registrars and superintendent
registrars are appointed by the county, county borough and metropolitan
borough councils but they act under the instruction of the Registrar General
for England and Wales, who is in charge of a central Government department,
the General Register Office, concerned with regulating the registration of
births, deaths and marriages, with planning and carrying out population
censuses, and with the compilation and analysis of population and vital
statistics. There are corresponding authorities1 and similar arrangements
(differing only in detail) in Scotland, Northern Ireland, the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man.
Censuses of the people of Great Britain have been taken regularly every
ten years since 1801, except that there was no census in 1941 because of the
war. In 1951 and 1961 censuses covering the whole of the British Isles were
taken by the appropriate authorities in England and Wales, Scotland,
Northern Ireland, the islands of the British seas and the Irish Republic!
All the reports based on the 1951 censuses have now been published. The
preliminary reports straightforward counts of males and females by area—
of the 1961 censuses were published in 1961 and the final local reports
in 1962-64. Reports on the Welsh-speaking population and on scientific and
1 The various authorities are: the General Register Office, Somerset House, London:
the General Registry Office, Edinburgh; the General Register Division of the Ministry of
Finance of the Government of Northern Ireland; the Governments of Jersey of
Guernsey and its associated islands, and of the Isle of Man.
Total
Population
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 9
technological qualifications, and tables on housing, birthplace and nationality,
age and marital condition, have been published, as have leaflets with summary
national tables relating to housing, household composition, occupation,
industry and migration.
The short demographic account of the United Kingdom given in this
chapter is based mainly on census reports and on the regular returns of births,
marriages and deaths, though some use has been made of other special
investigations, including the Reports of the Royal Commission on Population.1
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN POPULATION SINCE 1901
BY AGE GROUP
1901 = 0
The enumerated population of the United Kingdom at the censuses taken
on 23rd April, 1961, was 52,709,000, excluding persons in the Isle of Man
and the Channel Islands, which are not strictly parts of the United
Kingdom.
The population had increased by nearly 2^ million since 1951, by about
6^ million since 1931, by about 8| million since 1921 and by about 45^ million
—or about sevenfold—since 1700. The main causes of this increase were a
progressive reduction in death rates and a continuance of high birth rates
into the beginning of the twentieth century. Between June 1961 and June 1962
1 This commission was appointed in March 1944; its main report was published in
March 1949.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the population increased by i per cent, faster than at any time in the past 40
years, owing to natural increase and exceptionally high net gain from migration.
By June 1963 it was approximately 53,674,000. On the basis of present trends it
is now expected to go on growing, probably by slightly under 1 per cent a
year.
The population density of the United Kingdom is one of the highest in
the world. It was approximately 564 persons per square mile at the time of
the 1961 censuses.
Birth and Death For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate was about 35 per
thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just over 20 per
thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 30 years of the century,
but the natural increase of the population changed but little. It rose from
12 per thousand in 1851 to 15 per thousand in 1881, and fell to 11 per thousand
in 1901.
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age
groups, produced a population of low average age. At each successive census
the population of any age group exceeded the corresponding figure at the
preceding census, while the short expectation of life further reduced the ratio
of older to younger persons. When, therefore, death rates in all age groups
fell by an average of about a third, as they did between 1880 and 1910
the results were a very low general death rate, which helped to maintain the
population increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and a gradual increase
in the average age of the population.
After the first world war the birth rate fell to less than half the nineteenth
century rate. Even so, the population continued to increase slowly, though
its average age rose more rapidly (see diagram on p. 9).
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained
neany stationary at around 12 per thousand of the population though death
rates have continued to fall heavily in every age group, particularly among
pre-school children, school children, and adults in their thirties and forties,
with a consequent lengthening of the expectation of life from about 50 years
at birth in 1900 to 1910 to over 70 years at birth in 1958 to i960. Since 1933 the
steady fall in the number of births has ceased. During the second world war the
birth rate began to rise and reached a temporary post-war peak of 20-7 per
thousand population in 1947. It then receded again to slightly above the
pre-war level in the early 1950s, but since 1955 it has risen slowly and was
18-5 per thousand in 1963.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
II
Mortality
Causes
Marriage
Fertility Trends
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising standards
of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities,
improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, public and private schemes to make the health services generally
available, and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain
on mothers and enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant
and maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main
acute infectious diseases of childhood is less than a two-hundredth and
mortality from tuberculosis is about one-fifty-fifth of the rate prevailing in the
mid-nineteenth century. Infant mortality (i.e. deaths of infants under one year
old per thousand live births) has fallen by about 80 per cent since 1900.
Maternal mortality is now only about one-thirteenth of the 1934 rate. The
reported mortality from many of the chronic diseases of middle and old age,
such as cancer of the lung and coronary thrombosis, has risen during the
twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the improvement in
diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet discovered effective
measures to combat some of these diseases, and improvement in positive
health does not always bring increased immunity or resistance to them.
Years
H75
-70,
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
1871-80 1881-90 1891-1900 1901-10 1910-12 1920-22 1930-32 1950-52 1960-62
Over the past thirty years the proportion of the whole population who are
married has risen from 43 to 51 per cent, while the proportion of single
persons in the population over 15 years of age has fallen from nearly a third
to under a quarter. This change has been due mainly to an increase in marriage
rates among men and women in their late teens and early twenties. In 1962
some sixty per cent of the young women aged 20 to 24 were married; in 1931
only twenty-five per cent were married. Earlier marriage has led to a large
increase in the number of children born to women under 30 years of age and
in recent years has contributed to a substantial acceleration of the total flow
of births into the population.
The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and the early part
of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of the family
(i.e. the number of children born per married couple) caused by the spread
of deliberate family limitation. Couples married a hundred years ago produced
on the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline seems to
have set in with those married in the 1860s, and continued steady until, with
the couples married in the late 1920s, the average family size had been reduced
to between 2-2 and 2-1. The decline then stopped, and the figure remained
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH
IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Age
Distribution
Sex Ratio
Britain: an official handbook
detoetoeas^ ^ diStUrbanCe of the war data suggest a
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20
and 30 years later had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to
fneratlon’while those born a* the beginning of the present
century had only about 70 per cent of the number of children needed for
' S inCe then the figUre haS been rising again and seems hkely to
exceed full replacement with the generation born during the second world
war. Ihe rise has been due mainly to the increased proportion of children
surviving to adult life and of women getting married; but there has also been
some increase in family size and fertility statistics suggest that this increase
is continuing.
The first effect of the fall in the birth rate was to reduce the number of
f. lldrf?’.and therefore the ratio of dependent population to working popula-
lon This ratio was at a minimum in the 1930s. After 1936 the number of
children leaving school for work fell sharply owing to the drop in the birth
rate after 1921, while the population aged over 40 continued to increase and
e population aged over 64, born during an era of high fertility and repre-
sentmg successive generations of steeply rising numbers, increased very
^ u 6 rgj Cr birtb rates after I942 arrested the compensating fall in
the number of dependent children and have further reduced the ratio of
working to dependent population.
as follows"1963 the agC distribution of the British Population was estimated
Under 15 .. .. .. 23>i per cent
r5 to 64 .. .. .. 65-0 per cent
65 and over .. .. n-S per cent
An unusually small proportion of the population of the United Kingdom
(about 25 per cent) is now between 20 and 40 years of age. Assuming a
continued fall in death rates and an aggregate net gain from migration of
some 300,000 people from the usual age groups, it can be estimated that
between 1964 and 1979:
(1) the number of people aged 20 to 39 will increase by about 16 per cent
to about 16 million;
(2) the population aged 40 to 64 will decrease by about 4 per cent;
(3) the number of old people (over 65) will increase by more than 27 per
cent to about 8 million. P
Total births of boys naturally exceed those of girls by about 6 per cent, but
stillbirth rates and mortality rates at almost all ages are higher for males, so
that in nearly all countries—and in Britain since records began—women
preponderate among the elderly and outnumber men in the total population,
formerly indeed women outnumbered men in the United Kingdom in
a?C gr°Up fr°m adolescence onwards. Recently, however, the fall in
stillbirths and infant mortality has reduced the influence of these factors on
sex ratio so that the age at which women begin to outnumber men has been
advanced and is now about 35. On the other hand, the lengthening of the
expectation of life, which has been rather more marked for women than for
men, has increased the preponderance of women among the elderly—there
are now some seven women over seventy years old to every four men—and
made it a weightier factor in the sex ratio of the whole population. This increase
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
13
14
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Percentage
Change in
Population
1951-61
by Administrative Areas
■ 20 and over ]
10-19 | Increase
lU °" 9 '
III °- 9 |
x:;:;:- 10-19 | Decrease
20 and over I
Migration
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 15
in the number of elderly women, however, does not quite counterbalance
the increase in the number of boys and young men so that the ratio of females
to males has fallen from 108: 100 in 1951 to 106: 100 in 1963.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century until the 1930s the balance
of migration was markedly outward. Between 1815 and 1930 well over
20 million people left Britain for destinations outside Europe, mainly in the
Commonwealth and the United States. Many emigrants later returned and
large numbers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles, Germans and Hungarians,
entered the British Isles. Nevertheless, the net loss by migration from the
present area of the United Kingdom amounted to some four million between
1871 and 1931. Since then the balance of migration of Britain as a whole
has been inward, though Scotland and Northern Ireland have throughout
continued to have a net outwrard movement of population to countries
overseas as well as to England and Wales. The main net inflow to Britain
as a whole was in the years 1931 to 1940, when emigration was very low,
many former emigrants returned and there was extensive immigration from
Europe, including about a quarter of a million refugees seeking sanctuary
in Britain. There was also considerable net immigration from the Irish
Republic. After the 1939-45 war emigration to Commonwealth countries rose,
but for the whole intercensal period 1931 to 1951 there was a net gain by
migration of about half a million for the United Kingdom as a whole. In the
intercensal period 1951 to 1961 the net balance of migration was again inward,
but by a smaller margin (97,000), though the gross migration flows were
higher than before.
Emigration to the Commonwealth was probably over 200,000 in each of
the two peak years 1952 and 1957 but immigration was also increasing—from
the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic and the continent of Europe. From
1958 onwards the balance of migration was again markedly inwards owing to
a large increase in net immigration from Commonwealth countries, particularly
the West Indies and Pakistan, and in the three years 1960-62 total net
immigration amounted to some 388,000 persons—about three-quarters of
them from the Commonwealth and nearly half from the West Indies. In
these circumstances the Government decided that it was necessary to control
immigration from the Commonwealth and, in principle, the Irish Republic.
The Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962 (see p. 450), empowered the
Government to restrict the number of persons from the Commonwealth
and, in principle, the Irish Republic who may immigrate into the United
Kingdom without assured prospects of employment or adequate means of
self-support, and to deport unsuitable immigrants. The Act came into force
on 1 st July, 1962, and for the 18 months till the end of 1963 the net
immigration from the Commonwealth was about 70,000.
At the 1961 Census some 2-1 million residents in England and Wales were
reported definitely to have been born outside the United Kingdom—rather
under one-third of them in other Commonwealth countries, about the same
number in the 26 counties now forming the Irish Republic, and the rest in
foreign countries, notably Germany, Poland, the United States and Russia.
The total number born outside the United Kingdom had increased by about
40 per cent since 1951, largely because of the inflow from Commonwealth
countries in the West Indies, Asia and Africa. Residents in England or
Wales born in these countries had increased from 170,000 to over 570,000.
In Scotland and Northern Ireland the number of residents born outside the
British Isles is relatively small.
i6
Nationality
Distribution of
Population
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
tht Britith Na,ionaIity Act- 'P+S, with insignificant exceptions,
p ns who are born, or whose fathers were born, in the United Kingdom
or in a territory which was a colony of the United Kingdom on ist January
1949, or at the date of birth if later, or in a United Kingdom registered ship
or aircraft are citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies. Citizenship
may also be acquired: by descent (subject to certain requirements) from a
paternal grandfather born in the United Kingdom or Colonies or from a
more remote paternal ancestor in the male line; by registration, for citizens
of Commonwealth member countries or of the Irish Republic, for minor
children and for women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and
Colonies; in consequence of an adoption order; and by naturalisation. The
requirements for the grant of a certificate of naturalisation include five years’
residence in the United Kingdom or Colonies or five years’ Crown service
good character a sufficient knowledge of English and the intention to reside
in the United Kingdom or a colony or to remain in Crown service.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizen¬
ship by acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another
country; nor does a woman who is a citizen of the United Kingdom and
Colonies lose her citizenship by marriage to an alien. Indeed, a citizen cannot
be deprived of his citizenship against his will except in very exceptional
circumstances (for example, if he has obtained naturalisation or registration
as a citizen by fraud). Any man or woman who is a citizen is, however at
1 erty to renounce citizenship if he or she possesses or acquires the nationality
or citizenship of another country.
Citizens of the other independent Commonwealth countries are, in United
Kingdom law, British subjects or Commonwealth citizens. Until the passing
ot the Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962, they were free to enter and
remain in the United Kingdom without restrictions of any kind. Similar
treatment has been extended to citizens of the Irish Republic who, in the
United Kingdom, are not aliens.1
The population of Britain is predominantly urban and suburban. Only
4 per cent of the working population are engaged in agriculture and though
about 20 per cent live in areas classed administratively as rural, many of
this 20 per cent work and shop in towns.
During the nineteenth century the labour demands of newly developing
m ustry drew great numbers from the countryside and by the end of the
century three-quarters of the British population was living in towns and the
large conurbation was already the dominant type of British community. During
t e twentieth century the suburbs of the towns in these population centres
ave continued to spread and merge. Since 1921 nearly 40 per cent of the
population has lived in the seven great conurbations whose centres are the
cities of London, Manchester (South-East Lancashire), Birmingham and
»°llerh*m£0n (WeSt Midlands)- Glasg°w (Central Clydeside), Leeds and
radford (West Yorkshire), Liverpool (Merseyside), and Newcastle upon
1 arran&eme[ltus to ^ens of South Africa, which ceased to be
• f th Commonwealth in May 1961. Under the South Africa Act, 1962
rnm^AfnCaut’ Un 688 thuY Were aIs° citizens of the United Kingdom or some other
defSS nnaUfi? tCOUntI7’ b.ecame ahens, but South African citizens who fulfil certain
Kv rW 10nS showing close connection with the United Kingdom or a colony
by descent, residence or employment can become United Kingdom citizens by registra¬
tion if they apply before the end of 1965. Y g Stra
Conurbations
Urban Dispersal
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 17
Geography and increasing urbanisation have given rise to an uneven
distribution of the population. About 30 million people live within the
central area, about 60 to 65 miles wide and 200 miles long, which runs
approximately from the mouth of the Thames to the mouth of the Mersey and
contains five of the main conurbations, a number of other sizeable towns
and much rich agricultural land. Other areas with large populations are the
central lowlands of Scotland; 1,000 square miles in the north-east of England
from north of the river Tyne down to the river Tees; south-east Wales;
the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast from Poole, in Dorset,
eastwards. On the other hand, most of the mountainous parts of Britain,
including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and the central
Pennine Chain in northern England, are very sparsely populated.
These differences in average density between different regions have been
increasing. Though few places in Britain have had any decrease of population
in the past decade, there have been local differences in the rate of increase.
Many places in the midlands and south-east England, some south-coast retire¬
ment areas, some of the most prosperous parts of northern England, Wales
and Scotland, have had increases well above the average national rate, while
many of the older industrial towns and remote country areas in northern
England, Wales and Scotland and some coastal resorts have had relatively
small increases. The differences result from the combined effect of natural
increase in almost all areas and net migration towards the expanding employ¬
ment opportunities of the midlands and south and towards certain retirement
areas, mainly on the south coast.
The distribution of the population of the British Isles by country, as
estimated at mid-1963 and as enumerated at population censuses back to 1901
is shown in Table 1. The populations of England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland were in every case greater in 1961 than in 1951 and in 1951
than in 1931, whereas in the period 1921 to 1931 the population of Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland had declined. The rate of increase in England
however continues to be higher than that in the other three countries, largely
because of migration from these countries to England.
Table 2 shows the distribution of the population by urban and rural
districts and the populations of the standard administrative regions, of the
seven major conurbations and seventeen larger cities, some of which are the
principal cities included in a conurbation. Since 1951 the largest increases
have been in the eastern, south-western, midland and north midland regions
of England, and the smallest in the northern regions. The relatively small
increase in the London and south-eastern region may be accounted for by a
growing tendency for those working in London to reside outside the region’s
boundaries; it should be borne in mind in general that the statistics-of-conur-
bations and cities relate to administrative areas and do not necessarily include
all the continuously built-up areas. In the case of large towns development
commonly extends without a break beyond administrative boundaries and
is likely to cover considerable areas which are administratively rural. The
statistics of conurbations, which consist of continuously built-up economically
inter-dependent areas and include developing suburbs of large cities, are in
some cases more illuminating, though, even within conurbations as in urban
areas generally, there are large parks, commons, and other expanses of open
country.
The greatest concentration of population in Britain is in the London area.
Greater London is variously defined but it certainly covers an area much
i8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 1
Populations
1901-1963“
England f Persons
(excluding J Males
Monmouth- 1 Females
shire)
Wales and
Monmouth- •[ Males
shire l Females
J Persons
Scotland
( Persons
- Males
l Females
Great
Britain
T Persons
j Males
l Females
1901
30,509,234
14,714,157
15,795,077
2,018,609
1,014,456
1,004,153
4,472,103
2,173,755
2,298,348
1931
36,999,946
17,902,368
19,097,578
Northern
Ireland
j Persons
Males
l Females
Totals Great (Persons
Britain and J Males
Northern i Females
Ireland
1,236,952
589,955
646,997
38,236,898
18,492,323
19,744,575
(Persons
Males
Females
Jersey
Guernsey
and
Associated
Islands
Irish
Republic
i Persons
^ Males
l Females
(Persons
J Males
Females
{Persons
Males
Females
Totals
British
Isles
Persons
Males
Females
54,752
25,496
29,256
52,576
23,940
28,636
43,042
21,140
21,902
3,221,823
1,610,085
1,611,738
41,609,091
20,172,984
21,436,107
37,359,045
17,839,205
19,519,840
2,593,332
1,293,805
1,299,527
4,842,980
2,325,523
2,517,457
44,795,357
21,458,533
23,336,824
l,243,000i
601,000*
642,000*
46,038,357
22,059,533
23,978,824
49,308
22,443
26,865
50,462
23,424
27,038
42,743
20,675
22,068
2,933,000c
l,497,000c
1,436,000*
49,113,870
23,623,075
25,490,795
1951
41,159,213
19,745,530
21,413,683
2,598,675
1,270,103
1,328,572
5,096,415
2,434,358
2,662,057
48,854,303
23,449,991
25,404,312
1,370,921
667,819
703,102
50,225,224
24,117,810
26,107,414
55,253
25,774
29,479
57,310
27,291
30,019
45,496
22,091
23,405
2,960,593
1,506,597
1,453,996
53,343,876
25,699,563
27,644,313
1961
43,460,525
21,012,069
22,448,456
2,644,023
1,291,764
1,352,259
5,179,344
2,482,734
2,696,610
51,283,892
24,786,567
26,497,325
1,425,462
694,768
730,694
52,709,354
25,481,335
27,228,019
48,133
22,034
26,099
63,550
30,715
32,835
47,099
22,718
24,381
2,814,703
1,415,100
1,399,603
55,682,839
26,971,902
28,710,937
1963
44,361,000
21,521,000
22,839,000
2,662,000
1,310,000
1,352,000
5,205,000
2,499,000
2,705,000
52,227,000
25,331,000
26,896,000
1,446,000
705,000
741,000
53,673,000
26,036,000
27,637,000
47,880
21,930
25,950
61,500
29,600
31,900
48,094
n.a.
n.a.
2,841,000*
1,427,000
1,414,000
56,673,000
n.a.
n.a.
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
The 1963 figures are mid-year estimates; the rest are census figures. Exceptions are
noted in *, c and * below.
* Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1937, but not in 1931).
c Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1936, but not in 1931).
* Estimates for April 1963.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
!9
TABLE 2
Distribution of
the Population*
larger than the County of London (population about 3 million). The con¬
tinuously built-up area extends into the counties of Middlesex, Hertfordshire,
Surrey, Essex and Kent, and the area socially and economically dependent
on the capital is still wider. As in other urban concentrations, there is a long-
established tendency for decreases in the number of people who actually
have their homes in the inner parts of the area—especially the centre itself
—to be balanced by increases of population in and beyond the outer suburban
fringes. The war accelerated the pre-war fall of population in the inner areas
and retarded the rapid pre-war expansion of some of the outer areas. Between
1939 and 1951 the County of London lost about 800,000 people and the
population of the official conurbation, which roughly corresponds to the
continuously built-up area, fell by some 545,000 to 8,183,000 in 1951.
Since 1951 there has been a further dispersal, facilitated in part by the
improvement in public transport and the spread of car ownership. The
population of the inner areas has continued to fall, the population of the
conurbation outside London County has remained almost static, while a
broad belt of almost continuous population increase now completely encircles
the official conurbation, includes and passes beyond all London new towns
and extends along every major rail and road route from London. The con¬
temporary London region can be defined as a roughly circular area with a
radius of 40 to 50 miles from central London and a population in 1963 of
some 12,000,000 (an increase of half a million since 1951). The redistribution
within this region has resulted both from voluntary or private moves and
from planned transfers of population and probably from differences in natural
increase. The increased population of the outer areas includes both com¬
muters, who have moved their homes but continue to travel to work in inner
London, and inhabitants of new towns and expanded existing towns, who
have changed both their home and their workplace.
The characteristic of urban dispersal, which has reached its largest scale
in the London area, has been a feature of post-war change also in many
provincial cities and towns. It has been most marked where the local economy
has been prosperous, population increase rapid, and land for development
in short supply. Outward movement and fringe development for one or more
of these reasons has been noticeably large in outer areas of the West Midlands
and Merseyside conurbations and on the edges of Bristol, Derby, Leicester,
Norwich, Oxford, Portsmouth and Sheffield, while the populations of the
centres of conurbations and large cities have continued to fall.
Area in
square
miles6
Thousands
1921 1931 1951 1963
Urban and rural districts
England and Wales:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Scotland:
Cities and burghs
Landward areas
Northern Ireland:
Urban districts
Rural districts
8,318-2
50,029-2
441-6
29,353-3
78-5
5,159-5
30,035
7,851
3,311
1,572
638c
619c
31,952
8,000
3,362
1,481
678c
602c
35,336
8,422
3,592
1,504
750
621
37,365
9,658
3,698
1,506
777
669
Continued overleaf
20
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 2 (contd.)
Distribution of
the Population"
Standard regions of England and
Wales:
Northern
East and West Ridings
North-Western..
North Midland
Midland
Eastern ..
London and South-Eastern . .
Southern
South-Western. .
Wales
Conurbations:
Greater London
South-east Lancashire. .
West Midlands..
Central Clydeside
West Yorkshire
Merseyside
Tyneside
Cities:
Belfast ..
Birmingham
Bradford
Bristol ..
Cardiff ..
Coventry
Edinburgh
Glasgow
Kingston upon Hull ..
Leeds
Leicester
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle upon Tyne
Nottingham
Sheffield
Stoke on Trent
Area in
square
miles6
7,470-7
3,962-7
3,083-0
6,303-9
5,024-8
7,264-3
4,190-6
3,897-7
9,133-9
8,015-8
721-7
379-6
268-8
324-4
484-5
150-0
90-2
24-0
79-9
39-9
41-2
23-6
29-9
52-0
60-4
22-5
63
26
43
42
17
28
61
33'
Thousands
1921 1931
3,020
3,731
6,023
2,746
3,503
2,224
9,486
1,954
2,544
2,656
7,488
2,361
1,773
1,638
1,614
1,263
816
415C
919
286
377
221
128
420
1,034
287
458
234
803
730
275
263
491
240
3,038
3,929
6,197
2,939
3,743
2,433
10,330
2,135
2,615
2,593
8,216
2,427
1,933
1,690
1,655
1,347
827
438c
1,003
298
397
227
167
439
1,088
314
483
239
856
766
283
269
512
277
1951 1963
3,141
4,097
6,447
3,378
4.423
3,098
10,906
2,649
3,021
2,599
8,348
2.423
2,237
1,760
1,693
1,382
836
444
1,113
292
443
244
258
467
1,090
299
505
285
789
703
292
306
513
275
3,294
4,230
6,656
3,731
4,893
3,902
11,191
2,972
3,492
2,662
8,173
2,450
2,392
1,803
1,723
1,391
855
413
1,116
297
434
261
314
476
1,036
301
514
270
740
655
263
315
495
266
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
“ The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given relate in general to the areas as these were defined
in the year noted at the head of each column. The figures for conurbations, however,
relate in general as nearly as possible to areas as constituted in 1961.
b Area at the date of the 1961 census of population.
c 1926 and 1937 census figures.
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language
predominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic,
is the first language of the majority of the population in most of the western
counties and was spoken by 26 per cent of the population at the time of the
Language
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
SOCIAL
PATTERNS
Number and
Composition of
Households
1961 census. In Scotland, in 1961 some 77,000 persons, mainly in Ross and
Cromarty, Inverness, Argyll, and Lanark, spoke the Scottish form of Gaelic,1
while a few families in Northern Ireland spoke the Irish form of Gaelic.
The Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic are no longer effectively living
languages, although, in the Isle of Man, Manx is spoken by a few people,
and is used in addition to English for certain official pronouncements.
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French
patois is still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official
language of Jersey, used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French
and English are used in the courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now
used for almost all official proceedings.
A general summary of trends in social organisation, similar in scope to the
foregoing summary of population trends, is not practicable. It may be useful,
however, to review some of the evidence relating to the structure of British
households and the extent and use of leisure in Britain in order to provide
a background to the information given in later chapters on such matters as
town planning, housing, and transport.
Less than five per cent of the population was enumerated by the censuses of
1911, 1921, 1931, 1951 and 1961 in institutions such as hotels, schools and
hospitals; the rest lived as members of private households (usually families).
In 1911 there were about nine million private households2 in Great Britain.
By 1961, according to the censuses of England and Wales and of Scotland,
there were about 16J million households, an increase of about 80 per cent.
This expansion was much more rapid than the 26 per cent increase in the
total population during the same period because lower birth rates, a lengthened
expectation of life and changing customs meant more but smaller families.
The average size of households in Great Britain fell from 4-5 persons in
1911 to 31 in 1961.
Of the 14I million private households in Great Britain in 1951, n| million
were estimated, according to the 1951 census one per cent sample tables
(based on an analysis of a representative one per cent sample of census
returns in Great Britain), to be of the simplest type, comprising married
couples or widowed persons with their children, if any, or persons living
alone. More specifically, they comprised 3-2 million married couples with
no children, 900,000 widowed or divorced persons living alone, 6-9 million
married couples, widowed or divorced persons with children of any age and
600,000 single persons living alone. Some three-quarters of the single persons
living alone and almost all widowed and divorced persons living alone were
over 40 years old, and about two-thirds of all persons living alone were 60 years
of age or over.
Altogether over 8 million households (57 per cent of all households) were
estimated in the 1951 census sample tables to be without children under 16,
while another 3 • 1 million contained only one child.
The small average size of households does not imply that wider family and
kinship ties are without strength and social significance. Indeed, a study,
published in 1957,3 stressed the importance of the mutual help of relatives
and neighbours in the long-established and balanced communities living in
1 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included
in the counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
2 Counting persons living alone as one-person households.
3 Family and Kinship in East London, by Michael Young and Peter Willmott. Routledge.
22
BRITAIN.' AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the more crowded parts of east London. The survey, which also covered
a suburban area of Greater London, noted the dangers of weakening
such ties when households are moved out to more congenial suburban
surroundings.
Work and
Leisure
Journeys to Work
Domestic Help
Leisure and
Holidays
Sport
Most men over 15 years old are in full-time work and most women are either
housewives or in full-time work. In many cases housewives also go out to
work part-time or even full-time. Nearly a third of married women have a
paid job and over half the women working for pay are married.
Agreed hours of full-time work for the majority of occupations are usually
from 40 to 42 hours a week. Actual weekly hours worked by men average
a little longer owing to overtime working, and actual hours worked by women
and girls average a little less. In addition, the journey to and from work is
often long (see p. 19) and there is often a long journey for housewives to the
main shopping centre in both urban and rural areas. In most areas there are,
of course, a few shops much closer at hand.
Probably less than five per cent of housewives employ any regular paid
help and almost certainly less than one per cent have a resident servant.
Pending the publication of the final reports of the 1961 Census, the statistical
evidence on this matter is rather fragmentary, but suggests a continuing
reduction in the number of households with paid help, and confirms what
can in any case be readily deduced from everyday experience, that housewives
have less leisure and considerably fewer periods of continuous leisure of over
one hour than other persons in Britain, in spite of the growth of the habit
of eating some meals away from home1 and the spread of labour-saving
devices. More than three households in every four now have a vacuum cleaner,
about half have a washing machine and over one in three a refrigerator.
Compared with earlier generations, however, most people today have
considerably more leisure. In most industries and services, hours of work
are usually arranged to give a five-day week and most employees are entitled
to at least two weeks’ continuous holiday a year in addition to the statutory
public holidays. Moreover, owing to rising real incomes and the increasing
mechanisation of heavy work, more people have the money and energy to spend
their leisure in a variety of activities: on a weekday evening roughly an
eighth of the adult population are engaged in leisure activities outside their
homes, while the range of week-end pursuits has greatly widened. Over
half the population take at least a week’s holiday away from home every
year, mostly in July and August. Traditionally most families have spent
their holiday by the sea in Britain, lodging at a seaside boarding house
or hotel, or staying with relatives or friends. Other forms of holiday, still
usually at or near the seaside, have been gaining greatly in popularity, including
holiday camps, caravanning, camping and touring in a car or coach. A
relatively small but rapidly increasing number of holidaymakers go abroad—
4^ million in 1963, including travellers to the Irish Republic. In the same year
about 2,200,000 overseas tourists visited Britain (excluding visitors from the
Irish Republic).
Many people are interested in playing or going to watch outdoor sports.
Sporting interests are becoming increasingly varied (see Chapter 19) but
Association football is, both as a spectacle and as a game for boys and young
1 It is estimated that approximately half of all school children and of all adults at work
take their midday meal away from home on working days.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
23
Betting
Television
Cars and
Motor Cycles
Social Mobility
men, still the most popular. Much of the gambling with small stakes, which
is practised at least occasionally by three adults out of four, is on the results
of sporting events.
The total money staked by the public on organised betting and gambling
(private wagers and games of chance cannot be counted) is estimated at
between £750 million and £1,000 million and seems to have increased by
about 50 per cent since 1957; at least in part the apparent increase was
because the legalisation of betting shops under the Betting and Gaming Act,
i960, brought into the open betting which had been illicit. About half the
money staked is on horse racing. Betting on football matches, both at fixed
odds and through the football pools (see Chapter 19) is widespread, but
usually at smaller stakes. A fairly recent gambling craze is for Bingo, a
form of Lotto, which is being played by large numbers of people in converted
cinemas and in club rooms and village halls, although total expenditure is not
large.
The spread of television has added a vast new audience of indoor spectators
to the crowds who go to watch sporting events and great national occasions.
By mid-1964 about 80 per cent of the families in Britain (and a somewhat
higher proportion of the large families) had a television set; viewers are fairly
evenly distributed among all sections of the population, irrespective of
income or occupation. The number of television receiving licences doubled
between 1955 and 1959 to over nine million. Since 1959 the increase has been
slower, the total number in June 1964 being over 13 million.
Rising standards of living and, in particular, the widely distributed owner¬
ship of television sets and motor vehicles, have affected leisure habits in
many ways and have provided new and varied opportunities for recreation
and entertainment.
There were over million motor vehicles licensed in the summer of
1964, of which about 8 million were cars and about million were motor
cycles (including motor scooters). Many cars and some motor cycles are used
partly, if not primarily, for business purposes. During the summer, however,
roads to the sea and the country and to sporting events are usually thronged
(and sometimes jammed) with cars, especially on fine Saturdays and Sundays.
The spread of car ownership, making many people more independent of
public transport, is leading to a new and more scattered distribution of houses,
changing the siting requirements of factories, shops and offices, as well as the
whole pattern of leisure activities, and making large-scale urban reconstruc¬
tion and road development urgent.
During the past twenty years the real incomes of manual workers, and
particularly of unskilled workers and young workers under eighteen years of
age, have risen rapidly both in absolute terms and in relation to the incomes
of non-manual workers. At the same time opportunities for education and
promotion, already considerable, have widened. An investigation of occupa¬
tional and social mobility made fourteen years ago found that, if occupations
were classified by social status into seven groups, only one man in three had
the same social status as his father. More than half the people in the two
top groups (‘professional and administrative’ and ‘managerial and executive’)
were the sons of men who had held less important positions, while only a
quarter of the sons of unskilled workers were themselves in occupations in
that category. A survey in 1958-59 of the way of life of 600 hourly-rated
men in five manufacturing firms in England found that a quarter of the sons
over eighteen years of age of men in the sample were in professional or
B
24
Entertainments
Clubs
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
managerial occupations or training for them. In consequence, social dis¬
tinctions based on occupation have become less clear cut, and differences
in the ways of life of manual and non-manual workers are much less pro¬
nounced. Many manual workers’ families have acquired habits and tastes
which were formerly regarded as ‘middle-class’, though educational and
cultural levels vary widely.
Such social changes often call for difficult adjustments. Many families of
unskilled and semi-skilled workers, for example, suddenly find themselves
with more money to spend when their children leave school for work at
fifteen years of age; while the families of most non-manual and many skilled
manual workers forgo the extra income in order to continue their children’s
education. The increased earnings of young workers, however, have influenced
the status and outlook of adolescents generally. ‘Teenage’ society with
sufficient coherence, independence and spending power to establish its own
customs, tastes and fashions is a feature of present-day Britain; and as in
many other countries, the activities of groups of teenagers without adequate
parental control attract more attention than formerly and are sometimes a
serious social problem in certain areas.
One of the chief long-term effects of television, according to an investigation
into its influence on children, is to widen tastes and stimulate new interests.
For this reason, as well as because of its direct competition, it can be regarded
as the main cause of the fall in attendances at cinemas, formerly the chief
entertainment of large sections of the community. Cinema attendances
(7 million a week) are at less than a third of the rate of ten years ago,
but the cinema remains the most popular form of indoor entertainment
outside the home, particularly for young men and women and older children.
About two-thirds of the unmarried aged 15 to 24 go at least once a week.
Attendances at theatres are much smaller. There are probably only some
200 theatres offering professional performances compared with some 2,000
cinemas. Nevertheless, there is an enthusiastic and growing public not only
for plays but for ballet, opera and concerts.
Dancing is popular, especially with those under twenty-five years of age, it
is thought that about six million people go dancing every week and television
audiences for ballroom dancing competitions are rated at nearly five million
households. There are estimated to be some 3,000 to 4,000 regular dance
halls, including public dance halls and halls operated by the major dance
schools, which are open at least three times a week, and about 4,000 other
schools of ballroom dancing. Public dances are also often held in other halls,
while many of the clubs and societies which abound in Britain hold dances
from time to time in their own or hired premises. In addition, Scottish and
English traditional dances have their own following while, since the war,
there has been a very large increase in attendance at ballet and other stage
dancing classes (mainly by young girls).
In addition to the perennially popular sports and pastimes, there are a
number which attain a transitory popularity and it is not possible to tell how
permanent any new trend will prove. A sport new to Britain and gaining
popularity is ten-pin bowling, which has been developed in America from
the traditional English game of skittles.
Clubs and societies, which may be primarily social or devoted to some
particular purpose, range from small informal groups to great national and
international organisations with branches throughout the country. Organisa¬
tions of national importance in social life and in the promotion of social
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Other Social and
Cultural Activities
25
gatherings include, in addition to those connected with religious denomina¬
tions, the Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes, the Townswomen’s Guilds
and the Women’s Institutes. There are some 3,600 clubs, with over two
million members (mainly but not entirely men), affiliated to the Working
Men’s Club and Institute Union. These clubs are primarily social and
recreational, though they also arrange lectures and classes. Over 2,400
Townswomen’s Guilds, with a total membership of about 200,000, are
affiliated to the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds. The guilds are
both educational and social in purpose, and they co-operate in many public
welfare activities. The declared objective of the National Federation of
Women’s Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; the institutes make
an important contribution to rural life by providing meeting places for
countrywomen and by organising social gatherings. There are in villages
throughout England and Wales some 8,700 institutes with nearly half a
million members, while in Scotland and Northern Ireland there are Women’s
Rural Institutes with similar aims and interests.
In spite of the growth of social clubs, one traditional social rendezvous, the
inn or ‘pub’ (public house) has maintained and even increased its popularity
both in towns and in villages, while with the spread of motoring many isolated
country pubs in picturesque surroundings have found their whole business
transformed. Pubs now have a very wide circle of casual customers (both
men and women) as well as many ‘regulars’ who meet for a drink and a chat,
and perhaps to play some traditional public house game or to watch television.
To attract this new and wider public many pubs have greatly improved their
appearance and amenities, while competitors for this public are restaurants
and milk bars as well as the coffee bars which in the last ten years have become
popular with young people, largely because of the atmosphere and decor.
On the other hand, many people, especially the married and the elderly,
spend much of their leisure at home—reading, listening to the radio, record-
player or tape recorder, viewing television, entertaining their friends,1
looking after pets2 * 4 and pursuing hobbies. Hobbies are, of course, innumerable
in their variety, but many are practical and contribute to the improvement
of the home. About four out of five families do most of their own decorating,
while the sales of hand-tools and the rapidly increasing sales of small power-
tools and powered garden implements testify to the extent and range of
home carpentry and joinery and to the interest and initiative that maintain
Britain’s homes and gardens. In spite of the high proportion of the population
living in urban areas, at least every other family in Britain has some garden,
and the standard of both town and country gardens is high. Some 4,000 local
horticultural societies are affiliated to the National Allotment and Gardens
Society and there are a large number of unaffiliated societies; altogether
there are probably some 20 million spare-time gardeners. The numerous
flower and vegetable shows held in town and country are very popular, and
there is a large attendance at the most important of them, including the annual
Chelsea Flower Show.
1 Indications of the rise in the scale and standard of home entertaining are provided by
the increasing sales of table wines (double those of the 1930s) and of expensive foods,
and by the frequent newspaper and periodical features and broadcast programmes
devoted to cooking recipes.
2 A sample survey in 1959 suggested that about a quarter of all homes had a caged bird,
slightly over a fifth a cat, and slightly under a fifth a dog; there are probably some
4 million dogs in Britain, over 6 million cats and 8 or 9 million pet birds (mainly
budgerigars).
26
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A number of people, young and old, find their main free-time interest in
some form of sustained group activity connected, for example, with the
churches, trade unionism, politics, social welfare and reform, with study or
other self-improvement (the number of middle-aged people at evening classes
has been rising fast) or with cultural pursuits, especially amateur dramatics
and music-making (see the Arts section of Chapter 9)* People with such
interests are still in a minority but they are increasing in numbers and
constitute an important and characteristic feature of British life and, indeed,
an essential ingredient in the working of British democracy.
2
27
GOVERNMENT
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical State, whose origins and traditions
are to be found in the history of each of its four component parts: England,
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. England was unified under a Saxon
king in the ninth century; Wales became part of that kingdom and Ireland
was joined with it under the same king before the end of the thirteenth
century; and the English and Scottish thrones were dynastically united in
the person of James I and VI in 1603. In 1707 the Treaty for the Union of
England and Scotland provided that the two countries ‘should be forever
united into one kingdom’, and one Parliament (the Parliament of Great
Britain) became the supreme authority in both countries. In 1801 the Act
for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1800, which joined the Irish
Parliament to the Parliament of Great Britain, established the United
Kingdom. In 1922 the 26 counties of Southern Ireland (now the Irish
Republic) became a completely independent country, outside the United
Kingdom. Meantime, the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, had enacted a
constitution for Northern Ireland which perpetuated Northern Ireland
representation in the United Kingdom Parliament as the supreme authority
and, at the same time, provided that country with its own legislature and
executive, to deal with domestic affairs.
The United Kingdom is a unitary, not a federal, State but methods of
government are flexible and, to some extent, adapted to the needs of the
constituent countries. Thus there is some measure of devolution in the
administration of Welsh affairs under a Cabinet Minister (who is Minister
for Welsh Affairs), assisted by a Minister of State, and advised by a Council
for Wales as broadly representative as possible of all the main aspects of
Welsh life and thought. England and Wales on the one hand, and Scotland
on the other, continue as before the Union to have different systems of law,
a different judiciary, different educational systems, different systems of local
government, national churches on a different footing, and, for most domestic
matters, different Government departments. The main Scottish departments
are grouped under the direction of the Secretary of State for Scotland, who
is a member of the United Kingdom Cabinet. In Northern Ireland the law
is derived from and similar to the law of England but the judiciary is separate;
the Northern Ireland Government departments are responsible to the
Northern Ireland Parliament. The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man
(which are Crown dependencies, not part of the United Kingdom) have their
own legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and of law,
and their own courts. At the same time, they have a special relationship with
the United Kingdom because of their proximity to the mainland and the
antiquity of their connection with the Crown. They are treated as part of
the mainland for purposes of trade and postal communication and are
‘territories for whose international relations Her Majesty’s Government is
responsible’. They are also formally subject to the United Kingdom
Parliament.
28
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The United Kingdom Parliament has the ultimate responsibility for the
good government of a number of overseas dependencies within the Common¬
wealth, all of which are administered by territorial governments and are at
various stages of development towards full self-government. The United
Kingdom is also one of the independent member nations of the Common¬
wealth,1 which all acknowledge the Queen as the symbol of their free association
and, as such, the head of the Commonwealth; most of these independent
countries owe allegiance to the Crown.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by
common law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions,
which are not part of the law of the land since violation of them would not
lead to proceedings in a court of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable
to the machinery of government. The rules of the constitution have never
been codified; principles and practice are both alterable, and the rules of the
constitution can be adapted to changing conditions at any time by the passing
of an Act of Parliament, or by the general acceptance of a new convention,
without serious disturbance to existing organs and forms.
The organs of government in the United Kingdom constitution are readily
distinguishable although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They
are:
(1) the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the
supreme authority in the realm;
(2) the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other Ministers
of the Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national
policy; (b) Government departments, most of them under the control
of ministers and all staffed by civil servants, which are responsible for
administration at the national level; (c) local authorities, which administer
and manage many services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards,
which are severally responsible for the operation of particular nation¬
alised industries or public services, and which are subject to ministerial
control in varying degrees; and
(3) the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes,
and is independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The following pages describe these three organs of government in some
detail in order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in
spite of interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle
upon which it was founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II
is a descendant of the Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the
year 829, and of Malcolm II, whose reign in Scotland (1005-34) was corre¬
spondingly important in that part of the realm.
According to the Royal Titles Act, 1953, the royal title in the United
Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms
1 The other members are: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Ceylon,
Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanganyika, Jamaica, Trinidad,
Uganda, Kenya, Zanzibar, Malawi, Malta and Zambia.
GOVERNMENT
29
-5 I
I—I -o,
CO
^ !
<1 ^
O S
WK
.s
!
H ~
c
►h'C
5 Oh
« O
<»o
T3
< §
£f
o 3-
H-g
> i
Zen
w>«
W O
o ^
oo_^
M T3
■ -S O'
o g
o t.S
3
-JO «
o •+
' O a
"Jffi
» S ?
■t goo
CO 0) m
£0$
> «Q
-Q-3Z-
Q .<
W
S .w
S SS
Ky^ ►—)
'•5'S
8 ^
05<S
=l . u ^03
>e§
0 3^0
a-| 8-
myrh
mOO 3U
moo<1
«
JO . S
^ 3 d^ww
-o'-e e sRn
^ TO
>» 0“ onV; ^ nt
— ^cSco S3 ^ 2'-
^ P-l M 0) ^
S'jH*
\o <3
'SS
>z
CjJM
§2
w-«
0 «
ot:
Z O
2s
•3 N
— In ^2 ^
CL,^ M
S-g&ig
9-c -Np^j
ia^NSSS
gw S' ~
O W
2-28«os gs
^ iST) S Jotg >, fa <0
S Ch o-3<2 ojo o
S a) « <u o luLjJOrO
S o u o o u1-^ «U
g SSSOO^S
"C'C o
° >, 2!
PHOnPL.^fc g
U 0) 1> 1U (U O
jOJOjOJOjO.Srt 0
E-|fHE-|E-|t-|>PQ
^ S
3 «■< a-S
^2^cn
8 8 «°tS
'CCg’C
P5
SO-g
^ CO CL
o a>
a
i£P.h
°^c
0) O'.S
^ o
_Q gS S.
U
O c ■ 0
O^E
0 • >» ? ij
a> « o
•I SP CM
n « --,2 »_
.g£§^"
& 3 0-« s1
C-2 o.y o
^0?<Q
—1 't? T3 ^-s
^ P° O
O Tj-
1,0 g<0 ^Ojc-
1^-11
-| O g-
>> §
■dii
- « a)
PS
■a o>^ o
■a M g a
u. . d
uj:Q »-i
—o «
CO <s o
1^1 ^
* g<; e?
g
1 <U N
H O'
2 G M
< •
3
5
.X)
Ut
CL
u«
CL
-2 T3
^ -M
u n
C <3 S
> >>
3P8
o
owr^
|s|«Si
-S „-SBg g-
O §
>. V 01 Ql-JC?
O to N
Scg'w
Pw8
S'®
Cl <u
rt S k. §
M -PC
-« 2,o o_
^ 2'5,«
S
s
c
^3V
i^-spi ~
_^°0Q2 £3 D.
‘tt w « ^ g
^ ^C/5
i-H ^
>• 2s
X
Lh c+h
W • °
3 g <UJ3
^ s-^ Ef
N'-oq 3
hH N 1-1 xi-
|J o - C
W ".g-^
z-“!sM
W pH
Ui
s
Cf
& <?
-•3 o
a
^ 2
O VO
■3 'i
C O'
< ”
Coo
—"S 10
° 2 •
.2 jp
P “o
UO
_ >, O'
2 M
8-q
P O
'Srf;
fg|
m
0
^,1 £
,'51 ^
^ o &
*§
<ij ^ Q
111
co «, S
w H) 2
o’ s^s
■3
o§;
«! §
w r \
C O
2 ^
M -m
PC O
c.2
o G.2PQ
m.2 3—.
2 co § «
'§ § §|
^<c3o
3°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Succession
Accession
Coronation
and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’.
The form of the royal title is varied for the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, to suit the particular
circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom, the Queen being
represented by a Governor in Northern Ireland. For the performance of
royal functions in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is
represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown the Queen’s representative
is the Governor-General, who is appointed by the Crown on the advice of
the ministers of the country concerned and is wholly independent of the
United Kingdom Government. In the United Kingdom dependencies the
Queen is usually represented by Governors (but in some cases by High
Commissioners, Administrators or Residents), who are appointed by the
Crown, have varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible
to the United Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries
concerned.
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement, 1701, which
provided that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most
excellent Princess Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’.
Subsequent Succession to the Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration;
and although succession is not bound to continue in its present line, it cannot
now be altered (under a provision of the Statute of Westminster, 1931)
except by common consent of the member nations of the Commonwealth
which owe allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which
provide that the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the
Throne according to their seniority or, if there are no sons, the daughters
in order of their seniority. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-
Regnant and the powers of the Crown are vested in her as fully and effectively
as though she were a king. By convention, the consort of a king takes the
rank and style of her husband; but the converse does not apply and the
constitution has never attached any special rank or privileges to the husband
of the Queen-Regnant.
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession
of another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new
Sovereign is proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of
the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the
Lord Mayor, aldermen and other leading citizens of the City of London,
and the High Commissioners in London of the member nations of the
Commonwealth are also invited to attend.
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval
which may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the
same in substance for nearly a thousand years although the details have
frequently been modified to bring it into conformity with the customs of
the time. The service used at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953
was derived from that used at the coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the
year 973.
1 The Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I.
GOVERNMENT
Acts of
Government
31
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of
representatives of the Lords, the Commons and all the great public interests
in the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the
other Commonwealth countries and of representatives of foreign States.
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the
executive, an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in
England and Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland, the commander-in-chief
of all the armed forces of the Crown and the temporal head of the established
Church of England. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary process
during which the absolute power of the monarchy has been progressively
reduced, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which she cannot
constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The United
Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation
during the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers
without any necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts
of government which require the participation of the Queen.
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; as a general rule
she opens the new session with a speech from the throne (although this may
be read by the Lord Chancellor if the Queen is unable to be present); and
she must give Royal Assent before a Bill which has passed all its stages in
both Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enactment. The Queen is ‘the
fountain of justice’, and as such, can remit all or part of the penalties imposed
on people convicted of crime. As ‘the fountain of honour’, the Queen confers
peerages, baronetcies, knighthoods and other honours,1 and makes appoint¬
ment to all important State offices, including those of judges, officers in the
armed forces, governors, and diplomats, and to all leading positions in the
established Church of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are
required before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In the
realm of international affairs, by virtue of her pre-eminence as head of the
State, the Queen has the power to conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory,
to declare war and to make peace.
These and similar acts of government involve the use of the royal preroga¬
tive2 which has been defined as ‘the residue of discretionary authority legally
left in the hands of the Crown’. Ministerial responsibility for the exercise
of this authority is shown in three constitutional ways in which the royal
will can be expressed: by Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice
of the Privy Council’; by Order, Commission or Warrant signed personally
by the Queen and generally bearing the signature of one or more responsible
ministers; or by Proclamation, Writs, Letters Patent, or other documents
under the Great Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in obedience to a Royal
Warrant countersigned by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not
detract from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; a
few, i.e. the Order of Merit, the Order of Companions of Honour, the Royal Victorian
Order, the Most Noble Order of the Garter, and the Most Noble and Most Ancient
Order of the Thistle, are in the Sovereign’s personal gift.
2 Other powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by Royal Charter;
the construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of infants; the admin¬
istration of charities; coinage; the grant of franchises, e.g., markets, ferries and fisheries;
the right to treasure trove; and the right of printing or licensing others to print the
Bible, the Book of Common Prayer and State papers.
32
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
smooth working of government; for although the Queen has no personal
authority and must show complete impartiality in every field, she must be
informed and consulted on every aspect of the national life. The Queen
holds meetings of the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and
other holders of office at home and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet
decisions, reads dispatches and signs innumerable State papers.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them
if the Sovereign is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of eighteen on
accession to the throne. The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act, 1953—
laid down that the first potential Regent should be the Duke of Edinburgh
and thereafter those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event
of the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision is made
for the appointment of Counsellors of State (generally speaking, the wife
or husband of the Sovereign, and the four adult persons next in succession
to the Crown1) to whom the Sovereign may delegate by Letters Patent
certain royal functions. But Counsellors of State may not, for instance,
dissolve Parliament (except on the express instructions of the Sovereign),
nor create peers.
Ceremonial and Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the
Royal Visits British Isles and, in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered
outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages
are the same today as they were many centuries ago. Royal marriages, the
birth of royal children and royal funerals are marked by ancient ceremonial,
although to a lesser degree than in former days; and the birthday of the
Sovereign, formerly the occasion of many royal and public functions, is
today officially celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on the Horse
Guards Parade. State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head
of State visits the United Kingdom; investitures are held at Buckingham
Palace; and royal processions grace such social occasions as the Ascot Race
Meeting, known as Royal Ascot, and add significance to the opening of
Parliament, when the Queen drives in state from Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating
from the fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal
ordinances, established custom and the public will. The Queen and other
members of the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom every
year, and their presence at the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial,
and charitable works of national importance ensures nation-wide interest and
support. They also pay State visits to foreign Governments and undertake
lengthy tours in other countries of the Commonwealth.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say, the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—
the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons.
The three elements of Parliament are outwardly separate: they are con¬
stituted on different principles; they do different work in different places and
they meet together only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the
1 The Regency Act, 1953, provided that Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
GOVERNMENT
The Meeting of
Parliament
33
coronation, or the opening of Parliament by the Queen in person, when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law¬
making organ of State, however, Parliament is a corporate body and cannot
legislate without the concurrence of all its parts (except in the case of Bills
passed under the Parliament Acts, 1911 and 1949).
The Parliament at Westminster is representative of all the countries of the
United Kingdom. It can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, or
any of the constituent countries separately, or for any combination of them.
It can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, but in these
islands and in Northern Ireland it is not the only legislature, for the Northern
Ireland Parliament has power to legislate for Northern Ireland on most
domestic subjects (see p. 43), and the ancient legislatures of the two Channel
Island Bailiwicks (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and of the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) legislate on domestic matters.1 Nevertheless,
the Parliament at Westminster retains supreme authority, and within practical
limits there is nothing that it cannot legally do.
By the passing of the Parliament Act, 1911, the life of a United Kingdom
Parliament was fixed at five years (although it is usually dissolved and a general
election held before the expiry of the legal term); and since one Parliament
cannot bind its successor (for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not
be sovereign or supreme), each assembly has a period of time of up to five
years during which it may legislate exactly as it chooses. During its life, it
can make or unmake any law; destroy by statute the most firmly established
convention or turn a convention into binding law; and legalise past illegalities
thus reversing the decisions of the courts. It even has power to prolong its
own life by legislative means beyond the normal period of five years without
consulting the electorate although such power is used only in circumstances
of national emergency, such as times of war.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parliament is absolute. In practice.
Parliament does not exercise its supremacy in this way. Its members bear
in mind the common law which has grown up in Britain throughout the
centuries and they act as far as possible in accordance with precedent and
tradition. Moreover, although the validity of an Act of Parliament that has
been duly passed, legally promulgated and published by the proper authority
cannot be disputed in the law courts, no Parliament would be likely to pass an
Act which it knew would receive no public support. The system of party
government in Britain ensures that Parliament legislates with its responsibility
to the electorate in mind.
A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with
a proclamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council.
Such a proclamation on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and,
on the other, orders the issue of writs for the election of a new one and
appoints the day and place of its meeting.
The resignation of a government usually entails the dissolution of Parlia¬
ment. Formerly the death of a Sovereign also involved dissolution, but since
1867 the duration of Parliament has been independent of the demise of the
Crown; both Houses stand adjourned on such an occasion only until their
members have taken the oath of allegiance to the new Sovereign, which they do
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man consist of the Queen, the
Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the
member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each
legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
34
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The House of
Lords
immediately after the Accession Council has made the order for proclamation.
The time between the meeting of a Parliament and its prorogation or
dissolution is called a session. Parliament is usually prorogued by a com¬
mission under the Great Seal (see p. 31), which appoints the day and place
of its meeting in a new session. The date so appointed may be brought
forward or deferred by a subsequent proclamation. The effect of a prorogation
is at once to terminate all business (with certain minor exceptions) until
Parliament is summoned again. A Bill not completed in one session must
be reintroduced in the next, unless it is to be abandoned.
During a session either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to
such date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business.
A reassembly of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or by
virtue of powers specially conferred by each House on its Speaker.
The average number of sitting days for the House of Commons is about
160, divided by custom into the following periods: one from November until
Christmas lasting 30-40 sitting days, one from January to Easter of 40-50
sitting days, one from Easter until Whitsun of about 30 sitting days, and one
from Whitsun until the end of July lasting about 40 sitting days. Nowadays,
the session is sometimes concluded with a short period of up to 10 sitting
days in October, after the long summer recess. The House of Lords sits, on
average, for about no days.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual.
The Lords Temporal may be sub-divided into (i) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages under the Peerage Act, 1963, (ii) all life
peers created by the Crown under the Life Peerages Act, 1958, and (iii) Lords
of Appeal in Ordinary who are appointed under the terms of the Appellate
Jurisdiction Act, 1876, to assist the House in the performance of its judicial
duties and who remain members of the House after their retirement
from office. The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other
diocesan bishops of the Church of England, according to seniority of
appointment.
Temporal peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred by the Sovereign
on the advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages carry with them a
right to a seat in the House of Lords, provided the holder is 21 years of age
or over. Under the Peerage Act, 1963, however, anyone succeeding to a peerage
may, within twelve months of succession, disclaim that peerage for his or her
lifetime. Those who disclaim their peerages lose their right to sit in the
House of Lords but they are able to vote at parliamentary elections and are
eligible for election to the House of Commons.
Not all holders of temporal peerages with a right to sit in the House of
Lords attend the sittings of that House. Those who do not wish to attend may
apply for leave of absence, either for the duration of a particular Parliament
or for a shorter period.
Members in constant attendance at the House of Lords include elder states¬
men and others who have spent their lives in public service. They receive no
salary for their parliamentary work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses
from their homes to the Palace of Westminster (provided they attend at
least one-third of the number of sittings), and (with the exception of the
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chairman of Committees and any member in
receipt of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office) they may claim payment
GOVERNMENT
The House of
Commons
P ar liamentar y
Electoral
System
35
for expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the House (except for
judicial sittings) within a maximum of three guineas a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who sits
on the woolsack and is ex officio Speaker of the House. The Crown, by
commission under the Great Seal, appoints several members of the House
to act as deputy speakers in the absence of the Lord Chancellor. The first
of the deputy speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed
each session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House other¬
wise directs. The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments,
who is charged with keeping the records of proceedings and judgments and
who pronounces the words of the Royal Assent to Bills; the Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, who enforces the orders of the House; and the
Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Lord Chancellor.
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by almost
universal adult suffrage and consists of men and women from all sections of
the community. There are at present 630 seats in the House of Commons
(511 for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern Ireland).
Members of the House of Commons receive a salary for their parliamentary
work and hold their seats during the life of a Parliament. They are elected
either at a general election, which takes place after a Parliament has been
dissolved and a new one summoned by the Sovereign, or at a by-election,
which is held when a vacancy occurs in the House as a result of the death of
a member, or of his acceptance of office under the Crown,1 or as a result of his
elevation to the House of Lords.
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is elected
by the members to preside over the House immediately after a new Parliament
is formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of
Ways and Means, and the Deputy Chairman, both of whom may act as
Deputy Speaker; these officers are elected by the House. Permanent officers
of the House, i.e. those who are not members of Parliament, include the
Clerk of the House of Commons, who is charged with such matters as keeping
the records, endorsing Bills and signing orders, and the Serjeant-at-Arms,
who attends the Speaker in the House.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies,
each of which returns one member to the House of Commons. Permanent
Boundary Commissions for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
keep constituencies constantly under review, submit periodic reports, and
may, at any time, recommend changes in the boundaries of any particular
constituency or constituencies if, for instance, movement of the population
has made this necessary. Changes in the boundaries of constituencies which
came into effect for the 1955 general election increased the number of seats
in the House of Commons from 625 to the present figure of 630.
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained principally in the
Representation of the People Act, 1949, which repealed and re-enacted in a
single statute previous legislation relating to the franchise, the conduct of
elections and corrupt and illegal electoral practices. Under the provisions of
this Act, election to the House of Commons is decided by secret ballot in
which British subjects (except members of the House of Lords) and citizens
1 If a member wishes to resign from the House, he accepts what is technically an office
of profit under the Crown.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of the Irish Republic are entitled to vote (voting is not compulsory), provided
that they are 21 years old or over, and are not subject to any legal incapacity
to vote. Those eligible to vote in any constituency are those who are recorded
on the register1 of electors for the constituency as resident in that constituency
on a date fixed by statute. Electors normally vote in person at polling stations
especially established for the purpose, although members of the armed forces,
Crown servants of the United Kingdom employed overseas, and wives of such
persons, if resident overseas with their husbands, may vote by proxy. Voting
by post, or in certain cases by proxy, may also be allowed if the voter cannot
attend in person for such reasons as physical incapacity or the nature of his
work. Any person, male or female, who is a British subject of 21 years of age or
over and is not otherwise disqualified, may be elected to the House of Com¬
mons. Categories of persons disqualified for election include members of the
House of Lords, clergy of the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church, undischarged
bankrupts, and those expressly precluded under the House of Commons
Disqualification Act, 1957 (for instance, holders of judicial offices, civil
servants, members of the regular armed forces and the police forces, members
of the legislature of any country or territory outside the Commonwealth,
and holders of other public offices listed in the Act).
Parliamentary Each House of Parliament enjoys certain privileges and immunities designed to
Privilege protect the House from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. These
privileges apply collectively to each House and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown
for the Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the
beginning of each Parliament. These include freedom from arrest in civil
proceedings for a period from forty days before to forty days after a session
of Parliament; freedom of speech in debate; and the right of access to the
Crown, which is a collective privilege of the House. Further privileges
include the right of the House to control its own proceedings (so that it is
able, for example, to exclude strangers if it so wishes); the right to pronounce
upon legal disqualifications for membership and to declare a seat vacant on such
grounds; and the right to penalise those who commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords are: freedom from civil arrest;
freedom of speech in debate; freedom of access to the Sovereign for each
peer individually; and the right to commit for contempt. These privileges
are not formally claimed by the Speaker as in the House of Commons; they
exist independently without grant.
The Party
System
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth
century, and has now become an essential element in the working of the
constitution. .
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a
general election or a by-election, the parties may put up candidates for
election; any other citizen who wishes may also stand.2 The electorate then
A register containing the names of all electors, prepared for each constituency and
ublished yearly by registration officers, who in England and Wales are the clerks of
Deal councils and in Scotland are the land valuation assessors.
In the general election of October 1959 nearly all constituencies were contested by
.abour and Conservative candidates; Liberal candidates numbered 216. The number
,f Independents and of candidates representing other political parties was very small.
GOVERNMENT
37
indicates, by its choice of candidate at the poll on election day, which of the
opposing policies it would like to see put into effect.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the
majority of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority
of supporters in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition,
the leader of the majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign,
usually on the advice of senior ministers; and its most outstanding members
in the House of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial
appointments on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority
party becomes the official Opposition with its own leader and its own council
of discussion or ‘shadow Cabinet’; while the members of any other parties
or any Independents who have been elected may support the Government
or the Opposition according to their party’s or their own view of the policy
being debated at any given time.
In the general election held in October 1959, 787 per cent of the electorate
voted, compared with 83-6 per cent in i95°> 81-9 per cent in 1951 and
76-8 per cent in 1955- The number of votes cast for the principal parties is
shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3
Votes cast at
General
Elections
1950-59
Party
Conservative and
supporters
Labour (and
Co-operative)
Liberal . .
Communist
Others* . .
1950“
12,501,983
13,295,736
2,621,489
91,815
258,454
1951“
13,724,418
13,948,385
730,551
21,640
177,329
1955
13,310,891
12,405,254*
722,402
33,144
288,038
1959
13,750,965
12,216,166*
1,640,761
30,897
223,949
" Figures for 1950 and 1951 exclude those few constituencies for which candidates
were returned unopposed. All seats were contested in 1955 and 1959.
* Includes Northern Ireland Labour.
c ‘Others’ include Welsh and Scottish Nationalists, Independent Labour, other
Independents, Irish Labour, Irish Nationalist, Irish Anti-Partitionist, and Sinn Fein.
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the
general elections of 1955 and 1959 is shown in Table 4.
The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable
extent upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on
by agreement: that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must
govern and therefore accepts its decisions; and the majority agrees that the
minority should criticise and therefore sets time aside for that criticism to
be heard. The detailed arrangements of Government business are settled,
under the direction of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House (who
may be the Prime Minister or some other minister), by the Government
Chief Whip in consultation with the Opposition Chief Whip. The Chief
Whips together form the ‘usual channels’ often referred to in the House of
Commons when the question of the possibility of finding time for debating
some particular issue is being discussed. The direction of the business of the
House is primarily the responsibility of the Leader of the House, and it is
his duty to provide all reasonable facilities for the House to debate matters
about which it is concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Whips (the Chief
38
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 4
Members Elected
at General
Elections in
1955 and 1959
The Functions
of Parliament
Parliamentary
Procedure
Whips and their assistants, chosen within the party or by the Prime Minister
for the Government party), whose duties include maintaining the voting
strength of their parties by ensuring the attendance of members at important
debates. The Opposition Whips have no official position, but the Government
Chief Whip in the House of Commons is the Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury; of the other Government Whips, five hold titular posts as
Junior Lords of the Treasury, three are officers of the Royal Household and
a number are unpaid. There are also Government and Opposition Whips
in the House of Lords. The former, who hold offices in the Royal Household,
sometimes act as spokesmen for the Government in debates.
1955
Conservative and supporters 347
Labour .. .. .. 277
Liberal .. . . . • 6
630
1959
Conservative and supporters 365 a
Labour . . .. .. 258
Liberal .. . . . . 6
Independent . . . . 1
630
« A majority of too over all other parties. This was the first time since the establish¬
ment of the modern party system in Britain in the nineteenth century that a party had
increased its parliamentary strength in four successive general elections and the first
time that a party had retained office after being in power for the duration of two full
Parliaments.
The main functions of Parliament are (i) to make laws regulating the life
of the community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make
available finance for the needs of the community and to appropriate the
funds necessary for the services of the State, and (3) to criticise and control
the Government. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the ratifica¬
tion of certain international treaties and agreements (in spite of the fact that
the making of treaties is a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the
Government and, in theory, is not subject to parliamentary approval).
Both Houses of Parliament have their own standing orders, but procedure
is based on custom and precedent (much of which dates back to the beginning
of the sixteenth century and even earlier) rather than on written orders,
which merely supplement the practice in each House. The system of debate
is much the same in the two Houses: for instance, every matter is determined
upon questions put from the chair or woolsack and resolved in the affirmative
or negative, as the case may be; members speak from wherever they have been
sitting and not from a rostrum; and members do not read their speeches.
The main difference is that in the House of Commons the Speaker has a
far greater measure of control.
In the House of Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no inherent
authority to check or curtail debate, such matters being decided by the
general sense of the House. In the Commons, on the contrary, the Speaker
has full authority to give effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and
orders of the House. He must carefully guard against abuse of procedure
or any infringement of minority rights, and it is his duty to allow or disallow
any closure motion (i.e. a motion to curtail or end discussion so that the
matter may be put to the vote). He has certain powers to check irrelevance
GOVERNMENT
Legislation
39
and repetition in debate, and to save the time of the House in various other
respects. In cases of grave disorder, he has power to adjourn the House or
suspend the sitting on his own initiative.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the
Speaker, and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number
of votes is cast, the Speaker must give the decisive vote; he does this (if
possible) in such a way as to avoid change and leave the question to be debated
on another occasion. The procedure on voting in the House of Lords is
similar to that in the House of Commons, but the Speaker or chairman has
no casting vote. With the exception of questions relating to Bills and delegated
legislation, the House of Lords is governed by the principle that unless there
is a majority in favour, the question is decided in the negative. When the
House is sitting judicially (see pp. 84 and 87) the question is put in such a
way that, if the votes were equal, there would be no interference with the
order under appeal.
As a rule, all proceedings of either House are public (the right to debate
in secret is exercised only rarely), and a full record is published daily in the
official reports, Parliamentary Debates {Hansard).
Legislation can be initiated from either side of either House; but no Bill
involving taxation or the spending of public money can proceed very far
unless the Government agrees to introduce a ‘financial resolution’ to cover it.
This has the effect of giving the Government exclusive rights over a wide
field of legislation, and as a result most Public Bills are presented by the
Government. However, private members (i.e. members of the House who
are neither office holders in the Government nor Opposition leaders) can
introduce Public Bills on their own initiative, and such Bills can be debated
on certain days expressly set aside for the purpose in each session.1 Peers
can introduce Public Bills in the House of Lords at any time during a session
without notice. In addition, persons and bodies outside Parliament can
promote Private Bills relating solely to matters of individual, corporate or
local interest.
Bills may originate in either House, unless they deal with finance or
representation when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule,
however, Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons
before the Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature are
frequently introduced and fully debated in the Lords before being sent to
the Commons.
The process of passing a Public Bill is basically the same in the House of
Lords as in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal First Reading
on introduction; it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies
between one day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it
may be given a Second Reading after the result of a debate on its general
merits or principles. In the Commons, it is then referred for detailed
examination either to a standing committee or, if the House so decides, to
the whole House sitting in committee; and, in the Lords, to a committee of
the whole House. When the committee stage is finished, the Bill is reported
to the House, and a further stage takes place during which the committee’s
amendments may be altered, additional amendments may be suggested and
1 Private members also have the right of moving for leave to introduce Bills after
question time (see p. 42) on certain days under the ‘Ten Minute Rule’, i.e. the Standing
Order which allows a brief speech proposing and another opposing the introduction of
the Bill before the House decides whether or not to grant leave.
40
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Committees
incorporated, and, if necessary, the Bill may be recommitted to committee.
Finally, it is submitted for a Third Reading and, if passed, is sent on from
the Commons to the Lords or from the Lords to the Commons (depending
on its place of origin), where it enters on the same course again. Any amend¬
ments which the second House makes to the Bill must be agreed to by the
first House, or a compromise reached, before the Bill becomes law.
In practice, the Lords pass without amendment all financial Bills, such as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing
taxation, and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the
Supply Services from the Consolidated Fund.1 As a general rule, these Bills
are introduced upon resolutions in a committee of the whole House of
Commons and they may be initiated only by a Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are
sent to the Sovereign for Royal Assent, now usually given by commission.
The Sovereign’s power to refuse assent has not been exercised since the early
eighteenth century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; they
are then returned to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent.
However, should any Lords Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would
never reach the Statute Book, for no debating time would be allotted to it—
at any rate until a new government came into power, when it might be
revived. The Lords, on the other hand, are unlikely to be able to prevent a
Bill insisted upon by the Commons from finally becoming law. In the normal
course of events, they either accept a Bill from the Commons and return it
unchanged; or they revise and improve it by amendments and return it for
the consideration of members of the other House, who frequently agree to
the amendments made. The Lords cannot require the Commons to agree to
amendments; nor can they delay a Bill indefinitely. They have no powers in
respect of Money Bills; and since the passing of the Parliament Act, 1949,
any other Public Bill which has been passed by the House of Commons in
two successive sessions may be presented for Royal Assent without the consent
of the Lords, provided that a year has elapsed between the date of the Second
Reading of the Bill in the Commons and the date on which it is finally passed
in that House. These limitations on the powers of the Lords are based on the
belief that the chief value of the Upper House, which is a non-elected assembly,
lies in bringing the wide experience of its members into the legislative process,
not in thwarting the elected House. In other words, proceedings in the House
of Lords give time for further reflection, and often elicit new points of view.
In substance, a Private Bill goes through the same procedure as a Public
Bill but most of the work is done in committee, where the promoters must
prove the need for the powers or privileges that they seek and where any
objections raised by opposing interests may be heard.
A committee of the whole House (see p. 39) is presided over by a
chairman instead of the Speaker. Its function is to consider Bills in detail,
clause by clause, after their Second Reading. The Committees of Supply and
of Ways and Means are committees of the whole House of Commons; they
discharge the financial duties of the House concerning the grant of public
money and the levying of taxation.
1 It is provided in the Parliament Act, 1911, that all Money Bills sent to the House of
Lords one month before the end of the session shall receive the Royal Assent notwith¬
standing, if they are not passed by the Lords without amendment within the month.
GOVERNMENT
Delegated
Legislation
41
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of
which exist to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised and
complex work. They are:
(1) Standing Committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons
as necessary, for the consideration of the committee stage of Public
Bills and, in the case of the Scottish and Welsh Grand Committees,
other business committed to them. With the exception of the Scottish
Standing and Grand Committees1 (which deal with Public Bills and
other matters relating to Scotland), and the Welsh Grand Committee2
(which considers the annual report for Wales and certain selected subjects
for debate), each standing committee consists of from twenty to fifty
members nominated by the Committee of Selection (a body normally
consisting of eleven members drawn from the main parties in the
House at the beginning of each session); in all cases the parties are
represented in proportion to their numbers in the House. The procedure
of a standing committee is generally similar to that of a committee of
the whole House.
(2) Select Committees, which are appointed to inquire into and report to
the House on special matters. Select Committees may be appointed
by either House when the occasion for such an appointment occurs,
or they may be appointed every session, sometimes by Standing Order,
to review particular matters. The latter type of committee is known as a
‘sessional’ committee and includes the Estimates and Public Accounts
Committees. There are also select committees to deal with Private Bills,
and joint select committees of both Houses of Parliament which may
be appointed at the instance of either House.
In addition there are the parliamentary party committees: the Conservative
and Unionist Members Committee, popularly known as the 1922 Committee,
which consists of the back bench (non-ministerial) membership of the party;
and the Parliamentary Labour Party, which is a corporate body comprising
all members of the party in both Houses.
Delegated legislation, which is legislation not by the direct functioning of
Parliament but by powers conferred on the executive by Act of Parliament (or,
more rarely, by royal prerogative), has been part of the parliamentary system
for at least six hundred years. Parliament, however, made but sparing use
of its power to delegate legislation (except during a period of social, political
and economic change in the second half of the fifteenth and most of the
sixteenth centuries) until the end of the nineteenth century, when a changing
conception of the part that should be played by the State in the life of the
community made inroads upon parliamentary time and thus caused the
system to be adopted on a more extensive scale. With the ever-increasing
scope of Government activity during the past sixty years, pressure on
parliamentary time has become even more acute; as a result, the system of
delegated legislation created under statutory powers has become generally
accepted.
1 The Scottish Standing Committee consists of thirty members nominated from
Scottish constituencies with up to twenty other nominated members; in its plenary
form, as the Scottish Grand Committee, it comprises all the members for the Scottish
constituencies and not less than ten nor more than fifteen others.
2 The Welsh Grand Committee consists of 36 members for constituencies in Wales and
Monmouthshire, with up to 25 other nominated members selected in order to make the
balance of parties in the committee approximate to that in the whole House.
42
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Control
The system of delegated legislation empowers ministers and other author¬
ities to regulate administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. Its
advantages are said1 to be: (i) that it shortens and clarifies Bills before
Parliament, thus enabling Parliament to deal with a greater volume of business
and to give fuller attention to matters of policy and principle which are its
primary concern; (2) that it encourages flexibility, in that administrative
details can be worked out as and when the necessity arises ‘with greater care
and minuteness, and with better adaptation to local and other special circum¬
stances than they possibly can be during the passage of a Bill through
Parliament’; (3) that it is invaluable in an emergency, for it is ‘the means by
which the legislature can dispense with its own deliberative procedure and
arm the executive with power to take immediate action’; and (4) that it
provides a speedy, convenient and accurate means of giving effect to the
policy of Parliament.
In order to minimise the risk—inherent in the system—that delegated
legislative powers might supersede or weaken parliamentary government,
such powers are normally delegated to the Queen in Council or to authorities
directly responsible to Parliament, i.e. to ministers of the Crown, to Govern¬
ment departments for which ministers are responsible, or to organisations
whose legislation is subject to confirmation or approval by ministers who
thereby become responsible to Parliament for it. Moreover the Act which
delegates legislative power generally defines the precise limits of this power
and, in the more important cases, gives Parliament the right to confirm or
annul the statutory instruments2 by which delegated legislation is enacted.
Certain Acts also require direct consultation, before such legislation is made,
with organisations which will be affected by delegated legislation.
The House of Commons is aided in its supervision of delegated legislation
by the Select Committee on Statutory Instruments, which is set up each
session to report on the unusual or unexpected use of statutory powers. The
Special Orders Committee of the House of Lords examines and reports on
all Statutory Instruments requiring affirmative resolution.
Parliament’s function of controlling the Government in power is exercised
in the final analysis by the ability of the House of Commons to force the
Government to resign either by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or
by rejecting a proposal which the Government considers so vital to its policy
that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’. Such direct control of the Govern¬
ment, however, has not formed a normal part of British political life for
many years; but parliamentary procedure offers a number of opportunities for
a searching examination of Government policy by both the Opposition and
the Government’s own back-benchers. These include:
(1) Question Time, which is an hour of parliamentary time on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday during which ministers, in
rotation, answer questions put to them on matters for which they are
responsible. So much parliamentary time is devoted to scheduled public
business that questions are valued as the best means of eliciting hitherto
unpublished information about the Government’s intentions; they are
1 From an official minute written in 1893 and quoted in Concerning English Adminis¬
trative Law, by Sir Cecil Carr. Oxford University Press. 1942. pp. 33-34.
2 Statutory instruments are made in accordance with the provisions of the Statutory
Instruments Act, 1946, which repealed and replaced the Rules Publication Act, 1893.
Instruments of delegated legislation made under the Act of 1893 were known as
‘statutory rules and orders’ (‘S.R. & O.’).
GOVERNMENT
43
also an effective way of airing, and possibly securing some redress of,
grievances brought to the notice of members by their constituents.
(2) The right of members to use motions for the adjournment of the
House to initiate discussions on constituency cases or matters of public
concern. There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of public
business every sitting day; on a day when public business ends before
the scheduled time the time saved may be used for adjournment
debates; and immediately before the adjournment for each recess
(Christmas, Easter, Whitsun and the Summer) there is a whole day
spent discussing topics selected either by the Opposition or by private
members. Moreover, if a member wishes to discuss a definite matter
of ‘urgent public importance’ he may, at the end of Question Time,
ask leave to move the adjournment of the House; if the Speaker accepts
the motion as being within the terms of the Standing Order and if, the
matter being referred to the House, 40 or more members rise to support
the motion, the matter is debated later the same day.
(3) The practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates, in Committee
of Supply, has ceased to be a consideration of the financial requirements
of the Government and has become an occasion for the examination,
initiated by the Opposition, of some aspect of the Government’s adminis¬
trative policy, the cost of which has been included in the Estimates.
The means by which Parliament, and more particularly the House of
Commons, exercises responsibility in the management of the revenues of the
State and payments for the public service are described in Chapter 14, Finance.
The Northern
Ireland
Parliament
The Parliament of Northern Ireland consists of the Sovereign, a Senate and
a House of Commons. The Sovereign is represented in Northern Ireland by
a Governor, who summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament in Her
Majesty’s name; the Senate is composed of two ex officio senators (the Lord
Mayor of Belfast and the Mayor of Londonderry) together with 24 senators
who hold office for an eight-year term, 12 being elected by the House of
Commons every four years under a system of proportional representation; and
the House of Commons consists of 52 members, elected by a system of
parliamentary franchise similar to that which operates in Great Britain.
The House continues in existence for a period of five years unless it is
dissolved earlier.
The Northern Ireland Parliament has power to make laws for the peace,
order and good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all matters
except those especially reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom,
i.e.: the Crown or succession to the Crown; foreign relations; defence; the
postal services; the Supreme Court; customs and excise; income and profits
taxes; coinage; standards of weights and measures; trade marks; submarine
cables; wireless telegraphy; aerial navigation; and lighthouses, buoys and
beacons. Under the constitutional practices which have developed since the
passing of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, the United Kingdom
Parliament does not legislate on matters within the powers of the Northern
Ireland Parliament unless the Government of Northern Ireland requests that
this should be done. But, because certain matters have been reserved to the
United Kingdom Parliament, provision was made in the Government of
Ireland Act, 1920, for the continued representation of the Northern Ireland
constituencies in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; in
accordance with this provision, 12 members are returned to Westminster.
44
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Procedure and
Functions
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Judicial Committee
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council,
was the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council declined in importance;
many of its powers were transferred to the Cabinet, and much of its work
was handed over to newly created Government departments. The present-day
Privy Council exists mainly to give effect to policy decisions made elsewhere.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn of the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy
Council (which is retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister as an honour to persons who have
reached eminence in some branch of public affairs in any country of the
Commonwealth. There are usually about 300 Privy Counsellors.
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and is usually
presided over by the Sovereign. Three Privy Counsellors form a quorum,
but, as a rule, not fewer than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy
Council is called together only on the death of the Sovereign or when the
Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for the submission for the Sovereign’s
approval of Orders in Council, of which there are two kinds, differing
fundamentally in constitutional principle: those made by virtue of the royal
prerogative, for example, those embodying royal instructions to colonial
Governors; and those which are authorised by Act of Parliament and are a
form of delegated legislation. Members of the Privy Council attending
meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not thereby become
personally responsible for the policy upon which the orders are based; this
rests with the ministers in whose departments the draft orders were framed,
whether they are present at the meeting or not. Certain Orders in Council
must be published in the London Gazette, which is an official periodical
published by the authority of the Government.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclama¬
tions, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such
as summoning or dissolving Parliament) of the same validity as Acts of
Parliament.
There are a number of Privy Council committees whose meetings differ from
those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally
be present. These committees, which have advisory functions, may be
prerogative, such as the committee which deals with legislative matters
submitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man,
and the committees for medical research, scientific and industrial research,
agricultural research, overseas research, and nature conservation; or they may
be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge and the Scottish universities, and that which deals with applica¬
tions for the grant of charters to municipal corporations.
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out
in the Privy Council Office under the control of the Lord President of the
Council (see p. 45).
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal from
the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies and certain member States
of the Commonwealth, deriving its appellate jurisdiction in respect of such
ADDENDUM
GENERAL ELECTION 1964
Elections for the House of Commons in the 43rd Parliament of the United
Kingdom were held on 15th October, 1964. The Labour Party obtained 14
seats more than the Conservative Party; its majority over all other parties is
five. In comparison with the 1959 elections (see p. 37) the total Labour vote
was approximately the same, the Conservative vote dropped by about a
million and three-quarters and the Liberal vote rose by about a million and
a half. All 630 constituencies were contested: in 192 there were straight fights,
in 379 there were three-cornered contests, and in 59 there were four or more
candidates for election. Candidates for election totalled 1,757. About 77 per
cent of the electorate went to the polls.
The number of votes cast and seats gained were as follows:
Votes Percentage Seats
Labour .. .'. .. .. 12,205,576 44-1 317
Conservatives and Associates .. 12,002,407 43-4 303
Liberal  3,093,316 11-2 9
The Speaker  21,588 0-1 1
Others'*   327,326 1-2 0
“Others include Communists, Scottish and Welsh Nationalists, Irish Republicans,
Independents, and 23 members of individual parties, few of which were represented
by more than one candidate.
ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES
Substantial changes in the administration have followed the formation of the
new government (compare pp. 45-46). New senior appointments announced
by the Prime Minister include: First Secretary of State and Minister for
Economic Affairs, Secretary of State for Wales, Minister of Technology,
Minister of Overseas Development, and Minister of Land and Natural Resour¬
ces. The post of Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and Regional
Development has been discontinued, those of Secretary of State for Common¬
wealth Relations and Secretary of State for the Colonies (held jointly in the
previous administration since 1962) have been separated again.
In addition, compared with ten Ministers of State in the previous admini¬
stration (see p. 46) there are now thirteen, as follows: three in the Board of
Trade, two each in the Department of Education and Science and the Foreign
Office, one each in the Home Office, the Commonwealth Relations Office, the
Scottish Office and the Welsh Office, and two Ministers of State for Foreign
Affairs. One of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs has been appointed as the
permanent delegate of the United Kingdom to the United Nations; the other
is to deal with disarmament matters in the Foreign Office. [In order to comply
with section 2 of the House of Commons Disqualification Act, 1957 (see
p. 46), eight Ministers of State were appointed in the first instance without
ADDENDUM
remuneration. It has been officially announced that an early opportunity is to
be sought to ask Parliament to amend the Act.]
The functions of the new ministries and the reallocation of certain respon¬
sibilities among departments are described in the paper accompanying this
issue of the Handbook.
ERRATUM
On page 215, line 9, for “students” read “standards”
GOVERNMENT
Composition
Prime Minister
Non-Departmental
Ministers
Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
45
appeals from the principle of English common law which recognises ‘the
right of all the King’s subjects to appeal for redress to the Sovereign in
Council’ if they believe that the courts of law have failed to do them justice.
The Judicial Committee is also the final court of appeal from the ecclesiastical
courts of England, from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and from
prize courts1 in the United Kingdom and dependencies.
Appeals come to the Judicial Committee either where a right of appeal
has been specially created, for example, by statute, Order in Council or
Letters Patent, or by special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice
of the Judicial Committee. They are heard by a board of the committee,
whose members are generally selected from the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord
Chancellors and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, although other members of
the Privy Council who have held high judicial office (including Chief Justices
and certain other judges from other Commonwealth countries who have been
sworn of the Privy Council) may also be asked to sit when business is heavy.
The Judicial Committee does not deliver judgment; it advises the Sovereign,
who acts on its report and approves an Order in Council to give effect thereto.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time
being with the administration of national affairs.
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to
time, both in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The
usual ministerial offices may be classified under the following heads:
The Prime Minister, who is the recognised head of the Government but
has no department.
Non-Departmental Ministers, who include the holders of various traditional
offices—the Lord President of the Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster,2 the Lord Privy Seal, the Paymaster General—and Ministers
without Portfolio. These ministers have few or no departmental duties and
are thus available to perform any special duties which the Prime Minister
may wish to entrust to them.
Departmental Ministers, some of whom are known as Secretaries of State.
There are at present seven Secretaries of State—for the Home Department;
Foreign Affairs; Scotland; Commonwealth Relations and Colonies; Industry,
Trade and Regional Development; Education and Science; and Defence.
A few of the older posts have special titles: the Chancellor of the Exchequer
(who is responsible for the Treasury and a number of other departments),
the President of the Board of Trade (a post at present combined with that of
Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and Regional Development), and the
Postmaster General.
The Lord Chancellor has departmental functions; he is also in a somewhat
special position as a Minister of the Crown who is also head of the judiciary
in England and Wales. The four Law Officers of the Crown are: for England
1 Prize Courts deal with matters concerning property captured in time of war which, by
grace of the Crown, falls to the forces which assist in the capture.
2 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed
by the reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and
is separately administered by the Chancellor.
46
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
The Prime
Minister
and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; for Scotland,
the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State, who are additional ministers in Government departments
where the work is particularly heavy and complex, or when it involves
frequent travelling overseas. There are now two Ministers of State in the
Foreign Office, at the Board of Trade and in the Department of Education
and Science, and one each in the Home, Commonwealth Relations and
Colonial Offices; the Secretary of State for Scotland is assisted by a Minister
of State, and there is a Minister of State for Welsh Affairs.
Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary or,
where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to relieve
their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in parliamentary
debates and answering parliamentary questions, and by assisting in their
departmental duties. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and the
Junior Lords of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all other ministers
are appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons. There
are, however, always some ministers in the House of Lords, partly because
the House of Commons Disqualification Act, 1957, limits the number of
ministers who may sit and vote in the Commons while receiving salaries
from the Crown, and also because every Government must be assured of
spokesmen to expound and justify its intentions and its actions to the House
of Lords.
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during
the eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the
holder of this office derives from his status as leader of the majority party
in Parliament and from his power to submit his own choice of ministers to
the Sovereign and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. In
modern times the Prime Minister always holds the office of First Lord of
the Treasury, and may also hold another portfolio. Since 1902 he has always
been a member of the House of Commons.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general
business of the Government; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise
a general supervision over departments, settling departmental differences
and approving important departmental decisions where reference to the
Cabinet is not required. The Prime Minister speaks for the Government in
the House of Commons on the most important topics and answers questions
on its general administration in that House.
The Prime Minister’s responsibilities include making recommendations
to the Sovereign for the appointment of Church of England archbishops,
bishops and certain other senior clergy and the incumbents of some 200
Crown livings, as well as for appointments to high judicial offices, such as
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, Lord Chief Justice and Lord Justices of Appeal.
He also advises the Crown on appointments of Privy Counsellors, Lord
Lieutenants of counties1 and certain civil appointments, such as Lord High
Commissioner of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia.
GOVERNMENT
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
47
Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and some university appointments which
are in the gift of the Crown. The Prime Minister makes similar recom¬
mendations for appointments to various public boards and institutions, such
as the National Assistance Board and the British Broadcasting Corporation,
as well as to various royal and statutory commissions. In addition, he makes
recommendations to the Sovereign for the award of many civil honours and
distinctions and of Civil List pensions. He selects the trustees of certain
national museums and institutions.
The Cabinet is composed of a number of ministers (usually about 20) who
are selected by the Prime Minister personally. Its origins can be traced back
to the informal conferences that the Sovereign held with his leading ministers,
independently of the Privy Council, during the seventeenth century. After
the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an active role in politics in the eighteenth
century, and the development of organised political parties stimulated by
successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet
assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are1: the final determination of the policy
to be submitted to Parliament; the supreme control of the national executive
in accordance with the policy agreed by Parliament; and the continuous
co-ordination and delimitation of the authority of Government departments.
The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the Cabinet
is a group of party representatives, depending for its existence upon the
support of a majority in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential.
Its members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the
publication of Cabinet as well as of other State papers, and a resigning
minister desiring to make a statement involving disclosure of Cabinet dis¬
cussions must first obtain the permission of the Sovereign through the
Prime Minister. The theoretical reason for this secrecy is that a Cabinet
decision is advice to the Sovereign, whose consent is necessary before the
decision is made public. From a practical point of view, secrecy is essential
in the interests of unprejudiced discussion, which can take place only if there
is no risk of publicity for every statement made and every point conceded.
In normal times the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week
during parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is
not sitting. Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any
time, if a matter urgently requiring discussion should arise. During Cabinet
meetings decisions are reached on major issues of Government policy, and
the Cabinet settles any matters which cannot be disposed of at lower levels.
The Cabinet carries on much of its work by means of a committee system
which originated in the nineteenth century and has been developed to keep
pace with Government business during the past sixty years. The system
involves the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee
or to an ad hoc committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned,
which considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon
it to the full Cabinet with recommendations for action. Ministers not in
the Cabinet are called to attend its meetings when matters affecting their
1 As defined in the Report of the Machinery of Government Committee (the Haldane
Committee), 1918, Cd. 9230.
48
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ministerial
Responsibility
departments are under discussion; they may also be members of Cabinet
committees.
Detailed accounts of Cabinet meetings are not prepared; only the substance
of documents submitted, together with a summary of the arguments and
the conclusions, are recorded; even these records have a strictly limited
circulation. Responsibility for the keeping of records lies with the Secretary
of the Cabinet.
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which
ministers share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual
responsibility of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the
middle of the nineteenth century, imposes upon ministers the obligation to
act not as individuals but (in the interests of stability of government) as a
united group. It does not require every Cabinet minister to be present at
every Cabinet meeting; and the obligations of individual ministers may be
passive rather than active when the decision to be taken does not relate to
their spheres of administrative responsibility. At the same time, every
minister should be fully informed of the subject of discussion beforehand, so
that if he has any objections he may voice them at the meeting. He may not
repudiate, either in Parliament or in his constituency, policies which have
received Cabinet approval, nor may he adopt policies that have not been
agreed with the other departments concerned (including the Treasury). A
minister must also be prepared to vote with the Government on all issues,
and where necessary to speak in support or defence of its policy; if he feels
himself unable to agree or to compromise with the view of the majority of
his colleagues in Parliament or elsewhere he must resign unless the Cabinet
has agreed otherwise. A minister who does not resign in these circumstances
cannot later reject criticism on the ground that he did not personally agree
with the policy adopted.
The doctrine of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet is
bound to offer unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members
do not hold identical views on a given subject.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department
means that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its
acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of admin¬
istration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be
criticised in Parliament, whether he is personally responsible or not. Since
the majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, they are
available to answer questions and to defend themselves against criticism in
person. Departmental ministers who are in the House of Lords must be
represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually their Parliamentary or Under-Secretaries.
Departmental ministers are expected to take the final decision on all
matters relating to their spheres of administration, unless these are of such
political importance that Cabinet sanction is required. If any departmental
decision brings a minister under criticism in Parliament he may be upheld
by the Cabinet, which will then treat the matter as one of confidence in itself;
or he may be disowned, when he alone will be liable to lose office.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of
bringing government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament dis¬
courages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
GOVERNMENT
49
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
Government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation.
They may, and frequently do, work with and through local authorities,
statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations operating under
varying degrees of Government control.
A change of Government does not usually affect the number or general
functions of Government departments, although a radical change in policy
may be accompanied by some organisational change. The widening scope of
government activity in the past half-century, however, has led to the
formation of many new departments. A few have existed for over 200 years.
The work of some departments, for instance the Post Office and the Board
of Customs and Excise, covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other
departments, for example the Ministry of Labour, cover Great Britain
(England and Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland); others, such
as the Ministry of Health, cover England and Wales only, and there are
similar but separate departments for Scotland and Northern Ireland. Some
departments, for instance that of Education and Science, make special
arrangements for Welsh affairs.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in
which questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent
official, and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament.
For instance, Treasury ministers are responsible for a number of departments,
including H.M. Stationery Office, the Central Office of Information, the
Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Department of the Government
Actuary, the Royal Mint, the National Debt Office, the Public Works Loan
Board, and the National Savings Committee. The staff of departments are
all members of the Civil Service, a body of Crown servants recruited into the
service as a career.
Departments differ in size and in the volume, type and complexity of their
work. Internal organisation varies from department to department since each
makes its own arrangements for discharging its duties, but certain features
are common to most departments: for example, the minister of a major
department is likely to have at the head of his officials a permanent secretary
(known as the Permanent Under-Secretary of State in those departments
where the minister is a Secretary of State), one or more deputy secretaries,
and a varying number of under-secretaries and assistant secretaries. In
addition, major departments usually have a principal finance officer and a
principal establishments and organisation officer. A number of departments
have their own organisation and methods (‘O and M’) branch, the members
of which act in an advisory capacity. Many departments also have their own
legal advisers or solicitors, and their own information division.
Some departments maintain a regional organisation, and some that have
direct contact with the public throughout the country also have local offices.
Many Government departments are assisted by standing advisory bodies,
which are of three main kinds: consultative bodies, in which representatives
of the Government meet representatives of groups outside Government;
expert bodies which formulate recommendations for action in a particular
field; and bodies which have advisory status but executive powers. The
majority of these councils and committees (of which there are several hundred)
are permanent bodies attached to the main departments; they are appointed
by the relevant minister and their membership, apart from civil servants,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
50
includes industrialists, trade unionists, university and industrial scientists,
local government officials and councillors, and experts from many other
walks of life.
In addition, the Government frequently sets up ad hoc committees to
examine and make recommendations on specific matters. For certain
important inquiries a Royal Commission, whose members are selected on the
grounds of their wide experience and diverse knowledge of the subject under
consideration, may be appointed (by Royal Warrant). Commissions examine
written and oral evidence from Government departments and other interested
organisations and individuals, and on this evidence submit recommendations.
The Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part, or it
may decide to take no further action or may delay action until a later date.
Public inquiries are also undertaken by departmental committees, appointed
by the head of the appropriate department.
The following pages provide an outline of the principal functions of the
main Government departments. They are arranged in alphabetical order,
except for the Cabinet Office and the Treasury (which, in view of their
central position, are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern Ireland
departments (which are grouped at the end of the section). Further infor¬
mation on their work is given in later sections under the relevant subject
headings.
The Cabinet The Cabinet Office, or Secretariat of the Cabinet, was instituted during the
Office first world war and has grown into an instrument of great importance in the
co-ordination of policy at the highest level. It exists primarily to assist ministers
in the exercise of their collective responsibility through the Cabinet and its
committees: its functions include the orderly arrangement of business, the
recording of meetings and drafting of reports; and it is responsible for the
security of all Cabinet documents. Attached to the Cabinet Office, and an
integral part of it, is the Central Statistical Office, which is charged with the
collection from departments of statistics relating to the national economy, their
analysis, and their preparation as an agreed body of statistics to assist the
Government in formulating its economic and financial policy.
The Treasury Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the
First Lord of the Treasury (now always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor
of the Exchequer and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners
never meet as a board and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer assisted by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury (a Cabinet
Minister) and two junior ministers, the Financial Secretary and the Economic
Secretary. There is also a Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury, who is
the Chief Government Whip in the House of Commons.
The Treasury is responsible for the co-ordination of economic policy and
the control of public expenditure; it is also responsible for the efficient
management of the Civil Service, and is involved in the management of
other parts of the public service. Its financial and economic work is divided
into three functional groups dealing respectively with: financial and monetary
policy; public expenditure and resources; and co-ordination of economic
policy. The first of these groups covers overseas finance, home finance, aid
to territories overseas, and the inter-departmental co-ordination of external
economic policy; the second deals with public income and outlay in general
and with the main items of public expenditure; and the third is concerned
with the balance of the national economy as a whole and deals with short-
GOVERNMENT
Parliamentary
Counsel to the
Treasury
The Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Ordnance Survey
The Ministry of
Aviation
51
term economic trends, long-term reviews of resources, problems of economic
growth, and incomes policy.
On the management side, the Treasury is organised in two functional
groups. The first group is responsible for developing management services
and supervising organisation and methods of work, and includes specialised
divisions concerned with recruiting, training, manning and grading in the
Civil Service; the second group comprises divisions concerned with pay and
conditions of public servants.
The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is responsible for the drafting of
all Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions of Bills extending
exclusively to Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s Depart¬
ment. The Office drafts all financial and other parliamentary motions and
amendments moved by the Government during the passage of Bills through
Parliament; it advises departments on questions of parliamentary procedure;
and it attends sittings of both Houses of Parliament, and of their committees.
In addition, the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel drafts delegated legis¬
lation when specially instructed, and advises the Government on legal,
parliamentary and constitutional questions falling within its special
experience.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible in England
and Wales for administering Government policy for agriculture, horticulture
and fishing. The Ministry administers deficiency payments schemes and
various grants and subsidies designed to improve the efficiency of the
industries, and also gives free technical advice.
Schemes for the control and eradication of animal and plant diseases are
also administered by the Ministry, whose responsibilities extend to Scotland
in the operational control of certain diseases of animals.
In England and Wales the Ministry also deals with certain questions relating
to legislation about food, including labelling and advertising, slaughter¬
houses, and the quality and cleanliness of milk. Questions relating to the
supply and manufacture of food, its consumption, composition, preservation
and nutritional qualities, are dealt with by the Ministry for Great Britain
or the United Kingdom as a whole.
The Ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign
countries and participates in the work of certain international organisations
concerned with agriculture, fisheries and food, such as the Food and Agricul¬
ture Organisation of the United Nations.
The Ordnance Survey is administered by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, although it is itself responsible for its day-to-day
affairs. It is in charge of the survey and mapping of Great Britain—the
maps and plans resulting from the survey ranging in scale from 1/1,250
to 1/1,250,000. The Survey also undertakes a considerable amount of
agency work in compilation, drawing and printing for other departments,
particularly the Ministry of Defence, the Geological Survey and the Land
Registry.
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for the execution of Government
policy relating to civil aviation and the aircraft industry, the guided weapons
industry, the light metals fabricating industry and the electronics industry
(excluding telephones and telegraph equipment and electric lamps). It is also
responsible for certain aspects of space research and technology.
52
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Colonial
Office
The
Commonwealth
Relations Office
The Board of
Customs and
Excise
The Ministry’s civil aviation responsibilities include the regulation of
flying, the promotion of air safety and efficiency, the provision, administration
and equipment of State-controlled civil aerodromes and other ground services,
the organisation of research on, and development of, civil aircraft, the
negotiation of international air transport agreements, the registration of
aircraft, the licensing of aerodromes, operators and personnel, and research on
air navigation. The Minister of Aviation appoints the members of the
nationalised airline corporations and deals with various policy and financial
questions covering them. He also appoints the members of the Air Transport
Licensing Board.
The Ministry’s defence responsibilities include the supply of military
aircraft, guided and ballistic missiles, nuclear weapons, radar and other
electronic equipment for the fighting services; it is responsible for their
design and development, and carries out the necessary research.
The Colonial Office is concerned with the remaining dependent territories of
the United Kingdom. Each of these territories has its own administration
but the British Government has final responsibility for their good government
and for their relations with other countries. The staff of the Colonial Office
advise the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and the Colonies
on constitutional and other developments in the territories, and organise the
help they need. In this work the Colonial Office co-operates closely with the
Commonwealth Relations Office, the Foreign Office, and the Department of
Technical Co-operation.
The Colonial Office is to be merged with the Commonwealth Relations
Office in 1965.
The Commonwealth Relations Office links the British Government with the
Governments of the other member nations of the Commonwealth.
The duties of the Department are: to advise the Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Relations and the Colonies on policy affecting the other
members of the Commonwealth; to co-ordinate the work of the various
United Kingdom departments in so far as other Commonwealth countries
are concerned; to arrange consultation with other members of the Common¬
wealth on all matters of common concern; and to act as the main channel of
communication through which information is exchanged.
The Secretary of State also maintains relations with the Irish Republic
which, although no longer part of the Commonwealth, is not treated as a
foreign country.
The primary work of the Board of Customs and Excise is to collect and
administer the customs and excise duties imposed in the annual Finance Acts
or by other legislation, and to advise the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any
matters connected with them. The Board is also responsible for preventing and
detecting evasion of the revenue laws, including smuggling and illicit distillation.
The Board undertakes a wide range of non-revenue agency work for other
departments, for instance, the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions
on the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods, exchange
currency control, and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade
statistics from customs import and export documents.
The Ministry of The Government departments responsible for formulation of defence policy
Defence and for the control and administration of the three fighting Services were
GOVERNMENT
53
The Meteorological
Office
The Department
of Education
and Science
The Foreign
Office
The Forestry
Commission
completely re-organised in 1964. Previously the Ministry of Defence was
responsible for policy and the allocation of expenditure between the three
Services; and the Admiralty, the War Office and the Air Ministry were
responsible for the administration and day to day management of the Royal
Navy, the Army and the Royal Air Force respectively. These four separate
departments have now been merged to form one unified Ministry of Defence
which is responsible for all matters concerned with defence and with the three
Services. The Secretary of State for Defence is in charge of the department,
and there are three Ministers of Defence for the Royal Navy, Army and
Royal Air Force respectively, who have a particular responsibility for the
management of the individual Services, but who also assist the Secretary of
State in any general defence matters which he delegates to them.
The Meteorological Office provides the national weather service and meteoro¬
logical library. It supplies the material for sound and television forecasts and
much of the weather data published by the press. Local weather information
centres have been opened in London, Glasgow, Manchester and Southampton,
from which inquirers may get facts and forecasts, usually free of charge,
covering most of the northern hemisphere. The Office is also responsible for
meteorological, climatological, and geophysical research.
The Department of Education and Science is organised in two administrative
units. One of these is concerned with schools and other education (including
vocational, recreational and adult education and the youth service) in England
and Wales; the other deals with the universities and civil science throughout
Great Britain. The Department’s relations with the universities are conducted
through the University Grants Committee (see p. 166); its responsibilities for
civil science are discharged through a number of research councils (see p. 204).
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for the
whole work of the Department and is assisted by a Minister of State for each
of the two units. On general civil scientific policy, he is also advised by the
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy.
The Foreign Office, under the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, acts
as a channel of communication between the British Government and the
Governments of foreign States for the discussion and negotiation of all matters
falling within the field of international relations, including the drawing
up of international treaties and agreements. It also provides the means by
which the British Government is represented in the United Nations and on
other international bodies1 and is kept informed of developments in foreign
countries; by which British subjects and interests abroad are protected and
trade promoted; and by which British policy is explained to foreign
Governments and peoples.
The Forestry Commission, which is the national forest authority, with
its own annual Vote in the Estimates, is responsible for promoting the
interests of forestry, the development of afforestation and the production and
supply of timber in Great Britain, and for licensing the felling of growing
trees.
1 Other Government departments provide delegates and carry the expenses of con¬
tributions to many relevant international organisations (see pp. 51, 54, 173, 220,
253 and 432). In 1963 Britain’s contributions to the United Nations’ regular budget,
to the Special Accounts and Specialised Agencies amounted to some £13 million,
54
The General
Register Office
The Ministry of
Health
The Home
Office
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible for forest
policy in England and Wales, and the Secretary of State for Scotland in
Scotland.
The General Register Office is responsible under the Registrar General for
the regulation of civil marriages and for the administration of civil regis¬
tration in England and Wales, for the preparation of statistics and reports
relating to population, fertility, births, marriages, adoptions, diseases and
deaths and for taking the periodical census of the population. Responsibility
to Parliament rests with the Minister of Health.
The Ministry of Health is the Government department responsible (in
England and Wales) for the administration of the National Health Service
and for the welfare services run by local authorities for the aged, infirm,
blind deaf and other persons in need; and it has functions relating to too
hygiene and welfare foods. The Ministry is also concerned with the medical
and surgical treatment of war pensioners in England and Wales, the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man, or living in the Irish Republic.
The exercise of the Ministry’s functions in Wales has been delegated to
the Welsh Board of Health, the members of which are appointed by the
Minister of Health. r tt i u
The United Kingdom is represented by the Ministry of Health on the
World Health Organisation of the United Nations.
The head of the Home Office is the Secretary of State for the Home Depart¬
ment who is entrusted with all the responsibilities of national administration
which have not been especially assigned by law or convention to another
minister. The Home Secretary is the channel of communication between
Sovereign and subjects, and between the United Kingdom Government and
the Governments of Northern Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle
of Man. ^ . j
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are: the
maintenance of law and order; the efficiency of the police service; the treat¬
ment of offenders, including juvenile offenders; the efficacy of the probation
service; the organisation of magistrates’ courts; the introduction of legislation
on criminal justice; the efficiency of the fire service; the care of children by
local authorities and voluntary organisations; the regulation of the employment
of children and young persons; the law relating to the conduct of parliamentary
and local government elections; public safety and civil defence; immigration
control and naturalisation of aliens; and general questions and individual
cases relating to British nationality and citizenship of the United Kingdom
and Colonies.
Other matters for which the Home Office is responsible include: receiving
and submitting addresses and petitions to the Sovereign and preparing
presentations to Parliament; preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal
proceedings for the bestowal of honours; advising the Crown on the exercise
of the prerogative of mercy; making and receiving requests for the extradition
of criminals; sanctioning by-laws made by local authorities in so far as they
relate to ‘law and order’ and ‘good governance’; granting licences for scientific
experiments on animals; ordering the exhumation and removal of bodies;
supervising the control of explosives, firearms and dangerous drugs; and
administering the State Management Scheme for control of the liquor trade
in the Carlisle district.
Interior of a
polling station.
The ballot-box
is escorted to
the Returning
Officer for the count.
GOVERNMENT
55
The Ministry of The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is generally responsible for
Housing local government in England and Wales, and exercises powers in regard to
and Local housing, town and country planning, water, sewerage, and other services
uovernmen administered by local authorities. It is responsible for sanctioning loans for
most purposes for which local authorities require to borrow money and for
acting as the main link between local authorities and the central Government.
As the central housing authority, the Minister supervises the administration
of the housing statutes and the national housing programme; and his officers
keep in close touch with the local housing authorities in England and Wales.
Local authority proposals for dealing with slum clearance are also submitted
to him.
The town and country planning work of the Ministry includes the framing
and execution of the national policy on the use and development of land for
the purpose of achieving the best use of land in the public interest. The
functions of the Minister include confirmation of the acquisition and disposal
of land by local authorities; and the payment of grants in certain cases of
acquisition, clearing and compensation. The Minister also has responsibilities
in connection with the designation of new towns and national parks, the
development corporations of the new towns, the National Parks Commission
and the Commission for New Towns.
The Minister of Housing and Local Government is also the Minister for
Welsh Affairs.
The Central
Office of
Information
The Central Office of Information is a common service department which
produces information and publicity material, and supplies publicity services
required by all other Government departments. In the United Kingdom it
conducts Government display press, television and poster advertising (except
for the National Savings Committee), produces and distributes booklets,
leaflets, films, television material, exhibitions, photographs and other visual
material, carries out social surveys, and distributes departmental press
notices. For the overseas departments it supplies British information posts
overseas with press, radio and television material, booklets, magazines,
reference services, films, exhibitions, photographs, display and reading-room
material; manages schemes for promoting the overseas sale of British books,
periodicals and newspapers; arranges tours in the United Kingdom for
official visitors from overseas; and provides exhibition stands at trade fairs
(for the Board of Trade). Administratively the Central Office of Information
is responsible to Treasury ministers, while the ministers whose departments
it serves are responsible for the policy expressed in its work.
The Board of The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax
Inland Revenue and surtax, profits tax, stamp duty, estate duty and certain other direct
taxes of lesser importance, and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on
any matters connected with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of
real property for such purposes as compensation for compulsory purchase,
local rates in England and Wales, and estate duty, and it collects tithe redemp¬
tion annuities.
The Ministry The Ministry of Labour co-operates with other Government departments on
of Labour matters of general employment policy, including the distribution of industry,
and the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment.
One of the Ministry’s principal functions is to help employees to find the
work best suited to them and to assist employers to obtain suitable employees;
c
56
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Departments
to this end, it operates a national system of employment exchanges, which
includes a Professional and Executive Register at 38 of the larger exchanges.
It also operates government schemes for vocational training and is concerned
with the central administration of the Youth Employment Service, which is
provided locally by the Ministry of Labour or the local authority, and it
provides the Disablement Resettlement Service which helps disabled persons
to secure employment.
Other functions of the department include: the resettlement in civilian
employment of men released from the armed forces; the supervision, through
the Factory Inspectorate, of safety, health and welfare measures for workers
in industry and commerce; the collection and publication of labour statistics
of all kinds; the promotion of good industrial relations; and the provision
of services for conciliation, arbitration and investigation in industrial
disputes.
Responsibility for the relations of the United Kingdom Government with
the International Labour Organisation rests with the Ministry, which also
deals with overseas questions about labour and employment and with the
employment of foreign workers in Great Britain.
Besides these principal functions, the Ministry undertakes agency work for
other Government departments in connection with National Insurance,
National Assistance, repayment of income tax to unemployed persons, and
the issue of passports.
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales (the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General) are responsible for the legal advice given to the
Government; in addition, they have a wide range of duties in relation to the
courts. The Attorney General, who is the senior Law Officer, is the Crown’s
representative in the courts, and legal proceedings for the enforcement of
public rights and on behalf of the interests of charity are conducted in his
name. His consent is required to the institution of criminal proceedings for
certain offences, and the Director of Public Prosecutions is subject to his
superintendence. The Queen’s Proctor, who has certain duties connected
with the operation of the divorce laws, also exercises his functions under the
direction of the Attorney General. The Solicitor General is subject to the
authority of the Attorney General, with the same rights and duties. The Law
Officers, who are appointed from among the leading members of the English
Bar and are always members of the House of Commons, are assisted by a
small professional staff.
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an
eminent ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar and carrying Cabinet
rank.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian
of the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different
offices and branches which are mainly concerned with legal practice and
procedure. He controls the personnel and machinery of the courts of law
through his patronage, through administrative powers conferred by the
Judicature Act, 1925, and other Acts, through his membership of the Rules
Committee of the Supreme Court and his responsibility for that of the county
courts; he appoints the justices of the peace and recommends to the Crown
other appointments to the judiciary in England and Wales; and he is the
minister responsible for the Judge Advocate General’s Department, which
advises the Secretary of State for Defence and the Defence Council on legal
GOVERNMENT
The Paymaster
General’s Office
The Ministry of
Pensions and
National
Insurance
The National
Assistance Board
The Post Office
57
mstters concerning the administration of military and air force law, and
which reviews the proceedings of army and air force courts martial.1
In addition, the Lord Chancellor is a leading member of the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council; he appoints the chairmen of certain admin¬
istrative tribunals in England and Wales, and (with the Secretary of State
for Scotland) the members of the Council on Tribunals, and is responsible
for the administration of the Land Registry (which maintains a State register
of title to land), the Public Trustee Office (which may act as the executor
or administrator of the estate of a deceased person or as a trustee under a
will or settlement) and the Public Record Office (which preserves, and
provides access to, the national archives).
The Paymaster General s Office acts generally as a banker for Government
departments other than the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and
Excise, and the Post Office, for all of which separate arrangements exist.
Money granted by Parliament is transferred (in such sums as may be required
from day to day) from the Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster
General at the Bank of England. Most departmental payments are made by
means of payable orders drawn on the Paymaster General’s Office; these are
similar to cheques, and their recipients obtain payments through the com¬
mercial banks, whose accounts at the Bank of England are in turn reimbursed
by the Paymaster General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many public
service pensions, including those of civil servants, teachers, and members of
the National Health Service, as well as the retired pay and pensions of officers
of the armed forces, their widows and dependants.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance is responsible (i) for the
social security services established by the Family Allowances Acts, the National
Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, and
for reciprocal social security arrangements with other countries, and (2) for
the award and payment of pensions and allowances for disablement or death
due to service in the armed forces of the Crown (including service in the
Home Guard), or due to war injuries sustained by naval auxiliaries, merchant
seamen, civil defence personnel and civilians in the second world war, and
for the welfare of pensioners and their dependants and war orphans. In
addition to its responsibilities for war pensioners in the United Kingdom
and in the Irish Republic, the Ministry is responsible for the administration of
war pensions and for the medical treatment of war disablement of United
Kingdom pensioners living in Northern Ireland and, through its various
agencies, in other countries overseas. The Ministry maintains an office in
Ottawa to serve pensioners in North America.
The National Assistance Board is responsible to Parliament through the
Minister of Pensions and National Insurance for the administration of the
State service of financial assistance to persons in need and unable to maintain
themselves and of the non-contributory pension scheme under the Old Age
Pensions Act, 1936; it is also responsible for assessing the means of persons
applying for legal aid.
The Post Office, which is controlled by the Postmaster General, operates
the inland postal, telegraph, telephone and remittance services and, in
1 The Judge Advocate of the Fleet is responsible for these matters in the Royal Navy.
58
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry of
Power
The Department
of the
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor
co-operation with other countries and interests, the corresponding overseas
services.
Through its 25,000 post offices it also undertakes numerous agency
functions, including the operation of the Post Office Savings Bank, the issue
of savings certificates and bonds, the sale of broadcast receiving and other
licences, the sale of stamps for National Insurance contributions, and the
payment of grants and allowances, such as National Insurance payments,
retirement pensions and family allowances. A considerable volume of scientific
research and technical development relating to telephone, telegraph and radio
systems and the mechanisation of the postal services is carried out by the
engineering staff of the Post Office.
All Post Office income is paid into, and all its outgoings are met from, a
self-contained fund under the control of the Postmaster General.
The Postmaster General is also responsible to Parliament for broad questions
of national policy concerning the sound and television broadcasting services.
The Ministry of Power has the general duty of ensuring the effective and
co-ordinated development of fuel and power supplies in Great Britain, and
of promoting economy and efficiency in their distribution and consumption.
The business of producing and distributing gas and electricity and of pro¬
ducing coal is operated by the boards of the three nationalised industries
whose members are responsible to the Minister on policy issues. The
Ministry is also responsible for Government relations with the petroleum
industry; it regulates the construction and operation of privately owned
industrial pipelines; it has certain functions in relation to the iron and steel
industries; and it is specifically responsible for the use of atomic energy as
a source of industrial power and for the safety of nuclear installations other
than those operated by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
The Ministry is concerned with the general co-ordination of fuel research;
it administers the legislation governing the safety and health of workers in
or about coal mines, metalliferous mines and quarries, and it conducts or
arranges for research on these matters and on other specific projects.
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number
of Government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his Depart¬
ment include drafting and preparing litigation and prosecutions, representing
other departments in court, and giving general advice on the interpretation
and application of the law. The Department undertakes a considerable
amount of conveyancing connected with the transfer of real property and
with the administration of the residuary estates (undisposed of by will)
of certain deceased persons, and it deals with the outstanding property
and rights of dissolved companies. The Statutory Publications Office is
staffed and controlled by the Treasury Solicitor, who reports annually to the
Statute Law Committee (a body appointed by the Lord Chancellor from
among the judiciary and legal profession in England and Scotland) on its
work.
Some Government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury
Solicitor for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a proportion
of the work and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice, and often,
for conveyancing; and others, whose administrative work is based on or deals
with a code of specialised law or involves a great deal of legal work, have
their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also Procurator General (Queen’s Proctor).
GOVERNMENT
59
The Ministry of* 1 he Ministry of Public Building and Works is the point of contact within
PUH1W B^“lding the Government for the construction and the building materials industries;
and Works it ^as general responsibility for co-ordinating information about current and
future building programmes and for advising on the level of public building
activity; and is also responsible for statutory regulation of building. Regular
consultation with the industries at national and regional levels and a
comprehensive statistical service are maintained. The Ministry is responsible
for research and development work carried out in connection with public
building and for disseminating the results, of which the construction
industries are encouraged to make full use.
Other functions of the Ministry are: the execution of works services for
the Ministry of Defence; the provision of office accommodation for Govern¬
ment departments (including public buildings overseas), and of research
establishments and many other types of accommodation required by civil
and Service departments; the design, purchase, supply and maintenance
of furniture and equipment for Government departments and certain other
bodies, and their supplies of fuel, household articles and stores; the admin¬
istration of the Ancient Monuments Acts and the maintenance of those
ancient monuments and historic buildings which are in its charge; the making
of grants, on the advice of the Historic Buildings Councils, towards the
maintenance of historic buildings of outstanding interest; the maintenance
of royal palaces and certain official residences; services for certain State
ceremonial occasions; the management and maintenance of the royal parks
and certain other open spaces.
The Department
of Scientific and
Industrial
Research
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is under the
charge of a Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, the members of
which are appointed by the Secretary of State for Education and Science, after
consultation with the President of the Royal Society.
The DSIR promotes and organises industrial research and disseminates the
results of such research. In particular, it may (a) encourage and support
scientific research in universities, technical colleges and other institutions,
(b) establish and develop institutions for investigations and research relating
to trade and industry, (c) take steps to further the practical application of the
results of scientific and industrial research (except in defence, atomic energy,
medicine and agriculture), and (d) make grants for these purposes and for
postgraduate instruction. The DSIR administers fifteen research establish¬
ments, and it aids with grants over 50 autonomous industrial research associa¬
tions that are financed mainly by industrial memberships.
The Government has proposed the transfer of the functions of the DSIR
to three new research agencies and, to a minor extent, to the Department of
Education and Science.
The Stationery Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, responsible to the Chancellor of the
Office Exchequer, is the central agency for Government printing, binding and
publishing, and for providing Government departments with duplicating,
addressing and distributing services, office machinery, equipment and
supplies, commercially published books and periodicals, and desk stationery.
It also provides certain of these services for the armed forces of the Crown.
The Controller is Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament and in him is
vested the copyright of all British Government documents. About a third
of all official printing, including all parliamentary needs, is done in the
Stationery Office’s ten printing and binding works, the remainder being
6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
carried out by private printers under contract. As Government publisher, the
Stationery Office is responsible, through its nine government bookshops as
well as the normal bookselling channels at home and abroad, for sales of
official publications. It is also the United Kingdom agent for United States,
Canadian and Italian government publications and for those of the principal
international and European inter-governmental organisations.
The Department The Department of Technical Co-operation, under the Secretary for
of Technical Technical Co-operation, co-ordinates, promotes and carries out arrangements
Go-operation for providing countries outside the United Kingdom with technical assistance
in the fields of economic development, administration and social service.
The Department is responsible for the funds provided by the United Kingdom
Government under the Colombo Plan, the Special Commonwealth Assistance
Plan for Africa (SCAAP) and other programmes of technical assistance,
including those under the auspices of the United Nations. Its activities
include the recruitment of staff (principally from the United Kingdom) in
response to requests from overseas Governments and international organisa¬
tions and meeting requests by overseas Governments for assistance in the
training of their nationals in the United Kingdom. It administers the Overseas
Service Aid Scheme, under which Britain reimburses to certain Common¬
wealth independent and dependent Governments part of the cost of employing
experienced staff to help with government until they can be replaced by local
people.
The Department has responsibility for the Directorate of Overseas
(Geodetic and Topographical) Surveys and Overseas Geological Surveys,
and the Anti-Locust Research Centre. It finances research projects in the
United Nations and elsewhere for the benefit of developing countries and it
co-operates with other organisations in the United Kingdom concerned with
technical assistance.
The Board of The Board of Trade, under the Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and
Trade Regional Development and President of the Board of Trade, has a general
responsibility in respect of the United Kingdom’s commerce, industry and
overseas trade, including commercial relations with other countries, import
and export trade, the protective tariff, industrial development and consumer
protection. It is responsible for general distribution of industry policy and
for the co-ordination of the work of departments concerned with regional
development.
It is also responsible for promotion of exports, statistics of trade and
industry (both at home and abroad), including the censuses of production
and distribution, and the administration of certain regulative legislation, for
example in relation to patents, registered designs, copyright, trade marks,
weights and measures, merchandise marks, companies, bankruptcy, insurance,
distribution of industry, films, and enemy property.
In addition, the Board of Trade is the department generally responsible
for Government relations with all industries which are not specifically the
concern of other departments. In this connection, it provides both a channel
of communication with and a point of contact for these industries, and a
central place at which knowledge about them is accumulated, analysed, and
used as a basis for advising ministers and other departments. The main
industries which fall outside the scope of the Board of Trade’s specific
concern are food, agriculture and fisheries, building and quarrying, iron and
steel, shipbuilding, fuel and power, and transport.
GOVERNMENT
6l
The Ministry of The Ministry of Transport has powers and duties relating to inland transport,
Transport shipping and shipbuilding.
As the department responsible for inland transport, the Ministry has
certain statutory duties relating to railways, roads, road transport and inland
waterways. The Minister of Transport appoints the members of the nation¬
alised transport boards (British Railways Board, London Transport Board,
British Transport Docks Board, British Waterways Board and Transport
Holding Company) and agrees the general lines on which their development
programmes are drawn up. He is the highway authority for trunk roads and
motorways in England and Wales, allocates the funds provided by Parliament
for road expenditure in England and Wales (including grants for classified
roads vested in local authorities) and has many powers and duties relating
to road traffic and safety.
On the shipping side, the Ministry is generally responsible for Government
policy towards the shipping, boat building and ship repairing industries,
advising the Government on their state and prospects, seeking to help them
within the framework of Government policy, and promoting their prosperity
in the international field. The Ministry also administers the provisions of the
Merchant Shipping Acts in regard to ships, their masters, officers and men;
safety of life at sea; navigation (including pilotage, lighthouses and other
aids to safety in navigation); and wreck and salvage; it is responsible
for the provision and operation of troopships and for the Coastguard
Service; and it is concerned with harbours, docks, piers and river
conservancy.
SCOTLAND The Secretary of State is responsible in Scotland for a wide range of functions
which in England and Wales are divided among a number of departmental
ministers. He is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State and three
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law
Officers.
The Secretary of State’s functions are discharged by four main departments
of equal status (the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland,
the Scottish Development Department, the Scottish Education Department,
and the Scottish Home and Health Department), each under a Secretary
responsible to the Secretary of State.
The day-to-day administration of the departments is conducted in
Edinburgh, but each department has representatives in London for liaison and
parliamentary duties. The London office is generally known as the Scottish
Office, the term also used to describe all Scottish administration for which
the Secretary of State is responsible.
The Scottish Ministers are advised and assisted (particularly in relation
to questions with which more than one of the departments are concerned
or which fall outside the province of any of them) by the Permanent
Under-Secretary of State, Scottish Office, who is free from departmental
duties.
The Department has a general responsibility for, and in most cases admin¬
isters, Government measures for the promotion and development of farming
in Scotland. In certain of these functions the Department is assisted by eleven
agricultural executive committees, constituted of members of the agricultural
industry and organised on an area basis.
The Department has responsibilities for the oversight and protection of
the Scottish inshore, deep sea and fresh-water fisheries. It also has functions
The Department
of Agriculture
and Fisheries
for Scotland
62
The Scottish
Development
Department
The Scottish
Education
Department
The Scottish
Home and
Health
Department
Other
Administrative
Departments
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
relating to harbours, to steamer services in the Highlands and Islands and to
general questions concerning Highland development.
The Scottish Development Department is concerned with a number of the
main services affecting the physical development of Scotland, such as town
and country planning (including new towns), housing, roads, water supplies
and sewerage, and the prevention of river and air pollution (most of which
are administered locally by town and county councils) and with the Secretary
of State’s functions in regard to the Electricity Boards in Scotland. The
Department is responsible for general policy on local government, including
valuation and rating, and for the allocation of the Exchequer general and
equalisation grants. It advises the Secretary of State on Scottish economic
development generally.
The Scottish Education Department supervises the administration of the
Education (Scotland) Acts and guides the development of public education
in Scotland in all its forms. The Department’s functions include: the super¬
vision of the training of teachers and the issue of teachers’ certificates; the
regulation of teachers’ salaries and the administration of the Teachers
(Superannuation) (Scotland) Regulations; the control and distribution of
specific Exchequer grants in aid of educational expenditure; and the award
of students’ allowances to those taking full-time courses at universities and
colleges of education. The Department also exercises general supervision over
the child care and adoption services, remand homes, and approved schools
and is concerned with the administration of the Royal Scottish Museum.
The Scottish Home and Health Department is responsible for: (a) the
central administration of functions relating to law and order; and (b) the
health and welfare services in Scotland. Under (a) the Department is con¬
cerned with the police and probation services, criminal justice, legal aid and
the services needed by the courts, and is directly responsible for the adminis¬
tration of prisons and borstal institutions. It is also the central authority in
Scotland for the fire service, for civil defence, and for legislation concerning
shops, theatres, cinemas and licensed premises (which are directly maintained
by the Department in districts in which State management is in operation).
Under (b) the Department is responsible for the administration of the National
Health Service. Its work in connection with the associated welfare services
includes the supervision of local arrangements for the aged and handicapped,
and medical and surgical treatment for war pensioners.
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish
departments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the
Secretary of State. Such departments include the Scottish Information
Office, which undertakes information services on behalf of the Scottish
departments and, in some degree, for Great Britain departments in Scotland,
and acts as the agent in Scotland of the Central Office of Information; the
Department of the Registrar-General for Scotland (the General Registry
Office); the Scottish Record Office; and the Department of the Registers
of Scotland. There are also Scottish branches of the Great Britain and
United Kingdom departments under the direction of controllers, who are
responsible for ensuring that the execution in Scotland of the policy and
procedure of their departments is in accordance with Scottish conditions
and needs.
GOVERNMENT
The Law
Officers and
Legal
Departments
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The Ministry
Commerce
The Ministry
Finance
63
The Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the
Solicitor General for Scotland) are the chief legal advisers to the Government
on Scottish questions and the principal representatives of the Crown for the
purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is also closely concerned
with questions of legal policy and administration and is himself responsible
for the institution and direction of all prosecutions on indictment in Scotland,
and the control of summary prosecutions in the sheriff court.
In some of this work the Lord Advocate is assisted by the Lord Advocate’s
Department, the members of which also act as departmental advisers on
Scottish questions to certain Government departments who have no Scottish
legal adviser of their own. The work relevant to prosecutions is centred in the
Crown Office in Edinburgh.
The Parliamentary Draftsmen for Scotland are incorporated in the Lord
Advocate’s Department and are responsible to the minister concerned and
to the Law Officers for the drafting of all Government Bills in so far as they
affect the law of Scotland. Their responsibilities in this connection are
similar to those of the Parliamentary Counsel to the Treasury.
Executive and administrative powers on matters under the jurisdiction of
the Northern Ireland Parliament are vested in the Crown, and exercised
by the Governor, acting on the advice of the Northern Ireland Cabinet,
through a number of departments. At present there are Ministries of Agricul¬
ture, Commerce, Education, Finance, Health and Local Government, Home
Affairs, and Labour and National Insurance and, in addition, a National
Assistance Board and an Exchequer and Audit Department. A re-grouping
of departments, to bring them into line with current needs, awaits legislative
sanction. The Ministries of Home Affairs, Education and Agriculture have
functions implicit in their titles. The duties of the other departments are
summarised below.
of The Ministry of Commerce is concerned with industrial information and
statistical services; the progress of industrial production and trade in
Northern Ireland; the development of existing enterprises and the attraction
of new ones; and the administration of schemes of financial assistance to
industry. The department also has responsibilities in relation to electricity
and gas undertakings; harbours; the tourist trade; the regulation and
inspection of mines and quarries; mineral development; scientific develop¬
ment; weights and measures; the registration of companies and friendly
societies; and the administration of the Assurance Companies Acts and the
Industrial Assurance Acts.
of The basic functions of the Ministry of Finance are the financial administration
of the Government of Northern Ireland and the management of the Civil
Service. In connection with these functions the Ministry is responsible
for the control of borrowing, the issue of Ulster Savings securities, Govern¬
ment loans to local or public authorities, the collection of stamp duties,
death duties and certain excise duties, the payment of university grants,
the collection of land purchase annuities and the staffing, recruitment and
training of the Civil Service and the regulation of its conditions.
Other functions of the Ministry include the provision of buildings for the
Northern Ireland Government and certain departments of the United
Kingdom Government, the preservation of ancient monuments, the Public
Record Office, valuation, ordnance survey, the Land Registry and the Registry
64
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry of
Health and
Local
Government
The Ministry of
Labour and
National
Insurance
of Deeds, censuses, the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and
certain duties in relation to charities and charitable funds.
The Office of the Parliamentary Draftsmen, which prepares Bills for
introduction into Parliament, is attached to the Ministry.
The Ministry of Health and Local Government is responsible for the general
supervision of the Health Service in Northern Ireland, which is broadly
similar to the National Health Service in Great Britain: the administration
of the various aspects of the service is in the hands of the Hospitals Authority,
the General Health Services Board, and the local health authorities. The
Ministry also exercises functions under the Housing Acts (Northern Ireland),
supervising the house-building programmes of, and distributing grants to,
local housing authorities and the Northern Ireland Housing Trust. It also
supervises various other functions of local authorities, including planning,
public health, welfare, water, and sewerage services (many of which attract
specific grants-in-aid) and it controls the issue of central financial aid to local
authorities.
The Ministry of Labour and National Insurance is responsible for the
administration of the Factories Acts and other legislation connected with
industrial health and welfare; for the promotion in industry of joint machinery
for negotiation and for assistance in the prevention and settlement of
industrial disputes; for the administration of the Wages Councils Act; for
the administration of local employment offices and training centres and the
machinery for dealing with employment questions of all kinds under the
Employment and Training Act, the Youth Employment Service Act, and
the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act; for the administration of the
National Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries)
Acts, and of the Family Allowances Acts; and for carrying out certain
statutory functions in connection with the National Assistance scheme in
conjunction with the National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of
a political or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose
remuneration is found wholly and directly out of money voted by Parliament.
The number of civil servants under this definition is about a million, for it
includes several hundred thousand Government industrial employees in such
establishments as Royal Ordnance factories and Admiralty dockyards. The
term ‘Civil Service’ is, however, generally used only to cover ‘non-industrial’
members of the staffs of the various Government departments in the United
Kingdom or working overseas. The total number of non-industrial civil
servants employed in all departments, at home and overseas, is over 689,ooo1;
one-third are women.
Although the civil servant is legally a servant of the Crown, in practice
he serves the minister in charge of the department in which he works by
advising on the formulation of policy and by carrying out policy decisions
once they have been taken. From time to time the minister changes but the
civil servant remains to serve his successor. In Britain changes of government
1 Including part-time staffs—two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent to
one whole-time officer.
Development
the Modern
Civil Service
Control of the
Service
Civil Service
Classes
GOVERNMENT 65
do not involve changes in departmental personnel, since it is considered that
continuity makes for administrative stability.
of The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years.
Before then, departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying
standards were unknown, there was no central supervision, and political
jobbery was rife. Measures of reform instigated during the nineteenth
century included the substitution of open competition for the practice of
obtaining civil service appointments by favour or purchase, and the establish¬
ment of an independent body, the Civil Service Commission, to organise
recruitment to the service. The great expansion in State activity in the last
fifty years, and the consequent increase in the numbers of civil servants and
the scope of their duties, have led to further reorganisation: recruitment
competitions have been adapted to a developing educational system; co¬
ordination between the various departments has been improved; and many
commissions and committees of inquiry have been appointed by the
Government to make recommendations for increased efficiency in the conduct
of public business. Moreover, civil servants, though they remain employees
of their departments, have become members of an integrated service with
common conditions of employment and their traditions and standards of
conduct belong, not to individual departments, but to the Civil Service as
a whole.
Uniformity in the Civil Service derives mainly from the fact that the
Treasury exercises general control. One of the two Joint Permanent Secre¬
taries to the Treasury is the official head of the Home Civil Service and the
principal adviser of the Prime Minister on matters affecting the Civil Service
as a whole, and in particular on appointments to senior posts in the service.
The Treasury is responsible for the salaries and conditions of employment
of civil servants and for the central management of the general service classes;
it controls the total number of staff and the creation of higher posts, maintains
a Management Services Department which, among other things, serves all
departments which do not maintain an organisation and methods branch of
their own, and deals with general questions relating to training after entry into
the Civil Service. It is also concerned with the number of departments and the
distribution of functions between them.
Because modern government touches almost every aspect of life, the Civil
Service comprises officers with a wide variety of professional and technical
qualifications. Where officers of a particular type are required in more than
one department they are organised in general service or linked departmental
classes. This ensures similar grading and salary structures for the same type
of officer in each department. The main classes are:
1. The Administrative Class, which is responsible for advising ministers on
policy, for dealing with any difficulties which may arise in carrying out
existing policy and for forecasting the probable effects of new measures
and regulations. This relatively small class, which numbers about 2,550,
is recruited largely from the universities: non-graduates, however, form
at least one-third of the total.
2. The Executive Classes (General and Departmental, numbering some
75,000), which are responsible for the day-to-day conduct of Government
business, including, for instance, the higher work of accounts and
66
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
The Diplomatic
Service
revenue collection, within the framework of established policy. Members
of these classes may, after entry, train for specialist work such as that of
auditor, actuary or statistician.
3. The Specialist Classes, which number about 126,000 in a variety of
different categories, carry out the wide range of specialised activities
which are now undertaken by the Government. The categories include
accountants, architects, doctors, engineers, lawyers, surveyors and
scientists in all branches of science. The professionally qualified staff
are assisted by a large number of technical and drawing office staffs.
4. The Clerical Class (the largest of the main classes, comprising about
130,000 officers), which undertakes all the usual clerical work involved
in running departmental business, for instance, the preparation of
accounts and the keeping of records, the handling of particular claims
in accordance with known rules, and the summarising and annotation
of documents for the assistance of senior officers.
5. The Ancillary Clerical Classes (with about 100,000 members), which
include clerical assistants, shorthand typists and typists, duplicator
operators and a rapidly increasing number of machine-operating grades.
6. Messengerial and Minor Classes (with some 34,000 members) which, in
addition to messengers, include paper keepers, office cleaners and
similar workers.
In addition there are departmental classes where employment is peculiar
to one department. The main example is the Post Office with its postmen
(115,000), telephone operators (53,000), postal and telegraph officers (23,000)
and a wide range of staff for the installation, maintenance and development
of the telephone, telegraph and wireless systems. Other examples are the
Factory Inspectorate of the Ministry of Labour and the Schools Inspectorate
of the Ministry of Education and Science.
The Government of Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service which deals
with matters transferred to its jurisdiction under the Government of Ireland
Act, 1920. Subject to regional differences, the Northern Ireland Civil Service
is modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain, but recruitment to permanent
and pensionable posts is effected through the medium of a separate Civil
Service Commission. Interchange of staff between the two Civil Services
occurs to a minor extent only, and is a matter for departmental agreement
in individual cases.
Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service will come into existence on 1st January,
1965, and will take over the duties and posts of the present Foreign,
Commonwealth and Trade Commission Services. The Foreign Office and
Commonwealth Relations Office will continue to be separate Departments of
State in London, responsible to separate Secretaries of State, with their
staffs drawn from the Diplomatic Service.
Her Majesty’s Diplomatic Service will be a separate Service of the Crown,
providing an interchangeable staff for service both at home (in the Common¬
wealth Relations Office or Foreign Office or on secondment to Departments
of the Home Civil Service) and at British diplomatic and consular posts
abroad. It will have its own grade structure, corresponding by salary with the
grades of the Administrative, Executive and Clerical Classes of the Home
Civil Service; it will also have Secretarial, Communications and Security
GOVERNMENT
Public Services
of Overseas
Dependent
Territories
Recruitment of
Staff
Training after
Entry
Promotion
67
Guard branches. Various specialists and advisers from Home Departments
or the Armed Forces may serve at overseas posts on secondment or attachment
to the Diplomatic Service.
The Governments of dependent territories fill vacancies in their public
services by the appointment of suitably qualified local candidates wherever
possible; but because not all vacancies can be filled in this way, the Department
of Technical Co-operation and the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments
and Administrations are asked to recruit other candidates, principally from
the United Kingdom.
The recruitment of permanent civil servants in the Home Civil Service of
Great Britain and the present Foreign Service is in the hands of the Civil
Service Commission which, in the selection of entrants, is independent of both
ministerial and parliamentary control; its members are appointed by the
Crown on the advice of the Government. The normal method of entry is by
open competition, conducted in accordance with regulations approved by
the Treasury and consisting of written examination or interviews, or both.
The main points of entry into the main classes of the Home Civil Service
are planned to correspond to definite levels in the British educational
system, and it is the Commission’s duty to study the requirements of the
Civil Service in the light of the education provided by the schools and
universities.
Temporary civil servants are normally recruited by the department
concerned. No special qualifying examinations are required.
Each of the larger Government departments has a training officer and a
number of instructors, who organise both general and technical courses,
ranging from courses of systematic instruction for recruits in all classes to
‘refresher’ courses covering technical subjects or broader subjects such as
management and supervision for more experienced staff.
Methods of training include discussion groups, case studies, instructional
films, and educational visits to enable civil servants to study the working of
appropriate outside bodies. Officers in the early years of their service may be
transferred from branch to branch and, more rarely, from department to
department, in order that they may gain as wide an experience as possible of
Civil Service activities, and there are openings for selected officers to travel
abroad or to study at universities and other educational establishments.
Special facilities are also available for officers who take up private studies,
the degree of assistance depending upon the vocational value of the subject.
Training is co-ordinated by the Training and Education Division of the
Treasury, which also runs central courses for members of the administrative,
professional and scientific classes at different stages of their careers. In
addition, the division trains departmental instructors and other special
groups, for instance, superintendents of typists, audio-typists, and secretaries.
A period of probation (lasting from one to two years according to grade, with
extensions in certain instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent
Civil Service. Promotions from grade to grade are made by departments;
those from class to class partly through centrally conducted competitions (open
only to serving members of specified Civil Service classes), and partly by
departments themselves. All promotions to the administrative class from
other classes require Treasury approval. Promotions to most of the highest
68
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Conditions of
Service
Political and
Private
Activities
positions in the Civil Service, i.e. permanent secretary, deputy secretary,
principal establishments officer and principal finance officer, must be approved
by the Prime Minister; he is advised in these matters by the official head of
the Home Civil Service.
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service
as a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council,1 which is composed
jointly of official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate
sections of the service is provided through the various staff associations which
civil servants are encouraged to join (for instance, the Civil Service Clerical
Association, the Union of Post Office Workers, the Society of Civil Servants,
the Institution of Professional Civil Servants, and the Association of First
Division Civil Servants), and through departmental Whitley Councils (of
which there are about 70).
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is intended to compare
fairly with that paid for similar work outside the service, and usually he
receives annual increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to
which he belongs. In addition, although a civil servant holds office at the
pleasure of the Crown and may therefore be dismissed at any time, in practice
he enjoys a considerable measure of security of tenure. Thus every perma¬
nent civil servant may reasonably expect a full career in the public service,
and a pension on retirement2—though this, again, is not a legal right.
Civil servants are generally ‘conditioned’ to a given number of hours of
attendance a week. Overtime is paid to members of most of the lower salary
groups if they work longer. The standard working week for office staffs is
42 hours in London (41 in 1965) and 43 hours in the provinces. Annual leave
varies according to grade up to a maximum of six weeks, i.e. 30 working days,
a year. Sick leave on full pay, less any national insurance benefit received,
may be granted to permanent civil servants for up to six months in any twelve
months, and on reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s sick leave in any
four years; any officer whose health is permanently impaired may be retired on
medical grounds.
Officially, the position and functions of a civil servant remain the same
whichever political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government
of the day irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which a
civil servant, as a private individual, is free to participate in political activities
varies according to grade. For this purpose civil servants are divided into
three groups: those who are completely free to engage in all kinds of national
and local political activities (although if they intend standing for Parliament,
they must resign their appointment before nomination day3); those who are
free, subject to the acceptance of the need for discretion and with the per¬
mission of the department, to take part in most activities except parliamentary
candidature; and those who are debarred from national political activities
though they may seek permission to take part in local government and
political activities in the local field. In the non-industrial Civil Service, the
completely free groups are the manipulative grades of the Post Office, and
1 Whitley Councils are representative bodies for negotiation and joint consultation
between managements and staffs; the councils are named after Mr. J. H. Whitley,
former Speaker of the House of Commons and chairman of a committee which investi¬
gated industrial unrest from 1916 to 1919.
2 Temporary civil servants are eligible for pensions after 20 years’ continuous service.
3 Any civil servant in this group who is not elected will be reinstated in his previous
capacity on application within a week of the declaration of an election result.
GOVERNMENT
69
Security
the minor grades such as cleaners and messengers. The intermediate group
includes mainly clerical and typing grades, and the granting of permission
by the department depends, broadly, on the work that they do. The group
which is not allowed to take part in national political activities includes the
executive, the professional, the scientific and technical, and the administrative
grades. In general, because the reputation of the service must be closely
guarded, permission to take part in local political activities will be refused
to members of this group if the local activities are conducted on the same
party lines and through the same party organisations as national political
activities. Where permission is granted, it is subject to a code of discretion
and to the obligation to notify the department of election or co-option to a
local council.
Civil servants of every grade may, of course, exercise the right of all
citizens to register their private political opinions on appropriate occasions,
for instance, at general or local authority elections. They may also
engage in such private activities as they wish, provided that these do not in
any way conflict with their official duties, nor with the provisions of the Official
Secrets Acts, 1911 and 1920, and the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1906.
Since, however, a civil servant must not use his official position to further his
private interests, he is subject to certain restrictions in commerce and business:
for instance, he may not hold private interests in public contracts and he may
not use official information in writing, broadcasting or lecturing without the
approval of his department.
The political views of civil servants are not as a general rule a matter
of official concern, but there are some civil service duties in which secrecy
is so vitally important to State security that the Government does not feel
itself justified in employing any one to carry them out whose reliability is in
doubt. For this reason no one who is known to be a member of, or actively
associated with, the Communist Party or with Fascist organisations is
employed in connection with secret work.
Each Government department is responsible for its own internal security
and the Security Service, which operates independently under a Director-
General who is responsible for its efficiency to the Home Secretary, deals
with national security. In addition, there is a Security Commission which, if
requested by the Prime Minister in consultation with the leader of the Oppo¬
sition, may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public service
and, in certain circumstances, advise whether any change in security
arrangements is necessary or desirable.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Government on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of
the United Kingdom for many centuries. In its present shape it dates back
to the late nineteenth century, when the conception of a comprehensive
system of locally elected councils to manage various services provided for the
benefit of the community was first incorporated in statute law. The large
increase in population since that time, and the equally massive transformation
in the range, complexity and scale of local authority functions, have made
it necessary to review local government throughout England and Wales.
In Greater London the system has been reorganised and proposals have been
made in other areas (see p. 77) for a new structure more closely related to
contemporary and possible future needs.
70
Relationship
between
Central and
Local
Government
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local authorities are set up under the authority of Parliament, and their
powers and duties are defined by Acts of Parliament. Basically councils are
responsible to the law and to the local electors and not to the central Govern¬
ment. They determine their own budgets, and no minister of the Crown has
power to suspend or dismiss them, nor to inquire into the way in which they
organise their business. However, in respect of certain services, Acts of
Parliament dealing with local government give ministers of the Crown
defined powers, some of which are designed to secure a measure of national
uniformity in the standard of service provided, or to safeguard public health,
while others are for the protection of the rights of individual citizens. For
some services the minister concerned has wide powers of supervision; for
some there are strictly limited powers; for others no provision at all is made
for ministerial supervision.
In addition to their statutory powers, ministers concerned with local
government give assistance to local authorities by the general issue of advisory
circulars and by giving advice in individual cases.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is the main link between
local authorities and the central Government in England and Wales; in
Scotland the Scottish Development Department is responsible for general
policy in regard to local government; and in Northern Ireland the Ministry
of Health and Local Government.
The main pattern of local government organisation in England and Wales
(outside London) and Northern Ireland is a division of the country into
county boroughs and administrative counties. The county boroughs (mostly
with populations of over 75,000) are separate from the counties and indepen¬
dent of them. The administrative counties are sub-divided into county districts
—non-county boroughs, urban districts and rural districts, the last-named
being further divided into parishes1 (except in Northern Ireland). Scotland
is divided into counties (including four counties of cities) which are
independently administered; large and small burghs, and districts. Each local
authority division is administered by its own elected council. Until April
1965, when there will be a reduction in the number of county, borough and
urban district councils in England due to the coming into force of the
London Government Act, 1963, there are: in England and Wales (outside
the county of London) 61 county councils, 83 county borough councils,
317 non-county borough councils, 564 urban district councils, 474 rural
district councils,2 about 7,500 parish councils and some 3,300 parish
meetings (in parishes not large enough to have a parish council); in
Scotland, 33 county councils (two pairs being combined for certain
purposes), 200 town councils (including four for counties of cities) and
199 district councils (two counties not being divided into districts); and
in Northern Ireland, two county borough councils, 6 county councils,
9 non-county borough councils, 24 urban district councils and 31 rural
district councils.
Local government in London will remain in the hands of the London County
Council (LCC), 28 metropolitan borough councils and the City of London
until April 1965. On that date, under the provisions of the London Govern¬
ment Act, the LCC and the Middlesex County Council will be abolished and
the areas hitherto administered by them, together with adjacent areas of
1 There are usually some 20-30 parishes in a rural district.
2 Including the Isles of Scilly.
GOVERNMENT
71
Constitution
and Election of
Councils
Essex, Hertfordshire, Kent and Surrey, will form the Greater London area.
This area—over five times the size of the county of London1—will be
administered by the councils of 32 London boroughs2 and the City of London,
which retains its independent status (see p. 73), and the Greater London
Council (GLC)3.
Local councils comprise a number of unpaid elected councillors (and, in some
cases, aldermen elected by the councillors), presided over by a chairman who
has varied ceremonial and civic duties to perform in addition to his work
on the council. In most boroughs of England and Wales and Northern
Ireland the chairman is the Mayor; in the City of London and certain
important boroughs, the Lord Mayor; in the Scottish counties, the Convener;
and in the burghs, the Provost or Lord Provost.
The normal term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local
government is three years; aldermen normally hold office for six years. In
some local authority areas the whole council retires every third year and
another is elected immediately; in other areas elections are held annually,
when one-third of the councillors retire. Procedure at local government
elections is governed by rules laid down by the Representation of the People
Act, 1949.
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to
vote at a local government election provided that he or she is 21 years of age
or over on the qualifying date, is a British subject or a citizen of the Irish
Republic, is not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local
government elector for the area for which the election is held. In Great
Britain a person qualifies for registration as a local government elector if,
on the qualifying date for the register (compiled annually), he or she is
resident in the council area or occupies therein, as owner or tenant, any
rateable land or premises of a yearly value of not less than £10. In Northern
Ireland, in order to qualify for registration as a local government elector, a
person must have been born in Northern Ireland or, alternatively, have
resided continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years immediately
prior to the qualifying date and must have either a resident occupier’s or a
general occupier’s qualification.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the council concerned,
and under the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the purpose.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that
for parliamentary elections, although facilities for postal voting are more
restricted. Each elector has one vote for each seat contested in his electoral
area; he need not record all his votes, but must not give more than one vote
for each candidate.
Most candidates for election as councillor stand as representatives of one
of the national political parties; a few stand as members of an association
representing some local interest, or as independents. Each candidate must
be nominated by two electors, as proposer and seconder; and in England
and Wales (except in elections for rural district councils and parish councils)
eight other electors for the area must assent to the nomination. In Scotland
each county and district council candidate requires two proposers and each
1 394,000 acres compared to 75,000 acres, with a population of nearly 8 million com¬
pared to slightly more than 3 million.
2 Elected May 1964.
3 Elected April 1964.
72
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Functions and
Services
town council candidate a proposer and five assenters. Candidates must be of
British nationality, over 21 years of age, and must (1) be registered as local
government electors in the register of electors for the area for which they seek
election, or (2) have resided within that area during the whole of the twelve
months preceding the election (or within 3 miles in the case of parish councils),
or (3) in England and Wales, own freehold or leasehold land in the area.
Candidates are also subject to a number of statutory disqualifications designed
to ensure that unsuitable persons do not offer themselves for election.
Procedure at local government elections in Northern Ireland is governed by
electoral regulations made by the Ministry of Home Affairs for Northern
Ireland. These regulations are, in general, similar to those which apply in
Great Britain, though differing in certain particulars; for example, the town
clerk or the clerk to the council is the returning officer for all elections to the
authority; there is no postal voting and the only persons who may vote by
proxy are Service voters.
Most local authority areas are divided into electoral districts for local
council elections. Administrative counties are split up, in accordance with
orders made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department, the Minister
of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for Scotland, into
‘electoral divisions’. Boroughs, urban districts and rural districts in England
and Wales, and burghs in Scotland, are either divided into ‘wards’, or, if
they are small, left as single units. In rural districts the wards are based on
parishes which, if large enough, may be split into parish wards.
Outside London, county divisions each return one member. In the 1964
elections each London borough elected two to four councillors to the Greater
London Council: in future elections, boroughs are to be divided into electoral
areas (covering in most cases the same areas as parliamentary constituencies),
each of which will return one councillor. In other types of local authority
area each ward may return one or more members.
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer
such environmental and social services as Acts of Parliament require it to
provide and administer. It may provide additional services under the per¬
missive powers of a general Act or under powers granted to it by local or
Private Bill legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon their type, as follows:
in England (outside London) and Wales county borough councils are all¬
purpose authorities, while both county councils and county district councils
have particular functions allotted to them,1 which they exercise independently
to a considerable extent, although there is a certain degree of delegation from
county councils to county district councils, especially of duties connected with
town and country planning and the education, health and welfare services.
Parish councils or parish meetings have a few functions which they may exercise
of right. In Scotland the town councils of the counties of cities are all-purpose
authorities; elsewhere, the county councils, the town councils and the district
councils all share in local government work. In Northern Ireland the position
is broadly similar to that in England and Wales, except that local authorities
are not called upon to provide or administer police, civil defence or (except in
Belfast) fire services; moreover county councils do not in general delegate any
of their functions to county district councils.
1 For instance, county councils are generally responsible for the police, fire and civil
defence services, while the district councils administer most of the environmental and
sanitary services.
GOVERNMENT
73
In Greater London the basic units of local government (from April 1965)
are to be the London boroughs; the GLC will be responsible only for those
services which, by their nature, require unified administration and control
over the whole area. In the City of London (an area of approximately one
square mile in the centre of the metropolis) the City Corporation will exercise
the general powers administered and duties performed by the London
borough councils.
Local authority services may be classified under three heads: environ¬
mental, protective and personal. The environmental services are designed
to secure local good order, amenity and public health. They include the
inspection and abatement of nuisances, drainage, sewerage, street cleansing,
refuse collection and disposal, litter prevention, rodent control, the super¬
vision of water supplies, measures for ensuring food hygiene and for preventing
air pollution, and the provision of baths and washhouses. They also include
the services for bridge and highway construction and maintenance, for street
lighting, public safety on the roads, and the provision of recreation grounds,
parks and similar amenities. Town and country planning is the major
environmental service. The protective services are the fire service, the civil
defence service and the police service, while the personal services range from
health services, education and housing to the provision of public entertainment.
Local services concerned primarily with health and welfare cover the
provision of ante-natal, post-natal and child welfare clinics, and some resi¬
dential and day nurseries; the provision and supervision of midwifery services,
health visitors and home nursing facilities; measures for the prevention of
illness and the aftercare of physically or mentally sick persons; the provision
of domestic help where necessary; the ambulance service; the provision of
facilities for vaccination and immunisation against certain infectious diseases;
and the services for the permanently disabled or handicapped, for the aged
and infirm and for children deprived of a normal home life. Education and
culture are promoted by the establishment and maintenance of various types
of schools; by the provision of adult education centres, and art and technical
colleges; by the award of grants and scholarships to students of all kinds;
and by the provision of libraries, art galleries and museums. Housing needs
are met, as far as possible, by building new houses (mainly to let), acquiring
old houses and converting them to provide additional accommodation,
planning for slum clearance, seeing that adequate standards are maintained
in both newly built and older houses, and generally ensuring that housing
conditions are satisfactory.
Some local authorities also engage in trading services, such as passenger
transport, water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services; they also have
power to initiate schemes to attract industrial development.
The above is only a brief outline of local authority services. Fuller informa¬
tion is given under the relevant subject headings in later chapters of this
book.
Internal
Organisation
of Local
Authorities
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own
internal arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they
will discharge their responsibilities. Questions of policy and principle are
usually decided by the whole council, which appoints committees to carry
out the detailed administration of its various services. The more important
of the committees of the larger authorities divide their work among sub¬
committees, which stand to the parent committee in a relation similar to that
of the main committees to the whole council. The execution of the policy
74
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Officers and
Employees
decided upon by the council and the committees rests with salaried officers
and employees, whose number may vary from about half a dozen in a small
rural district to several thousands in the large counties and in the larger
county boroughs and burghs.
Apart from one or two minor provisions regarding the representation of
specialists on committees and the length of time certain members may hold
office, committees of councils are free from legal restrictions; even those
which are mandatory committees are constituted according to individual
requirements and not according to any set pattern laid down. For purposes
of classification, however, they may be divided into two kinds: ordinary
committees and joint committees. Ordinary committees may be further
divided into mandatory committees, the appointment of which is compulsory
under an Act of Parliament; other standing committees, which are appointed
in accordance with the standing orders of the council on a permanent basis
according to the extent of the council’s business; and special committees,
which a council may set up for a limited period to deal with a particular
problem that once solved is unlikely to recur.
Joint committees or joint boards consist of representatives of more than
one authority. They are usually established for services that can be more
effectively administered over a wider area than that controlled by a single
council, for instance, town and country planning, water supplies and the
police service.
Committees of a local authority may be advisory or executive; their powers
and duties are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing orders
or, in the case of a county or large burgh in Scotland, in the council’s adminis¬
trative scheme. A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees,
except its powers in connection with raising loans, levying rates, or making
financial demands on other authorities liable to contribute (raising precepts
in England and Wales and levying requisitions in Scotland) which are legally
reserved to the council as a whole.
The public and the press are admitted to all meetings of the council (and
of some committees) but may be excluded while a particular item is considered
if the council resolve that publicity for that matter would be prejudicial to
the public interest.
Generally speaking, councils are free to make such appointments as they
deem necessary for carrying out their work, although certain posts (for
instance, the clerk, the treasurer, and the medical officer of health) are
compulsory in almost all councils. Choice of personnel is left to a great extent
to the individual council: in theory, the appointment of certain chief officers
is subject to some central control but, in practice, the nominee of the council
is nearly always accepted.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers, whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial
kind; subordinate officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical
capacity; and manual workers who are employed to do the physical work for
which the council is responsible. Senior staff appointments are usually made
at the instance of the committee or committees particularly concerned;
most junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also
responsible for engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements
are always made in conformity with the council’s set establishment and
committees are informed of any appointments which they have not made
themselves.
GOVERNMENT
Local
Government
Finance
Grants
Rates
75
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within
the jurisdiction of the employing council (except for the rare case where the
proposed salary of an officer requires the approval of a Government depart¬
ment, as in the case of the clerk of a county council in England and Wales).
They are based on recommendations made by the Whitley Councils (see
note on p. 68), of which the largest, in England and Wales, are the National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Administrative, Professional, Technical
and Clerical Services and the National Joint Industrial Council for Local
Authorities’ Non-Trading Services (Manual Workers) and, in Scotland, the
Joint Negotiating Committee for Chief Officials of Local Authorities (Scot¬
land) and the Joint Industrial Councils for Local Authority Services. In
England and Wales conditions of service and salary scales for senior local
government officers are determined by separate joint committees. The local
government service in Northern Ireland has its separate joint negotiating
machinery at various levels.
All local government officers are expected to maintain a high standard of
conduct; as public servants they ‘must not only be honest in fact, but must
be beyond the reach of the suspicion of dishonesty’.
There are three sources of local authority income: Government grants
(about two-fifths); local rates, paid by occupiers of land and buildings (about
two-fifths); and rents from municipal houses, dividends and interest (about
one-fifth). Capital investment is, for the greater part, financed by borrowing.
Government grants occasionally take the form of capital grants, paid on
approval of claims made by local authorities for specific services, principally
roads and public lighting; more often, however, they are made on an annual
basis, either as specific grants, i.e. for a particular service, or as non-specific
grants. The latter include the general grant and the rate-deficiency payment
(equalisation grant in Scotland) paid to the poorer local authorities to
increase their resources. These two grants account for about four-fifths of all
annual grants. Specific grants are paid as ‘unit’ grants (a fixed annual
payment according to the number of units provided) for houses or as
‘percentage’ grants (a percentage of approved expenditure) for a small number
of services—mainly school milk and meals, the police service and the con¬
struction and upkeep of roads.
The largest single grant is the general grant, which is paid by the Minister
of Housing and Local Government to county and county borough councils
in England and Wales and by the Secretary of State for Scotland to county
and town councils in Scotland. This grant is apportioned among the author¬
ities according to a formula that takes into account the size of the population
in their areas and also such factors as the number of children of school age,
of young children and of old people and of exceptionally high or low
densities of population. The total amount of grant in any year is fixed in
advance, after consultation between the ministers and the local authority
associations.
In Northern Ireland there is a system of grants towards the cost of specific
services (for example, education, roads, housing, health and welfare, water
supplies and sewerage), supplemented by a general Exchequer contribution
which compensates for derating and takes account of the needs and resources
of individual authorities.
Rates are a form of local taxation paid by the occupiers of land and
buildings (except agricultural land and buildings) as contributions to the cost
of local services. They are levied by a poundage on the rateable value of
76
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Loans
property, which in England and Wales is equivalent to the net annual value
of the property, which in turn is based on the rent which it might reasonably
be expected to command if let from year to year with the tenant bearing the
rates and the cost of insurance and repairs. Valuation for rating is undertaken
every five years by valuation officers of the Board of Inland Revenue, who are
independent of the local authorities. In the latest valuation lists (1963) rates
for domestic property are based on current rental values; the Rating (Interim
Relief) Act, however, provides for grants to local authorities based on the
proportion of persons over 65 years of age in local populations and empowers
local authorities to remit, in cases of hardship, increases in domestic rate
bills caused by revaluation. Industry and freight transport are fully rated,
except in Northern Ireland. Charities pay half the full rate on property they
occupy for charitable purposes but may be given further relief by the rating
authorities, who are empowered to reduce or remit the rates for a wide range
of non-profit-making bodies.
Appeals from valuation may be made to local valuation courts, each
consisting of three members of an independent local valuation panel, and
thereafter to the Lands Tribunal.
In Scotland valuation is on a basis similar to that in England and Wales;
but it is carried out by assessors appointed by the councils of counties and
counties of cities. Appeals lie to the valuation appeal committee of each
valuation area and thereafter to the Lands Valuation Appeal Court of the
Court of Session. A Scottish Valuation Advisory Council has been established
by the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland the valuation
authority is the Commissioner of Valuation, whose department is part of the
Ministry of Finance. Industry and freight transport in Northern Ireland are
rated at a quarter of their net annual value.
The responsibility for levying and collecting the rates in England and Wales
lies with the councils of county boroughs and county districts; in Greater
London (from April 1965), with the London borough councils and City
Corporation. The rate poundage for each county district consists mainly of a
district rate and a county rate, calculated in accordance with the respective
requirements of the two authorities, and the proceeds of the latter are passed on
to the county council. In rural districts the rate levied in each parish takes into
account the requirements arising from any expenses incurred by the parish
council or parish meeting. In Greater London the GLC will raise revenue by
precepting on the London boroughs and the City. Rates in Scotland are levied
by the town councils in burghs and by county councils elsewhere; to cover
their expenditure, district councils levy a requisition each year to the county
council; a town council has to meet an annual requisition from the county
council in respect of the burgh’s share of the expenditure on functions exercised
by the county council throughout the county, including the burgh. In Northern
Ireland county councils are responsible for making, levying and collecting the
rates, except in such parts of the county as fall within the jurisdiction of the
county borough, borough, or urban district councils.
Loans may be raised by local authorities for financing such items of capital
expenditure as are sanctioned by the Minister of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment, the Secretary of State for Scotland, or, occasionally, the Government
department responsible for the service for which the capital is required. In
Northern Ireland the Government department responsible for the service also
issues the appropriate loan approvals. Borrowing powers for specific purposes
may also be taken under Acts of Parliament of local application.
GOVERNMENT
Control of Finance
Local
Government
Reorganisation
77
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by issuing stock upon the Stock
Exchange or by private mortgage. They also have access on a rising scale
(20 per cent of their long-term borrowing requirements in 1964) to the
Public Works Loan Board, which is financed by the Exchequer and which
also acts as lender of last resort to local authorities which cannot borrow on
reasonable terms on the market. Local authorities may also borrow temporarily
for a limited proportion of their outstanding loan debt.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned
by a finance committee, whose function it is to keep the financial policy of
the council under constant review. In England and Wales an external audit
is carried out (except for certain general accounts in most of the county
borough and about two-thirds of the borough councils) by district auditors
appointed by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. County
borough councils must use the services of the district auditor for accounts
which relate to children and education, and local health and welfare services.
In both county and non-county boroughs rating and coast protection are
also subject to district audit. For their other accounts borough councils use
mainly professional auditors; a few use ‘elective audit’, which provides for
the appointment of three auditors: two elected by the local government
electors and one appointed by the mayor. In Scotland the accounts of each
authority are audited by a professional auditor appointed by the Secretary
of State for Scotland and paid by the council concerned, and in Northern
Ireland by special local government auditors appointed by the Ministry of
Health and Local Government.
In the seventy years since the existing local government structure was set
up, the population of England and Wales has grown by nearly 14 million, the
greatest concentration of people being in the London area and the five other
conurbations of England (see p. 16). At the same time, the number and
scope of local authority activities have progressively increased: local authorities
are nowadays responsible not only for most of the environmental and personal
welfare services, but also for important functions in relation to a number of
services of nation-wide concern.
In contrast to all this, the basis of local government remained virtually
unchanged. In some areas, and more especially in those with a high density
of industry and population, developments inevitably led to some confusion
and loss of efficiency, since the structure was no longer in balance with
the work that modern councils had to do. For this reason local government in
Greater London has been reorganised (see p. 70), while elsewhere in England
a Local Government Commission is reviewing local government in the five
special review areas of the West Midlands, Tyneside, West Yorkshire,
South-East Lancashire and Merseyside and counties and county boroughs.
The Commission has produced final reports on 8 review areas (including
3 special review areas) and published draft proposals for one more. Before
making proposals the Commission must consult the local authorities and
other interested bodies and persons, and take their views into account. The
final reports must be submitted to the Minister of Housing and Local
Government who decides whether or not to accept the Commission’s
proposals after holding public local inquiries, where necessary, to hear objec¬
tions. Proposals are put into effect (with or without modifications) by means
of orders made by the Minister, which must be laid before Parliament. By
July 1964 the Minister had announced his decision on the proposals in the first
three reports, with the exception of those for two towns.
78
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FIRE
AUTHORITIES IN
GREAT BRITAIN
Central Control
Establishment
Schemes
A Local Government Commission for Wales produced its final report in
1964, with proposals covering the whole of Wales, but these proposals were
not accepted by the Government and the pattern of local government
appropriate to Wales is being reconsidered.
In Scotland the present local government structure, which has been in
existence for thirty years, is also under review.
THE FIRE SERVICE
The fire services in Great Britain are organised on a local basis, subject to
a measure of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England
and Wales) and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire services in
Northern Ireland are controlled by two authorities, the Belfast Corporation
and the Northern Ireland Fire Authority, which are responsible to the
Minister of Home Affairs. Every part of the United Kingdom is covered
by a public fire brigade.
There are 135 local authority fire brigades in England and Wales and 11 in
Scotland. In England and Wales, under the Fire Services Act, 1947, separate
fire brigades are administered by the county or county borough councils, which
are the fire authorities for their areas and have powers and duties which they
exercise either separately or as combined authorities where neighbouring
councils care to make such arrangements in the interests of the efficiency of
the service. From April 1965 the Greater London Council will be the fire
authority for the London Fire Brigade. In Scotland the local authorities are
grouped in eleven areas each with a single brigade; with the exception of
Glasgow, where the town council of the city is the responsible authority,
each area is administered by a joint committee representative of the councils
of the counties and large burghs in the area.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland make regulations
regarding the maintenance of discipline, training, and pensions in local fire
brigades, and their approval is necessary for certain reductions in establishment
schemes. In matters affecting the fire brigades as a whole (excluding discipline
and similar matters), each Minister is advised by the appropriate Central
Fire Brigades Advisory Council, consisting of representatives of the local
authority associations, representatives of the chief officers (firemasters in
Scotland) and other members of the brigades, and other persons having
special qualifications. The advisory councils are not concerned with the con¬
ditions of service of members of the brigades; on these subjects the National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades in Great Britain and the
National Joint Council for Chief Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades
in Great Britain are the negotiating bodies. Central control is also exercised
through the inspectors of fire services, whose duties include advising the
Ministers on technical matters.
Each fire authority is required to draw up a scheme showing the establishment
of officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and
location of fire stations and the number and type of appliances considered
necessary for the provision of an all-over cover of its area. Establish¬
ments vary considerably according to the fire risks in the area concerned
and are not always up to strength, but in the whole of England and Wales
there are about 23,400 whole-time and 16,500 part-time firemen, operating
GOVERNMENT
Operational
Methods
Fire Losses
Firemen
79
more than 3,500 fire-fighting appliances (including pumps, turntable
ladders, water tenders, and emergency and salvage tenders) housed in
some 1,600 fire stations. In Scotland there are approximately 2,800 whole¬
time and 2,100 part-time firemen, 650 fire-fighting appliances, and 320 fire
stations.
It is the duty of each fire authority to buy such vehicles and equipment
as are required. Equipment is standardised, and appliances are bought by
fire authorities to specifications which ensure that essential standards are
maintained and yet allow sufficient freedom of design to meet local
requirements.
Each fire authority must appoint a chief fire officer (firemaster in Scotland)
to be the head administrative and executive officer for its fire services. The
appointment must be approved by the Home Secretary or by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The chief fire officer or firemaster is responsible to the
fire authority for seeing that the fire brigade is organised and managed in
accordance with policy laid down.
There is a central headquarters for operational control, which is usually
exercised on a local basis by divisional officers in charge of the geographical
divisions into which most areas are divided. Each divisional officer has at his
disposal a staff of whole-time officers and men, often supplemented—par¬
ticularly in country areas—by part-time officers and men; and he is responsible
for mobilising this force in the strength necessary for dealing with any
outbreaks of fire in his division. Constant communication is maintained
between divisional and brigade headquarters, and if at any time an outbreak
of fire should grow beyond the capabilities of a divisional force, help is sent
from one or more neighbouring divisions in its area, or even from the area
of another fire authority. Under arrangements for mutual help made by all
fire authorities, the nearest available force is sent to the scene of a fire,
regardless of area boundaries. Some fire authorities employ firewomen on
communication and mobilising duties.
In England and Wales the number of fire calls a year rose from about
247,170 in i960 to 312,250 in 1963, including false alarms and special service
calls for such purposes as rescuing persons and animals trapped in dangerous
situations, dealing with crashed aircraft, and pumping and salvage operations.
In Scotland the increase in fire calls, including false alarms and special
services, over the same period was 3,726.
During these years fire losses in the United Kingdom rose by over
£22! million, accounted for in part by the growth in the value of properties
and goods, in part by the increase in the number of properties at risk, and in
part by an increase in the number of fires.
About two-thirds of the total number of firemen work on a whole-time basis.
The part-time firemen include: retained firemen who, in return for a retaining
fee, undertake to attend fires if called upon; volunteer firemen, who receive
no remuneration; and auxiliary firemen, who are enrolled as members of
individual fire brigades but with restricted duties. In addition, there are the
fire-fighting organisations outside the national service, for example, those
maintained by the Service departments of the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry
of Aviation, and by some large industrial and commercial concerns.
Recruits and junior ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive
practical training in basic firemanship at training schools run by fire authorities.
8o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
Research
FIRE SERVICES
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
Finance
In Scotland similar training is carried out at a central training school which
is the responsibility of the Scottish Home and Health Department. Advanced
and specialised training courses, including fire prevention courses, are pro¬
vided for the higher ranks at the Fire Service College, Wotton House, near
Dorking, Surrey, which is maintained by the Home Office and the Scottish
Home and Health Department as the central training institution for the fire
services, and at the Fire Service Training Centre (an annexe to the college)
at Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. The Home Office Fire Service
Department arranges facilities for properly accredited officers from overseas
fire services to study the organisation, current training methods, appliances
and equipment of the British fire brigades.
A few fire authorities in England and Wales have recently introduced
schemes for the employment of junior firemen, between the ages of 16 and
18 years, with a view to their being enrolled as regular firemen at the
age of 18. This system of entry is still in its early stages, but arrangements
are being considered upon which a more general introduction of the scheme
might be based.
The fire authorities bear the cost of maintaining the fire service. There is an
Exchequer contribution which is included in the aggregate amount of the
local authority general grant (see p. 75). For the purpose of arriving at the
amount of this contribution, the Government receives from fire authorities
(at the time when the grant is to be considered) details of the last known actual
expenditure for a year, together with estimates for the impending general
grant period.
Research into all aspects of fire prevention and fire-fighting, and in particular
into the relationship between the fire-fighter, the availability of fire equipment
and fire losses, is undertaken by the Joint Fire Research Organisation under
the direction of the Fire Research Board. The costs of the Organisation are
shared equally between the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
and the fire insurance companies who, jointly, nominate the members of
the Fire Research Board. The Organisation operates from a fire research
station at which practical tests are carried out. Problems of fire protection
are also studied by the Fire Protection Association, established by the Fire
Offices’ Committee1 as the national advisory centre for industry and the
general public on the protection of life and property against fire.
In Northern Ireland the Belfast Corporation controls the Belfast Fire
Brigade and is responsible for the area inside the city boundary, and the
Northern Ireland Fire Authority covers the rest of the country outside
Belfast.
The Belfast Fire Brigade maintains five whole-time stations and has an
establishment of 263 officers and men manning 13 appliances, while the
Northern Ireland Fire Authority has one whole-time station in Londonderry
and 44 other stations throughout the remainder of the area, and an establish¬
ment of 101 whole-time officers and men and 662 part-time firemen, manning
72 appliances.
The Fire Services (Amendment) Act (Northern Ireland), 1963, provided that
the amount of fire service grant payable to the Northern Ireland Fire
1 The Fire Offices’ Committee is representative of some, but not all, of the fire insur¬
ance companies in Britain.
GOVERNMENT
8l
Authority should be 50 per cent of the loan charges in respect of capital
expenditure which do not exceed .£90,000 and 25 per cent of the amount
(if any) by which the loan charges exceed .£90,000, together with 50 per cent
of the first £240,000 of other net expenditure and 25 per cent of the excess
over that amount. Expenditure in excess of the fire service grant is apportioned
among the local authorities liable to contribute to the funds of the Authority.
Under the Fire Services Acts, the Belfast Fire Brigade cannot qualify for
the payment of fire service grant.
82
3
LAW AND ORDER
THE LAW
In the United Kingdom the maintenance of public order depends on the
obedience which the public accord to the law. Individuals obey the law out
of a sense of private conviction or public duty, or, in the last resort, because
they know that if they fail to do so they will be penalised by the authorities
of the State. On the other hand, the use of penal measures by State authorities
must be, and in fact is, confined to what the law allows.
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, it does not have a single
body of law applicable universally within its limits; and in England and
Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland, respectively, separate systems are in
force (see p. 27). There are, however, similarities between the systems. As
between England and Wales on the one hand and Northern Ireland on the
other the similarity is general, due to the closeness of the association between
these countries since the twelfth century. As between Scotland and the rest
of the United Kingdom the differences are more extensive, although the
existence, during the past 250 years, of a common Parliament, a common
public opinion on broader issues, and a common court of appeal for civil
cases has resulted in substantial identity at many points.
A feature which is common to all the systems of law in the United Kingdom
(and differentiates them from some continental systems) is that there is no
complete code. The sources of law in all the British systems include statutes
dealing with particular subjects, and a large amount of unwritten or ‘common’
law, which can be gathered from numerous decisions of the courts and from
other sources.
The common law of England originated in the customs of the realm and
was built up by decisions of the courts. A supplementary system of law,
known as ‘equity’, came into being during the Middle Ages to provide and
enforce more effective protection for existing legal rights. It was administered
by a separate court and later became a separate body of legal rules. In
1873 the courts of equity were fused with the courts of common law,
so that all courts now apply both systems, but where they conflict, equity
prevails.
In Scotland the basis of the modern common law is embodied in the writings
of certain seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth century lawyers of
great repute who, between them, described systematically almost the whole
field of private and criminal law as existing in their times. Broadly speaking,
the principles enunciated by these lawyers, together with the many judicial
decisions which have followed and developed those principles, form the body
of Scots non-statutory law. Scotland has never had a separate system of
equity—equitable principles having always permeated the ordinary rules of
law.
Statute law includes Acts of Parliament and delegated or subordinate
legislation made under powers conferred by Parliament. It is absolutely
binding on all courts of the United Kingdom, taking precedence over any
other source of law.
LAW AND ORDER
CRIMINAL LAW
IN ENGLAND
AND WALES
Criminal Courts
Magistrates'
Courts
Quarter Sessions
Assizes
83
Another feature common to the legal systems of the United Kingdom is
the distinction made between the criminal law and the civil law. Criminal
law is concerned with wrongs against the community as a whole; civil law
is concerned with the rights, duties and obligations of individual members
of the community between themselves.
The courts of ordinary criminal jurisdiction in England and Wales include:
magistrates’ courts, which try the less serious offences and conduct preliminary
inquiries into the more serious offences; courts of quarter sessions, which
try most of the more serious offences; and courts of assize (including the
Central Criminal Court in London and the Crown Courts in Liverpool and
Manchester) which try the gravest offences and cases of special difficulty.
All trials at quarter sessions and assizes are conducted with a jury (see p. 95).
Most magistrates’ courts consist of two to seven lay magistrates who are
unpaid and do not normally possess any legal qualifications but obtain advice
on points of law, when required, from the clerk to the justices. In some
of the large cities, however, there are also paid, or ‘stipendiary’, magistrates
who are professional lawyers; they usually sit alone. In inner London from
April 1965 there will be a unified system of magistrates’ courts, in which either
a metropolitan stipendiary magistrate or lay justices may sit. The great
majority of offences (over 97 per cent) committed in England and Wales are
disposed of in magistrates’ courts.
Specially qualified magistrates sit in juvenile courts to hear cases involving
young persons under 17 years of age who are charged with any offence except
homicide or are brought before the court as being in need of care or protection,
as beyond control, or as persistent truants. These courts also deal with many
applications for the adoption of children. Consisting of not more than three
justices (normally including at least one man and one woman), they sit
either in a different room or building from that in which other courts are
sitting, or at a different time; only persons within certain specified categories
are admitted and only limited publicity is allowed.
Domestic Proceedings are also tried by not more than three justices, of
whom one should be a man and one a woman. The hearing of domestic
proceedings is separated from other business and, as in juvenile courts, the
public is excluded.
Courts of quarter sessions sit at least four times a year; in the busier places,
they meet much more frequently than this.
All counties have courts of quarter sessions and 98 boroughs also have
separate courts which exercise jurisdiction within their own boundaries. In
counties the courts are generally presided over by a bench of lay magistrates
under a legally qualified chairman. In boroughs the courts are presided over
by a single judicial officer, the Recorder, who is a barrister specially appointed
to act part-time in this capacity. In Greater London there are five areas, each
with its own quarter sessions. Each of these courts must be presided over by
a full-time paid chairman or deputy chairman.
Courts of assize are branches of the High Court presided over by High Court
judges and held at assize towns—generally in the county town of each county
and in certain of the other larger towns and cities. The judges go round
‘on circuit’ three times a year—on the autumn, winter and summer assizes.
Each town is visited once on each circuit; the larger towns are visited twice.
After the trial of criminal cases in each town, the judges deal with civil
cases.
84
Crown Courts
The Central
Criminal Court
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Liverpool and Manchester, Crown Courts act both as quarter sessions for
the two cities and as assize courts for South Lancashire. The courts are
presided over by the Recorders of Liverpool and Manchester, who are
whole-time judicial officers.
The Central Criminal Court at the Old Bailey in the City of London will act as
the court of assize for the criminal business of Greater London from April 1965.
The court sits at least four times a year; more than one court sits at one time
and each is presided over by a salaried judicial officer.
Appeals may be brought on a point of law by either the prosecutor or the
defendant direct from the magistrates’ court to the High Court; but the more
usual appeal is that of a convicted person against his conviction or his sentence,
which is heard by quarter sessions.
Appeals against convictions or sentences by quarter sessions, assizes or
Crown Courts go to the Court of Criminal Appeal. Appeals on questions of
law may be brought as of right, but on other grounds only by leave of the
court. The Lord Chief Justice usually presides in the Court of Criminal
Appeal, which consists of three or, in special cases, five judges of the Queen’s
Bench Division. On appeal against conviction the court has power to quash
the conviction and direct the appellant’s acquittal or, if the appeal is allowed
on grounds of fresh evidence only, to order a retrial.
A further appeal from the Court of Criminal Appeal to the House of Lords
can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the House of Lords
that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
There is no restriction on the right of a private citizen to institute criminal
proceedings, but most prosecutions in England and Wales are, in fact,
initiated and conducted by the police. In some cases the consent of the
Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions or, less frequently,
a Government department is required. The Director of Public Prosecutions
is also concerned with prosecutions in all the more serious classes of indictable
offences (i.e. those offences involving formal written accusation); in courts
where a substantial number of cases with which he is concerned are tried,
standing counsel are appointed by the Attorney General to appear on his
behalf. At the Central Criminal Court in London, for instance, there is a
panel of counsel known as Treasury Counsel, who are retained to prosecute
in the Director’s cases.
In criminal cases arrest may be effected either on a warrant issued by a
judicial authority on information laid before it or, in certain cases, without
a warrant. In the latter circumstances, a police officer may release the defen¬
dant on bail, that is to say, he may discharge him temporarily, subject to his
entering into a recognisance, with or without sureties, for a reasonable sum
of money, to appear in court at the time appointed for the trial. Magistrates
also have discretion to grant bail, and this discretion is liberally exercised
in accordance with well-established principles. An arrested person must be
charged at once with the offence of which he is suspected; under the Judges
Rules,1 once a person has been charged with or informed that he may be prose¬
cuted for an offence, no further questions relating to that offence may be
put by the police, save in exceptional circumstances for the purpose of
preventing or minimising harm or loss to any person or to the public, or for
1 These Rules do not have the force of law but carry very great weight.
LAW AND ORDER
Trial
85
clearing up an ambiguity in a previous answer or statement. Unless the offence
of which an arrested person is suspected is serious, he must be granted bail if he
cannot be brought before the court within a day.
If anyone is detained in custody otherwise than upon lawful grounds1 he
(or, if he is unable, someone acting on his behalf) may sue out a writ of
habeas corpus against the person who detained him, this person then being
required to appear before the court on the day named to show cause for
detention. The writ of habeas corpus may be granted by a single judge of the
High Court but may be refused only by a divisional court of the Queen’s
Bench Division.
Most indictable offences are tried in a superior court before a jury, although
some may be dealt with in magistrates’ courts, if the defendant consents.
Conversely, a criminal case which would ordinarily be dealt with in a
magistrates’ court must usually be heard before a jury if the offence is
punishable by more than three months’ imprisonment and the defendant
elects to be so tried.
Since criminal law presumes the innocence of the accused until his guilt
has been conclusively proved, the prosecution should not have any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. Every accused person has the right to
employ a legal adviser for the conduct of his defence and if he cannot afford
to pay he may be granted legal aid at the public expense. Anyone remanded
in custody may be visited in prison by his legal adviser. During the preparation
of the case, it is customary for the prosecution to inform the defence of any
relevant documents which it is not proposed to put in evidence and to disclose
them if asked to do so.
All criminal trials are held in open court and the rules of evidence (which
are concerned with the proof of facts and much the same in civil and criminal
trials) are rigorously applied. For instance, although the uncorroborated
evidence of one witness is, as a matter of English law, sufficient, conviction
in criminal cases solely on the evidence of an accomplice (or accomplices) is,
in practice, never allowed unless the judge has warned the jury of the danger
of convicting without corroboration.
During the trial the accused has the right to hear and subsequently to
cross-examine (normally through his counsel) all the witnesses for the
prosecution; to call his own witnesses who, if they will not attend the trial
of their own free will, may be ‘subpoenaed’, or legally compelled, to attend;
and to address the court either in person or through his counsel. But he
cannot himself be questioned unless he consents to be sworn as a witness
in his own defence. The right to cross-examine the accused, even when he
is so sworn, is limited by law, with the object of excluding inquiry into his
character or into past offences not relevant to the particular charge on which
he is being tried. Furthermore, although confessions made in the course of
previous judicial proceedings are admissible as evidence if they have been
made upon oath, no confessions made in any other circumstances should be
admissible unless it can be proved that they were made voluntarily, i.e.
without fear of prejudice or hope of advantage.
In criminal trials by jury it is, broadly speaking, the duty of the judge to
determine questions of law, to sum up the evidence for the benefit of the
1 These are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for contempt of court or of either House
of Parliament; in certain circumstances for civil debt; detention of persons found to be
mentally disordered; detention of children by their parents or guardians. The writ of
habeas corpus runs in both criminal and civil cases.
86
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
jury, and to acquit the accused or pass sentence, according to the verdict
of the jury; but the jury alone decides the issue of guilt or innocence. The
verdict of a jury must be unanimous; if its members are unable to reach
agreement, the case must be tried before a new jury.
If the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of
appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. If a
defence of insanity is accepted by the jury the verdict is ‘not guilty by reason
of insanity’ and the accused will be detained in a suitable hospital. From a
verdict of ‘guilty’ there is a right of appeal on the part of the defendant to
the appropriate court.
CIVIL LAW IN
ENGLAND AND
WALES
Civil Courts
County Courts
The High Court of
Justice
The main courts of civil jurisdiction in England and Wales are the county
courts, which are the courts for the lesser cases, and the High Court, where
the more important cases are tried. Most appeals go to the Court of Appeal
and from there may go to the House of Lords.
County Courts (of which there are nearly 400) are so located that no part of
a county is more than a reasonable distance from one of them. They are
presided over by a paid judge, who almost always sits alone, although he may
sit with a jury consisting of eight persons if either party wishes it and the court
makes an order to that effect. There are 79 county court judges now in office,
each having a circuit, which is either one court, or a group of courts, depending
on the amount of work to be done.
Generally speaking the jurisdiction of the county courts includes all civil
actions where the amount claimed is not more than £400 or where, in actions
for the recovery of land, the rateable value of the land is not more than ^4°°
a year. Cases outside these limits may be tried in the county court by consent
of the parties, or may be transferred to the High Court. Some actions, in
particular actions for libel and slander, cannot be brought in the county court.
In addition to the ordinary county courts, there are still a few local courts with
somewhat similar jurisdiction. Most of these are survivals from the medieval
borough courts, and have little or no work to do at the present time, but
the Liverpool Court of Passage, the Salford Hundred Court and the Mayor’s
and City of London Court are still well used.
The High Court of Justice forms part of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
Its jurisdiction is both original and appellate, and covers virtually all civil
causes and some criminal causes.
The High Court is divided into the Chancery Division, the Probate,
Divorce and Admiralty Division, and the Queen’s Bench Division. The work
is distributed between them in accordance with the Rules of Court (see p. 93)
and the practice of the courts. Although the rules do not give exclusive
jurisdiction in any matter to any one division, in practice each division has a
separate field of jurisdiction and the judges are attached to a particular division.
The High Court is staffed by 53 puisne1 judges. The Lord Chancellor is,
in strict law, the president of the whole High Court (although, in practice,
he does not sit in any Division); he is also nominally head of the Chancery
Division, of which the Master of the Rolls2 is another nominal member; there is
a President for the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division; and the Lord
Chief Justice of England presides over the Queen’s Bench Division. For the
hearing of cases at first instance, High Court judges sit singly. Appellate
1 Judges without any other special office.
2 Originally keeper of the records and assistant to the Lord Chancellor, the Master of
the Rolls has for centuries held high judicial office.
Opportunity to
undertake light work
preserves a sense
of purpose.
Centres organised by local
authorities and voluntary
organisations help to
alleviate loneliness in old age.
ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY IN BRITAIN
Wakehurst Place,
the new country
extension of
Kew Gardens.
Tending cocoa plants at
Kew Gardens, London.
Polar bears at Whipsnade Zoo.
LAW AND ORDER
Appellate Courts
Civil
Proceedings
87
jurisdiction is exercised either by divisional courts consisting of three (or
sometimes two) judges, sitting in one of the three Divisions of the High Court
or, in some cases, by a single judge.
Nearly all appeals from magistrates’ courts, ministerial decisions and the
decisions of judges sitting in Chambers1 are heard in the first instance in the
appropriate divisional court of the High Court,2 but all the more important
appeals in civil actions come before the Court of Appeal, which is part of
the Supreme Court of Judicature, and some (with leave of the Court of Appeal
or of the House of Lords) before the House of Lords, which is the ultimate
court of appeal in civil cases in the whole United Kingdom.
The Court of Appeal hears appeals from the High Court, the county courts
and assizes in civil cases. The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the
President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division, and most of the
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary are members of the court, but its effective head is
the Master of the Rolls, who is assisted by nine Lord Justices of Appeal; the
Court sits in divisions, each with three judges.
The judges in the House of Lords are the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but often sit as a group of five, and some¬
times of seven. Lay peers may not attend the hearing of appeals (which
normally takes place in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber),
but peers who hold or have held high judicial office may sit. The president
is the Lord Chancellor.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved
person; no preliminary inquiry as to the authenticity of the grievance is
required. The most common form of proceedings is an action commenced
by a writ served on the defendant by the plaintiff, which notifies the defendant
that the plaintiff has a claim on him and states the nature of the claim. If the
defendant intends to contest the claim, he ‘enters an appearance’ by informing
the court to this effect and documents setting out the precise question in
dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court.
Because civil proceedings are a private matter, they can at any time be
abandoned or compromised without leave of the court,3 and in fact, in the
great majority of cases, the parties to a dispute are able to settle their differences
through their solicitors before the stage of actual trial is reached. Actions that
are brought to court are usually tried by a judge without a jury, except in cases
involving claims for defamation, false imprisonment, unlawful arrest, seduction,
or breach of promise to marry, when either party may insist on trial by jury,
or in a case of fraud, when the person charged may also claim this right. In
trials where a jury is present, it is responsible for deciding questions of fact
(as in criminal trials) and also the amount of damages to be awarded to the
injured party.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Refusal to obey a judgment directing the defendant to do something or to
abstain from doing something may result in imprisonment for contempt of
court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant
of the court.
1 Decisions reached during proceedings which, under the rules of the court, do not
require to be heard in court.
2 Quarter sessions have appellate jurisdiction in respect of some magistrates’ courts
decisions.
3 Matrimonial causes are exceptional in that all cases (whether defended or undefended)
must come before a judge.
D
88
CRIMINAL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Courts of
Criminal
Jurisdiction
Burgh (or Police)
Courts
Justice of Peace
Courts
The Sheriff Court
The High Court of
Justiciary
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
As a rule, the court awards the costs of an action (the barrister’s fees,
solicitor’s charges and essential disbursements) to the winning party, although
in practice he always pays part of them. In certain circumstances (for instance,
extravagance or negligence in the conduct of the case), the court may, in its
discretion, refuse to order that one party’s costs should be borne by the other.
Criminal cases in Scotland are heard either under solemn procedure, that is,
where proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a jury,
or under summary procedure, where the judge sits without a jury. All cases
in the High Court of Justiciary and the more serious ones in the sheriff court
are tried under solemn procedure. Proceedings are taken under summary
procedure in the more minor cases in the sheriff court, and in the justice of
the peace and burgh (or police) courts.
These courts are established in burghs. The judges are town councillors who
are serving (or have served) in the office of the magistrate of the burgh. In
Glasgow a stipendiary magistrate acts as judge of one of the courts.
These courts are organised on a county (and county of city) basis, the judges
being the justices of the peace for the county (or county of city).
Any court of summary jurisdiction sits as a juvenile court1 when hearing
charges only against persons under 17 years of age. Special justice of the peace
juvenile courts have been established in three counties and in the city of
Aberdeen.
Scotland is divided into sheriffdoms, each consisting of a county or combination
of counties, and these sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court
districts. A sheriffdom has a sheriff and a number of sheriffs-substitute who
act as the judges of the court. The sheriff courts exercise an extensive civil
jurisdiction, as well as a criminal jurisdiction.
The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court of first instance.
Any one of the following judges is entitled to try cases in the High Court:
the Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of
Session), the Lord Justice Clerk, or any one of the 14 Lords Commissioner
of Justiciary who are also judges of the Court of Session. The seat of the
court is in Edinburgh, but the judges go on circuit to preside at trials in
other towns.
A person convicted in the High Court or in a sheriff court on indictment
may appeal to the High Court of Justiciary (a) against his conviction on any
ground which involves a question of law alone, or, with leave of the High Court
or upon the certificate of the judge who presided at the trial that it is a fit
case for appeal, on any ground, and (b) against his sentence, with the leave
of the High Court, unless the sentence is one fixed by law. Appeals are heard
by three or more judges, and there is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
A person convicted summarily may appeal to the High Court, but only on
questions of law and procedure, and not on issues of fact.
In Scotland the police make preliminary investigation of all cases of crime
discovered by or made known to them, but it is for the Public Prosecutor
concerned (the Lord Advocate in the High Court, the Procurators Fiscal in
the sheriff court, and the justice of the peace fiscal and burgh prosecutor in
1 It has been recommended by the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Committee
(1964) that all children under 16 years should be taken out of the ambit of the criminal
courts and dealt with by specially constituted ‘juvenile panels’.
LAW AND ORDER
89
the justice of the peace and burgh courts respectively) to decide whether or
not to prosecute and, in the case of the Procurator Fiscal, to decide whether
to proceed summarily or to charge the accused by petition with a view to
proceedings on indictment.
^rrest The police in Scotland have the same powers of arrest as have the police in
England and Wales. The Judges Rules do not apply in Scotland, but when
an accused person is arrested, he should be cautioned and have the charge
read over to him. Thereafter, only the accused’s voluntary statements should
be used in evidence at his trial, and the court will reject any statements made
by him unless it is satisfied that they have been fairly obtained.
As in England and Wales, a person apprehended in Scotland must be
brought before the court competent to deal with his case with the least possible
delay. There is no equivalent in Scotland to the public preliminary investiga¬
tion before examining magistrates held in England and Wales prior °to
committal for trial. Where a prosecution on indictment is contemplated, the
accused is brought before a magistrate for judicial examination. The magi¬
strate then commits the accused for trial, but he may first commit him for
further examination. Eight days may elapse between commitment for further
examination and commitment for trial.
Persons in custody, other than those charged with murder or treason, may
be liberated on bail by the sheriff or, if the offence is within the jurisdiction
of a summary court other than the sheriff court, by that court or the police.
Even in the case of murder or treason, bail may be accepted at the discretion
of the Lord Advocate or the Eligh Court of Justiciary. There is a right of
appeal to the High Court by the accused person against the refusal of bail,
by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by either party against the
amount fixed.
The writ of habeas corpus does not apply in Scotland, but the High Court
of Justiciary has power to release persons unlawfully detained and accused
persons must, in any event, be brought to trial within no days of committal.
rial In trials on indictment, the first ‘pleading’ diet takes place in the sheriff
court, when the accused is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty. If he
pleads not guilty, the case is continued to the second ‘trial’ diet in the appro¬
priate court. If he pleads guilty, and it is a case which is to be dealt
with in the sheriff court, the sheriff may dispose of it at once. If it is a
High Court case it is continued to the second diet in the High Court for
disposal.
The second diet is held at least nine days after the pleading diet, either
before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury. Evidence is led (without
opening speeches) and there are closing speeches for the prosecution and for
the defence, followed by the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return
a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’, both of which result in acquittal, or
they may find the accused ‘guilty’, in which case the court proceeds to deliver
sentence. The verdict (unlike that of an English jury) may be by a majority.
Fairness to the accused is ensured by the fact that, with a few minor exceptions,
no person may be convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses
or corroboration of one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly
implicate the accused person in the crime.
At summary trials the accused is asked to plead to the charge at the first
calling of the case and, if he pleads guilty, the court may dispose of the case.
Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court may proceed to trial at once or it
may appoint a trial diet for a later date.
9o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CIVIL LAW IN
SCOTLAND
Civil Courts
Sheriff Courts
The Court of
Session
The Scottish Land
Court
Civil
Proceedings
COURTS IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The main courts of civil jurisdiction in Scotland are the sheriff courts which,
in their civil capacity, correspond roughly to the county courts in England
and Wales, and the Court of Session, which is the supreme civil court
in Scotland.
The civil jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to nearly all actions and is
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff-
substitute, against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-
principal or directly to the Court of Session. Minor civil matters (actions
not exceeding in value) may be tried by justices of the peace.
The Court of Session has universal jurisdiction, sits only in Edinburgh, and
has sole jurisdiction, inter alia, in divorce actions. The court is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
which is mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions
of equal status, each consisting of four judges-—the first division being
presided over by the Lord President and the second division by the Lord
Justice Clerk. From the Inner House an appeal may lie to the House of
Lords.
The Scottish Land Court is a special court that deals with certain agricultural
matters. The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank
and dignity of a judge of the Court of Session.
In Scotland civil proceedings are initiated by the service on the defender of
a writ or summons, which sets out the nature of the decree which the pursuer
seeks, a statement of facts upon which the pursuer founds his claim, and a
statement of the legal propositions upon which the pursuer maintains he is
entitled to the remedy which he seeks. In Court of Session actions the next
step is the calling of the summons, which is the publication of the action in
the court lists. If the defender intends to contest the action, he must ‘enter
appearance’ within two days of calling and thereafter lodge defences to it.
In the sheriff court ‘entering appearance’ precedes the ‘tabling’ of the case.
It is much more common in Scotland than in England and Wales to have
legal debates in court as to the competency or relevancy of the written pleadings
prior to the proof.
In Scotland a pursuer can abandon his case, including any matrimonial
case, at any time, but where abandonment is sought after the commencement
of the proof or trial, only with leave of the court. Trial by jury in civil action
in Scotland is much more common than in England and Wales, being the
usual form of proof in actions for damages for personal injuries.
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in
England and Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller com¬
munity. The superior courts comprise the Supreme Court of Judicature
(consisting of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal) and the
Court of Criminal Appeal. The High Court is the superior court of first
instance, is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench Division
(including probate, matrimonial and Admiralty proceedings) and the circuit
courts (assizes) and is constituted of the Lord Chief Justice, as president,
and two judges. The Court of Appeal, which is the appellate tribunal, is
constituted of the Lord Chief Justice and two Lords Justices of Appeal.
The inferior courts are the county courts and courts of summary jurisdiction
(petty sessions). Courts of quarter sessions have been amalgamated with the
county courts, which now exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction and
IPECIAL COURTS
Uoroners’
Courts
Idministrative
Tribunals
LAW AND ORDER gj
are presided over by county court judges, of whom there are five (two of
them having the title of Recorder—of Belfast and of Londonderry). At least
four sittings of the court are held annually in each division. Petty sessions
courts are composed of one resident magistrate (who corresponds to a
stipendiary magistrate in England and Wales) who sits alone except in some
specific cases, for instance in a special crimes court, where two may adjudicate.
Juvenile courts are composed of one resident magistrate and two lay members,
one of whom must be a woman.
Coroners’ courts are common law courts convened when a person appears
to have died a violent or unnatural death or a sudden death of which the
cause is unknown, and in certain other circumstances. In such cases, it is
the duty of the local coroner (who may be a barrister, a solicitor, or a medical
practitioner of not less than five years’ standing, appointed by a county or
a county borough council) to hold an inquiry into how, when, and where the
deceased died; he may hold an inquest in court for this purpose, and he must
do so if he has reasonable cause to believe that the deceased has died a violent
or unnatural death or has died in prison or in circumstances for which an Act
of Parliament provides that an inquest must be held. A jury must be summoned
in certain cases, including those in which there is reason to suspect that the
death was due to murder, manslaughter, or infanticide, or was caused by an
accident arising out of the use of a vehicle on the public highway. If the jury
returns a verdict of murder, manslaughter or infanticide by a particular person,
the coroner must commit that person for trial at assizes. If the death is merely
a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, the coroner need not hold
an inquest, but may order a post-mortem examination to ascertain the cause
of death.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal
inquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and
may report the result of his inquiries to the Crown Agent in order that
Crown Counsel may consider what proceedings, if any, are required.
In Northern Ireland coroners are appointed by the Minister of Home
Affairs and must be either barristers-at-law of not less than five years’
standing practising in Northern Ireland or practising solicitors of the Supreme
Court of Judicature in Northern Ireland of not less than five years’
standing.
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial or
quasi-judicial functions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a
rule, they are set up by Act of Parliament or under powers conferred by
statute, which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure.
The continuing expansion of governmental activity and responsibility for
the general well-being of the community has greatly multiplied the occasions
on which the individual may find himself at issue with the administration,
or with another body of persons or an individual; consequently there has
been a substantial growth in the number of tribunals (there are over 2,000
in existence) and in the range of their activities during the past fifteen years.
Their constitution follows a fairly general pattern: all, for instance, consist
of an uneven number of persons so that a majority decision can be reached;
members are usually appointed by the minister concerned with the subject
but other authorities (for instance, the Crown, the Lord Chancellor and the
Master of the Rolls) have the power of appointment in appropriate cases and
the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord President of the Court of Session in
92
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Board
Military Courts
Scotland, makes appointments in all cases where a lawyer chairman or member
is required; and, with some exceptions, members of tribunals hold office for
a period specified in the warrant or instrument by which they are appointed.
Administrative tribunals may be broadly classified as follows:
(i) those which have permanent members appointed for their special
knowledge, and a chairman who must be a lawyer of experience: for
instance, the Transport Tribunal, which has jurisdiction over British
Railways passenger fares within the London area and London Transport
road and rail fares and also hears appeals relating to road carriers’
licences throughout Great Britain, and the Lands Tribunal, which has
jurisdiction in a variety of matters relating to the value of property;
(ii) those which are purely administrative: for instance, the Special Com¬
missioners of Income Tax, who hear appeals on income tax matters
from the rulings of the Inland Revenue officials;
(iii) those which deal exclusively with matters of interest to one Government
department or public authority: for instance, the Pensions Appeal
Tribunals, which hear appeals against the rejection by the Minister of
Pensions and National Insurance of war service pension claims; and
(iv) those which consist of ordinary people appointed by a minister to arbi¬
trate between individuals: for instance, the Rent Tribunals, which have
jurisdiction in the determination of rents of certain properties.
There are also tribunals which enforce professional discipline, such as the
General Medical Council and the Disciplinary Committee of the Law
Society, but these are entirely different in constitution from the statutory
tribunals and have no jurisdiction over the general public.
Although there is no general provision respecting appeals from statutory
tribunals, the Tribunals and Enquiries Act, 1958, and other Acts provide
for an appeal, at least on a point of law, from all the more important tribunals
to the High Court and, in Scotland, to the Court of Session. An appeal may
also lie to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a minister of the Crown
or to an independent referee. An advisory body known as the Council on
Tribunals (appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of
State for Scotland) exercises general supervision1 over the tribunals and reports
on particular matters, those peculiar to Scotland being dealt with by the
Scottish committee of the Council.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, first appointed in 1964 by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland after consultation
with the Lord Chancellor, consists of a chairman of wide legal experience and
five other legally qualified members. Its function is to entertain applications
for ex gratia payments of compensation, in certain circumstances, to victims
of crimes of violence in Great Britain or on a British vessel or aircraft.
Compensation is assessed on the basis of common law damages and, generally
speaking, takes the form of a lump sum payment.
Generally speaking, courts martial have jurisdiction over serving members
of the armed forces in connection with the system of military law enforceable
under provisions of the Army Act, Air Force Act and Naval Discipline Act.
(Non-military offences committed in the United Kingdom by members of the
Excluding supervision of the professional disciplinary tribunals.
LAW AND ORDER
ADMINISTRATION
OF JUSTICE
93
armed forces are dealt with in the ordinary criminal courts.) Courts martial
may be convened by any authorised officer.
At every general court martial, and in important cases at district courts
martial, an officer, known as a judge advocate, must be present to advise the
court upon law and procedure and ensure that the accused is afforded a fair
trial. The Judge Advocate General’s Department acts for the Air Force as
well as the Army, but the Navy has a separate Judge Advocate of the Fleet.
Appeals lie to the Courts Martial Appeals Court, and from that court to
the House of Lords if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the House of Lords that
the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
There is no Minister of Justice in the United Kingdom. Responsibility for
the administration of the judicial system in England and Wales, when it
does not rest with the courts themselves, lies partly with the Lord Chancellor
and partly with the Home Secretary. The former is concerned with the
composition of all courts, both criminal and civil, with parts of criminal
procedure and with everything relating to civil law, and the latter with
criminal law, preventing offences, apprehending offenders, part of the process
of trying them, and virtually the whole of their treatment. The Prime Minister
is also concerned in that he is responsible for recommending to the Crown
the highest judicial appointments.
The administrative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature and the
appointment of the officers of the court (for instance, the masters, registrars
and clerks) is partly in the hands of the Lord Chancellor and partly in the
hands of the appropriate judges. The Lord Chancellor is concerned with
legal procedure in that he is a member of the Rule Committee which makes
the rules of the Supreme Court, appoints the County Court Rule Committee
and has power to alter or disallow the rules made by it. He is concerned with
law reform in that he refers questions on this subject (save in the field of
criminal law, where the Home Secretary is primarily responsible) to the
Law Reform Committee and the Private International Law Committee, and
that the reports of these committees, which often become the basis of legisla¬
tion, are presented to him.
Magistrates’ courts are mainly administered by the magistrates themselves,
chiefly through committees known as magistrates’ courts committees (com¬
mittee of magistrates in inner London); but the local authorities, with
financial assistance from the Government, are responsible for meeting their
costs, and the Home Secretary, besides exercising a general oversight, has
certain specific responsibilities, including the approval of boundary changes,
approval of the appointment of justices’ clerks, and deciding disputes on
financial matters.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary and the Court of Session are
administered by the Clerk of the Justiciary and his staff and the principal
Clerk of Session and his staff respectively. The Secretary of State for Scotland
is responsible for the staffing and general organisation of the sheriff courts.
In Northern Ireland the administration of the superior courts has been
reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. The judges are appointed by
the Crown and are removable only on an address of both Houses of that
Parliament. The Minister of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland is responsible
for the staffing and general organisation of the county and petty sessions
courts; the judges of the county court and resident magistrates are appointed
by the Governor of Northern Ireland.
94
THE PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The operation of the law requires the participation of judges with whom,
aided in certain cases by juries, the decision of disputed cases rests; of the
officers of the court, who have general or specialised functions of an adminis¬
trative (and sometimes of a judicial) nature in the courts to which they are
attached; and of the barristers (advocates in Scotland) and solicitors who are
entrusted with representing the interests of the parties to a dispute.1
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts (since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power) and the Sovereign, acting on the
advice of ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary. In
England and Wales appointments to the highest positions—the Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the
President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division and the Lords
Justices who are the judges of the Court of Appeal—are made on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister, while the Lord Chancellor recom¬
mends the appointment of the puisne judges, the county court judges
(except in Lancashire where they are recommended by the Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster), the chairmen of quarter sessions, the recorders of
boroughs, and the metropolitan and other stipendiary magistrates. Justices
of the peace are appointed on behalf of the Crown by the Lord Chancellor,2
who is advised, as to a county by the Lord Lieutenant3 with the assistance
of a local advisory committee, and as to the boroughs by separate advisory
committees.
In Scotland the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appoint¬
ment of the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord
Justice Clerk. Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies
with the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State is responsible
for the appointment and removal of justices of the peace.
Judges are not engaged in politics, except in the case of the Lord Chancellor
who, as well as being head of the judiciary, is a leading member of the
Government in power. With the exception of justices of the peace, judges
have always been appointed from practising barristers or advocates and neither
their training nor their career is in any way dictated by the State.
Once appointed, judges normally hold office for life or until statutory
retiring age. However, in certain circumstances (for instance, in cases of mis¬
conduct or proven incapacity) judges of the inferior courts in England and
Wales may be removed from their position by the Lord Chancellor. In
Scotland the Secretary of State may issue an order for the removal from
office of a sheriff-principal on a report prepared by the Lord President of the
Court of Session and the Lord Justice Clerk, on the grounds of inability,
neglect of duty or misbehaviour, but this order is required to lie before both
Houses of Parliament for a period of four weeks. A sheriff-substitute may
similarly be removed from office, but in his case no parliamentary procedure
is necessary.
In England and Wales all superior judges (other than the Lord Chancellor
who, as a Cabinet Minister, changes with the Government) are subject to a
1 The law allows full liberty to the individual to conduct his own case, both in its initial
and final stages, if he thinks fit. The more usual practice, however, is to be legally
represented.
2 Except in Lancashire, where the Chancellor of the Duchy acts on behalf of the Crown
in this matter.
3 The office of the Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth
century. Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county
militia.
LAW AND ORDER
Juries
The Legal
Profession
95
power of removal only by the Sovereign on an address presented by both
Houses of Parliament.1 Since 1701 only one such address has been moved
(against a judge convicted of misappropriation of funds, in 1830); and it can
be stated with confidence that Parliament would never use this means to
attempt to interfere with judicial independence. Similarly, although no court
in the United Kingdom would ever question the validity of an Act of Parlia¬
ment which had been legally promulgated and published it might, through
its interpretation of the statute, come to a decision contrary to the policy of
the Government which introduced the Act. In such a case the Government
could try to persuade Parliament to clarify or amend the statute by new
legislation. It would not be open to it to penalise the judge or to try to
influence the court in any other way.
A jury in England and Wales summoned to assizes or county quarter sessions,
or in a civil action, consists of twelve persons (except in county courts, where
juries consist of eight persons). In Scotland the jury consists of fifteen persons
in criminal cases and twelve in civil cases and in Northern Ireland of twelve
in criminal and seven in civil cases. Most householders (men and women
alike) are liable for jury service if they are British subjects between the ages
of 21 and 60, but persons following certain occupations can claim exemption.2
A jury is completely independent of both the judiciary and the executive.
In criminal cases the accused can have up to seven jurors changed without
giving reasons and both defence and prosecution can object for cause
shown (for instance, lack of impartiality), but once members of the jury have
been sworn, they are protected from interference of any kind. It is an offence to
assault, threaten or attempt to corrupt a juryman either before or during a trial.
At certain inquests at coroners’ courts in England and Wales and Northern
Ireland, a jury is required to be present to return a verdict on how, when and
where a deceased person died. The jury in this instance consists of from
seven to eleven jurors. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner
to decide whether objects of gold or silver found in the ground are ‘treasure
trove’.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Each performs distinct duties—solicitors undertake
legal business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems sub¬
mitted through solicitors and conduct proceedings in the higher courts—though
certain functions are common to both.
A barrister in England is required to have reached an accepted educational
standard, to have passed the legal examinations conducted by the Council of
Legal Education and to have become a member of one of the four Inns of
Court—Gray’s Inn, Lincoln’s Inn, the Middle Temple and the Inner Temple.
A barrister with a substantial junior practice may apply to the Lord Chancellor
for a patent appointing him Queen’s Counsel—a proceeding known as ‘taking
silk’. Most higher judicial appointments are made from among barristers who
have become Queen’s Counsel. The professional conduct of a barrister is
subject to the scrutiny of the General Council of the Bar; but disciplinary
powers are vested exclusively in the Benchers of the Inns of Court.
1 There is no statutory provision for removal of judges of the Court of Session or High
Court of Justiciary from office and it is probable that special legislation would be
required to effect such a dismissal.
2 The conditions for jury service in England and Wales are currently under review by
a departmental committee.
96
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
LEGAL AID AND
ADVICE
Legal Aid in
Civil Cases
A prospective solicitor in England and Wales must be considered suitable
by the appropriate committee of the Law Society (the professional organisation
of solicitors) and he must enter into ‘articles of clerkship’ with a practising
solicitor of not less than five years’ standing before he can begin his professional
career. The term of articles lasts for three or five years, depending upon the
educational qualifications of the student. An articled clerk must pass the
necessary examinations held by the Law Society and, unless he has been a
barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is generally required to attend
a course of studies at a recognised law school. Once a solicitor is qualified,
he may become a member of the Law Society.
In Scotland an advocate requires to have an arts degree or its equivalent.
The conditions applying for the admission of solicitors are similar to those
applying in England and Wales. The analogous professional organisations
are the Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland.
In Northern Ireland barristers are members of the Inn of Court of Northern
Ireland; there is also a General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The
professional organisation for solicitors is the Incorporated Law Society of
Northern Ireland.
Schemes for free legal assistance to persons of slender means and resources
have existed for centuries in some courts—to a limited extent in England and
Wales, and to a somewhat greater extent in Scotland. The Legal Aid and
Advice Act, 1949, and the corresponding Legal Aid (Scotland) Act, 1949,
were introduced to improve existing arrangements in civil proceedings so that
no one would be financially unable to prosecute a just and reasonable claim
or to defend a legal right, and also to make the facilities already available in
criminal proceedings1 more easily accessible to those who needed them.
The scheme established by the Act of 1949 for providing legal aid in civil
matters has been gradually brought into operation, until today legal aid is
available for nearly all types of civil proceedings in nearly all courts of law.
It is also available for oral legal advice and in certain circumstances where
the assistance of a lawyer is needed but which do not (or do not yet) involve
litigation.
Free legal aid in civil cases is available to persons with very small incomes and
capital, and contributory legal aid to those in higher income and capital groups.
The majority of people in England and Wales are financially eligible for legal aid.
The legal aid scheme in England and Wales is run by the Law Society under
the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor. It is operated by 12 area com¬
mittees and a network of local committees composed of barristers and
solicitors (who may be paid a fee), with a salaried staff. The cost is met from
the Legal Aid Fund, drawn from three sources: contributions from assisted
persons; costs recovered from opposite parties in litigation; and a grant from
the Exchequer.
Applicants for free legal aid must show that they have reasonable grounds
for asserting or disputing a claim. A successful applicant is allowed to select
from a panel a solicitor who, if necessary, instructs a barrister, and the case
is then conducted in the ordinary way. Certain types of action, including
libel and slander, are excluded from the scheme.
In Scotland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of
Scotland through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court
1 Legal aid in criminal proceedings is under review by a departmental committee.
LAW AND ORDER
97
Legal Aid in
Criminal
Courts
Legal Advice
Legal Aid in
Northern
Ireland
committee and sixteen local committees. To obtain legal aid for litigation an
applicant is required to show ‘probable cause’ and produce in support of his
application a statement corroborated according to the requirements of
Scottish law. Assistance is available in connection with appeals to the House
of Lords from the Court of Session, in civil proceedings before the Court of
Session, the Lands Valuation Appeal Court and the sheriff courts and in
matters not involving litigation. Where litigation is not involved, the applicant
must show he has reasonable grounds for taking the proposed legal
action.
Free legal aid is available in the criminal courts in England and Wales under
the Poor Prisoners’ Defence Act, 1930, which provides for the granting of
either a legal aid certificate which entitles the recipient to the services of a
solicitor (or, in the case of a preliminary inquiry into a charge of murder, of
a solicitor and counsel) in defending a charge heard summarily or at committal
proceedings in indictable cases, or a defence certificate which provides both
solicitor and counsel in a trial on indictment. The granting of these certificates
is in the discretion of the justices or judge before whom the applicant is to be
tried, except in the case of a person committed for trial on a charge of murder,
when a defence certificate must be’ granted if the defendant has insufficient
means.
Free legal aid for an appeal to quarter sessions is provided for in the
Summary Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act, 1933, which lays down that, in proper
cases, an appeal aid certificate may be granted by a magistrates’ court or
quarter sessions. The granting of legal aid appeals to the Court of Criminal
Appeal rests with a judge of that court who may also grant legal aid for the
purposes of a further appeal to the House of Lords.
The cost of legal aid in magistrates’ courts is paid out of the Legal Aid Fund.
In the higher courts payments are made in the first instance out of local
authority funds and the cost is reimbursed by the central Government.
Pending the full implementation of the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland)
Act, 1949, legal aid in criminal cases in Scotland has been limited to voluntary
arrangements, operated by the legal profession, for the representation of
poor persons, either free of charge or at modified fees. Legislation has
recently been passed, however, to facilitate the introduction of a statutory
scheme, financed by the State, of legal aid in criminal proceedings.
Oral advice on legal matters is available, both in England and Wales and in
Scotland, free of charge to persons in receipt of national assistance and at a
very reasonable cost, i.e. at 2s. 6d. for an interview of up to thirty minutes,
to those of limited means. Advice is given by practising solicitors paid out
of the legal aid funds of the two countries. The scheme is administered by the
two Law Societies, which also run voluntary schemes (for a fee of £1) for
those who do not qualify for statutory assistance.
In Northern Ireland free legal aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons
under the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Act, 1945, the cost being met
from public funds.
Legislation providing for a comprehensive system of legal assistance
(covering legal advice, preliminary legal aid and legal aid by way of repre¬
sentation by solicitor and counsel in all courts and tribunals) to persons
within the income and capital ranges specified in the Legal Aid Act, i960,
was recommended in a majority report of a committee appointed by the
98
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Penalties
Northern Ireland Minister of Home Affairs. Legislation providing for a Legal
Aid and Advice scheme will shortly be laid before the Northern Ireland
Parliament.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The chief aims of the penal system of the United Kingdom are to deter the
potential law-breaker and to reform the convicted offender. The element of
deterrence is intended to lie in the fear of detection, public trial, and possibility
of punishment rather than in the severity of the punishment itself. In England
and Wales penal practice is under review by a Royal Commission which is
re-examining, in the light of modern knowledge of crime and its causes, the
concepts and purposes which should underlie the punishment and treatment
of offenders.
Except in relation to murder and certain rare offences for which there is a
fixed penalty, the court has discretion to select the penalty (within maxima
prescribed by law) that it considers most suitable in the light of the circum¬
stances of the offence and the offender. In general, the courts have power to
impose either imprisonment or a fine for serious offences (both in certain
cases); while most minor offences are punishable by a fine only, with the
alternative of imprisonment if the fine is not paid. Moreover, the court has
discretion to discharge an offender absolutely, to place him on probation
or (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland only) to discharge him condition¬
ally (i.e. subject to the condition that he commits no offence during a specified
period not exceeding twelve months). Summary courts, when they consider
sentencing a first offender to imprisonment, must be satisfied that no other
method of dealing with him is appropriate.
In England and Wales no offender under the age of 17 years may be
sentenced to imprisonment. Offenders aged 17 and under 21 are not sentenced
to imprisonment for any period between six months1 and three years (unless
they are persistent offenders, in which case a sentence of imprisonment of
18 months or more may be passed). In Scotland, no offender under 21 may be
detained in a prison. Methods of dealing with young offenders are described
on p. 103.
Corrective training or preventive detention (shortly to be replaced by
extended sentences of ordinary imprisonment) may be imposed on persistent
offenders. Corrective training, which lasts from two to four years (seven years
in Northern Ireland), is designed to correct a man’s criminal tendency and
encourage him to become a responsible citizen. Preventive detention is usually
imposed on offenders whose response to previous institutional training has
been unsatisfactory; the sentence runs for not less than five years (three in
Northern Ireland) or more than 14 years, as the court decides.
Since 1957 the death penalty in Great Britain for murder has been limited
to murders classified as ‘capital murder’. These are not necessarily the type
of murder regarded as the most wicked, but are those which strike especially
at the maintenance of law and order and on which the deterrent effect of
capital punishment is believed to be most likely to operate, i.e. murder done
in the course or furtherance of theft, murder by shooting or by causing an
1 The Criminal Justice Act, 1961, provides for the eventual abolition of short-term
sentences (less than six months) for young offenders such sentences to be replaced,
when sufficient accommodation is available, by detention in a detention centre for
between three and six months.
LAW AND ORDER
Administrative
Authorities
99
explosion, murder committed to escape lawful arrest or to effect or assist
escape or rescue from legal custody, murder of a police officer (or person
assisting him) acting in the execution of his duty, or murder by a prisoner
of a prison officer (or person assisting him) acting in the execution of his duty.
The penalty for murder not in capital categories is imprisonment for life,
except that the death penalty continues to apply where a person who is
convicted of murder has previously been convicted of another murder com¬
mitted in Great Britain on a different occasion. Murderers under the age of
18 years at the time that the crime was committed are not sentenced to death
or to life imprisonment, but ‘to be detained during Her Majesty’s pleasure’.
If it can be proved that a person accused of murder was suffering from such
abnormality of mind as substantially impaired his mental responsibility at
the date of conviction, he is entitled to be convicted of the lesser offence of
manslaughter.
It is the long-established practice for the Home Secretary or the Secretary
of State for Scotland to review every capital case before the law is allowed to
take its course and to consider whether there are grounds for advising the
Crown to exercise the prerogative of mercy. Where a reprieve is recommended,
the sentence of death is commuted to one of imprisonment for life. A person
subject to a sentence of life imprisonment is liable to be detained for the rest
of his life, but the Home Secretary may, if he thinks fit, release him on licence
at any time. In recent years, the period served, in an average case, by persons
whose death sentences have been commuted has been about nine years, but
the period varies according to the circumstances of the particular case and
the question of whether the prisoner’s release would be likely to involve risk
to the public.
The Homicide Act, 1957, is not applicable to Northern Ireland where
sentence of death is passed in all cases of murder. The exercise of the preroga¬
tive of mercy in such cases is considered by the Northern Ireland Cabinet, which
tenders advice to the Governor in his capacity as representative of the Crown.
In England and Wales the Home Secretary is the minister generally responsible
for legislation relating to the treatment of offenders, for collecting statistical
and other information about the operation of the penal system, for reviewing
the advantages and defects of the various methods of treating offenders, and
for bringing information about these methods to the attention of the courts.
He is specifically responsible for supervising the approved schools, for pro¬
moting the efficiency of the probation service, and for providing, maintaining
and managing prisons and borstal institutions.
The general supervision of penal institutions is the responsibility of visiting
committees, appointed by the justices, for those prisons to which convicted
persons are committed direct from their courts, or of boards of visitors,
appointed by the Home Secretary, for the other prisons and institutions.
The main functions of the committees and boards are: to act as the superior
disciplinary authority of the prison or institution; to constitute an independent
judicial body to which any prisoner or inmate may make a complaint or
request; and to report direct to the Home Secretary, both by formal annual
report and as occasion may require, on every aspect of the administration of
the prison. The boards also advise on the release on licence of the inmates of
borstal institutions.
The penal systems in Scotland and Northern Ireland are based on principles
similar to those applied in England and Wales. The Secretary of State for
Scotland is advised in the discharge of his duties by the Scottish Advisory
IOO
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prisons
Classification of
Prisoners
Training
Employment
Council on the Treatment of Offenders. In Northern Ireland the system is
the responsibility of the Ministry for Home Affairs.
The post-war increase in the total number of people found guilty of indictable
offences led to severe overcrowding in prisons and strained the resources
of borstals, approved schools and the probation service. Measures to deal
with the problems include a substantial increase in the number of prisons and
other penal institutions and the reconstruction or replacement of a number
of old prisons.
Prisons in England and Wales are of the following types: local prisons of
the ordinary type, which receive all classes of prisoners direct from the courts;
local prisons of a special type, which may be of varying degrees of security, for
short-sentence prisoners, chiefly first offenders; young prisoners’ centres for
the reception of youths under 21 years of age with sentences of three months
or over, as far as accommodation permits; regional training prisons (some of
which are open) for first offenders and trainable prisoners of other categories,
including those sentenced to corrective training; and central prisons for
habitual law-breakers and long-term first offenders—one for the latter class
is an open prison.
The Scottish system of classification of prisoners is broadly the same as
that of England and Wales; but each prison in Scotland, except the open
prison, accommodates more than one classification group. In Northern
Ireland, with its smaller population, the necessity for several kinds of prison
to separate the various classes of prisoners does not arise to the same extent.
Every person committed to prison is received in the local prison serving the
court from which he is committed. Subsequently, he may either serve his
whole sentence at the local prison or be sent to another institution, depending
on his age, the length and nature of his sentence, and his personal history
and character.
The object of classification is first to ensure the separation of the sexes, of
young persons from adults and of untried prisoners from convicted prisoners;
secondly, to prevent contamination, among convicted prisoners, of the better
by the worse; and thirdly, to provide training appropriate to their needs for
those among convicted prisoners who seem likely to benefit therefrom.
In prison training, efforts are being made to provide (1) work of a kind likely
to help fit prisoners to earn their living after release, with technical training
in skilled trades for certain persons, (2) suitable educational facilities, and
(3) opportunities for the development of a sense of personal responsibility,
including (for suitable prisoners) training in open conditions.
New problems in the organisation and management of industries in prisons
have arisen as the result of changes that have taken place both in industrial
methods and in the prison system during the past thirty years, and because
of the substantial increase in the number of prison inmates for whom employ¬
ment must be found. The whole subject is therefore being studied by a
standing Advisory Council on the Employment of Prisoners, appointed by
the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Council
has so far made three reports: the first deals with suitable kinds of work, job
training and earnings for prisoners; the second with the employment and indus¬
trial training of borstal inmates; and the third with the organisation of prison
industries.
LAW AND ORDER
101
Education
Medical
Services
Religion and
Welfare
Except in local prisons in England and Wales, where the hours are shorter,
most prisoners spend about 40 hours a week in the prison workshops or in
other employment such as building, farm work, domestic work and gardening
in the prison precincts. A few prisoners are employed outside the prisons
on various projects, such as agriculture, land drainage, road works and
forestry.
In England, Wales, and Scotland, small payments are made to inmates for
the work they do, and good work is rewarded by payments above the mini¬
mum; in Northern Ireland there is a progressive system of earnings, which
is not related to output nor to work done.
Educational schemes are provided in prisons in England, Wales, and Scotland
by the local education authorities with the advice of the Government depart¬
ments responsible for education in their respective countries, and in Northern
Ireland by the Ministry of Home Affairs. In England and Wales the local
authorities also provide tutor organisers and most of the instructors; in all
cases the full cost of their services is reimbursed. Evening classes and a wide
range of correspondence courses are also available; and the system of vocational
training courses in operation in a number of prisons enables suitable trainees
to take the examinations of recognised examining bodies.
Educational schemes are supplemented by periodical lectures, film displays,
concerts, and dramatic performances. Prisoners may also use the prison
library, which in most cases is now stocked by the county, city or borough
library committee.
Medical attention is provided by full-time and part-time medical officers whose
duties include not only the care of the physical and mental health of prison
inmates, but also the oversight of those services which affect health in prisons.
A few prisons and borstals have their own psychiatric clinics (with qualified
medical staff, visiting psychotherapists and psychiatric social workers) to
which inmates may be transferred where necessary. In England and Wales
there is one psychiatric prison, with accommodation for some 350 people,
and a prison psychological service, whose officers are employed to assist
governors and medical officers in their work of examining and classifying
prisoners, and to advise on methods of training. The hospital facilities of
the National Health Service (see Chapter 5) are also available for the treatment
of prisoners in appropriate cases. Arrangements may be made for prisoners
serving short-term sentences to receive treatment after release.
A chaplain of the Church of England (in Scotland, of the Church of Scotland
and in Northern Ireland, of the Church of Ireland and Presbyterian Church)
and a Roman Catholic priest are appointed to every prison. Ministers of the
Methodist Church and of other denominations are either appointed or
specially called in as required. Regular services are held, and chaplains and
other ministers of religion may visit prisoners in their cells.
Welfare is the general concern of the prison staff, particularly of the
chaplains and assistant governors but all prisons have resident or visiting
social workers.
Prisoners may write and receive letters regularly and may be visited by their
relatives and friends at specified intervals. They may also receive visits from
prison visitors specially appointed for the purpose. The voluntary work
of prison visitors in England and Wales is co-ordinated and guided by the
National Association of Prison Visitors.
O*
102
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Privileges and
Discipline
Discharge and
After-Care
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to im¬
prisonment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence
(one-fourth in Northern Ireland in respect of sentences of less than two
years), provided that this does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in
Scotland, 30 days). A life prisoner may be released on licence by the Home
Secretary (see p. 99). All prisoners become entitled to certain personal
privileges at successive stages in their sentence.
For breaches of discipline in prison, the prison governor, the visiting
committee or the board of visitors have power to order, among other penalties,
forfeiture of remission (postponement of eligibility for release) and forfeiture
of privileges.
All prisons have social workers, either resident or visiting. They are available
to help in any personal problems that a prisoner may have; to take such
steps as may be practicable to alleviate any anxieties he may express about
the circumstances of his dependants; and to encourage and assist him to
make suitable plans for his future. Social workers in prisons work closely
with those agencies in the community whose aid the prisoner and his family
may need either during his sentence or after his release.
In England and Wales pre-release courses, at which experts hold open
forum with prisoners nearing their release on the domestic, social and
industrial problems with which they are likely to be faced, are conducted
at all prisons. Specially selected prisoners amongst those sentenced to preven¬
tive detention, long-term imprisonment and, in Scotland, corrective training
are allowed to work in ordinary civilian jobs outside prison during the
months immediately preceding their discharge; hostels for this purpose
have been established at several prisons. Home leave, allowing five clear
days at home, is extensively granted to many categories of prisoners with
sentences of two years or over towards the end of their sentences to enable
them to make family adjustments and contacts with potential employers.
On discharge from local or regional prisons, certain classes of prisoners
serving sentences of less than four years (three years in the case of most
women) may be assisted by local discharged prisoners’ aid societies (voluntary
bodies supported partly by private and partly by public funds) or by the
National Association of Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies (a central co¬
ordinating body, maintained by grants from public funds for its administrative
expenses). The National Association is also responsible for welfare and after¬
care arrangements at regional training prisons and special local prisons.
Statutory supervision in England and Wales applies to persons released
from preventive detention and corrective training, to young prisoners, and to
persons discharged from borstals and detention centres. The sanctions for
failure to observe the conditions of supervision are recall to prison, borstal
or detention centre. Statutory supervision (except for young persons discharged
from detention centres) is the responsibility of the Central After-Care
Association, a voluntary body financed from public funds, of which the council,
appointed by the Home Secretary, includes in its membership representatives
of the Ministry of Labour, of the National Assistance Board and of the proba¬
tion service. The Association also undertakes voluntary after-care, on release,
of certain long-term prisoners. The After-Care Council, appointed by the
Secretary of State for Scotland, carries out similar duties in Scotland.
The Central After-Care Association works through local associates, usually
probation officers; the National Association works through the after-care
officers of local aid societies; and the After-Care Council in Scotland uses
LAW AND ORDER
Treatment of
Young
Offenders
Remand
103
the services of voluntary guardians. The officers of the local organisations
make arrangements for the reception of discharged prisoners, and advise,
assist and befriend them for as long as is necessary, or as required by statute.1
In Northern Ireland the after-care of all prisoners is carried out by the
discharged prisoners’ aid societies with the help of probation officers.
Under the English legal system, a child under the age of ten cannot be
charged with an offence. A child between ten and 14 years old, who is
charged with an offence other than homicide, must be dealt with in a
juvenile court unless charged jointly with an adult. A young person (i.e. one
between 14 and 17 years of age) charged with an indictable offence may be
dealt with summarily (as is usually the case) or committed for trial by jury.
In certain cases young persons may claim to be tried by jury, though this
right is rarely exercised.
In Scotland all children and young persons between eight and 17 years of
age who are charged with offences must be dealt with in juvenile courts,
unless they have been charged in conjunction with adult offenders or are
proceeded against on indictment.
In Northern Ireland, likewise, a child or young person between the ages
of eight and 17 will normally be dealt with by a juvenile court unless charged
jointly with an adult or committed for trial by jury in the case of an indictable
offence. Such committal may take place at the request of the accused’s parents
or at the discretion of the juvenile court.
Methods of treatment available in law for dealing with children and young
persons found guilty of committing an offence include: absolute discharge;
conditional discharge (in England and Wales only); fines imposed upon the
offender or, in certain circumstances, upon his parents; probation; committal
to the care of a fit person (normally the appropriate local authority) until the
age of 18; or committal to an approved school. Offenders aged not less than
10 and under 21 years may be ordered to attend an attendance centre; aged
not less than 14 and under 21, they may be detained in a detention centre;
aged not less than 15 and under 21, they may be sent for a period of borstal
training. In Scotland offenders of 17 and under 21 found unsuitable for
detention centre or borstal training may be detained in a young offenders’
institution.
For advice on matters particularly concerning young offenders the Home
Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland are jointly advised by a Standing
Advisory Council on Juvenile Delinquency.
In England, Wales and Scotland remand homes are provided by local
authorities for the custody of boys and girls under the age of 17 before their
appearance in court, or between court appearances (while inquiries are
made as to the best method of treatment for them), while they are awaiting
vacancies in approved schools, or for a short period (up to a month) of
punitive detention. In Northern Ireland the responsibility for providing
or arranging for the provision of remand homes rests with the Ministry of
Home Affairs.
In addition to remand homes, remand centres are being established in
England and Wales (and are planned for Scotland), to which a court may send
young persons between the ages of 17 and 21 who would otherwise be
1 Recommendations for the amalgamation of statutory supervision and voluntary after¬
care into a common service have been accepted in principle by the Government; it may
be some years, however, before they can he given full effect.
104 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
remanded to prison, and those under 17 years old who are unsuitable for
remand homes.
The system of remand offers valuable opportunities for observation, the
results of which are included in reports for the guidance of those responsible
for the future of young offenders.
Approved Schools Approved schools are residential schools for boys and girls under the age of
17 years who, the courts consider, need not only removal from home but
also a fairly long period of training. These boys and girls may be sent to
approved schools because they have committed an offence or are in need of
care or protection or on certain other grounds not involving the commission
of an offence. The schools may be provided by local authorities, by voluntary
organisations concerned with the welfare of children and young people on a
national scale, or by local committees formed by people interested in such
work. In England and Wales the schools must be approved by the Home
Secretary; in Scotland, by the Secretary of State for Scotland; and in Northern
Ireland, where they are known as training schools, by the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
The schools are for boys only or for girls only. They are classified according
to age on admission, and include separate schools for Roman Catholics.
Assignment to a school in the appropriate age group is determined by such
considerations as the location of the school in relation to the home, the type
of training provided, and the probable reaction of a child or young person
to the individual personalities of the staff.
The main ingredients of approved school training are education in the
formal sense, religious education and guidance, craft training (for the older
groups), attention to health and to the use of recreation and leisure, social
training and personal case work. Its primary object is the re-adjustment of
the boys and girls for their return to the community; contact is maintained
with their homes while they are in approved schools and after they have left
help and supervision are given.
A child or young person may be detained in an approved school or training
school for three years, except for boys and girls under the age of 12 years and 4
months at the time of committal, who may be kept until the age of 15 years and
4 months, and those over the age of 16 on committal, who can be detained
only up to the age of 19, or 19^ if they have been found guilty of absconding
or of serious misconduct in an approved school. In England and Wales a boy
or girl aged 15 years or over, and in Scotland any approved school pupil,
who presents a threat to the discipline of a school may be temporarily trans¬
ferred on a justice’s warrant to another establishment pending inquiry as to the
best means of dealing with him. In England and Wales a boy or girl of 15 years
or over who is detained in an approved school as an offender and is thought to
be more suitable for borstal training may, with the consent of the Home
Secretary, be brought before a magistrates’ court, which has power to order
removal to borstal. Managers of approved schools are under an obligation
to review the progress of each pupil in their charge with a view to granting a
release as soon as he or she is fit for it; release within the first six months of
the detention period requires the consent of the responsible Minister.
Statutory responsibility for after-care of boys and girls released from approved
schools rests on the school managers who are assisted in this work by welfare
officers and the probation and child-care services.
Attendance Centres A number of attendance centres have been established in England and Wales
to deal with boys between the ages of 10 and 17 found guilty of offences for
LAW AND ORDER
Detention Centres
Borstal Itistitutions
io5
which an adult can be sentenced to imprisonment. This form of treatment is
designed to teach young offenders a respect for the law and to give them
some instruction in the proper use of leisure. Boys ordered to attend must
do so during their spare time on Saturday mornings or afternoons; they may
be required to attend for up to three hours on any one occasion and for a
total of not less than twelve hours (with certain exceptions) and not more
than twenty-four. The activities include a period of instruction in handicrafts,
or a lecture (for example, on first aid) and a period of physical training or
disciplinary tasks under supervision. Efforts are made at the centres to
induce the boys to join a youth club or other suitable organisation.
There are also two centres for youths aged 17 to 21, which operate on
lines similar to those adopted at the juvenile centres, but the activities are
adapted to meet the needs of the older age group.
Detention centres provide a means of treating young offenders for whom a
long period of residential training in an approved school or borstal does not
seem necessary but who cannot be taught respect for the law by such measures
as fines or probation. In England and Wales junior centres are available for
boys between the ages of 14 and 17 years, and senior centres for boys between
the ages of 17 and 21. One centre is also available for girls in both age groups.
In Scotland there are two senior centres. Detention in England and Wales
may be for not less than three and not more than six months; if consecutive
sentences are passed, the total term may not exceed nine months at any one time.
Remission of up to one-sixth of the sentence may be earned for good conduct. In
Scotland the fixed period for all detention centre sentences is three months.
As the intention is primarily deterrent, the life of a centre is strict and
vigorous, demanding a brisk tempo and the highest possible standard of
discipline and behaviour in every aspect of training. The routine provides a
normal working week of 44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to
physical training, and experience has shown that much positive training can
be given within the limits of this framework. Boys of compulsory school age
receive full-time education, and classes of further education are provided for
others in the evenings. Statutory supervision for up to 12 months of young
persons discharged from detention centres is undertaken by probation officers.
The borstal training system consists of different borstals specialising in
different types of young offender, classified according to such criteria as age,
intelligence and criminal sophistication. There are also a few borstals for
special purposes, such as allocation or recall. In England and Wales the
period of the sentence ranges from six months to two years and is followed
by supervision for two years from the date of release. In Scotland, where
there is no minimum period of detention, the maximum is two years and the
supervision period is for one year from the date of release from the institution.
Sentences in Northern Ireland are for periods not exceeding three years
including the period under supervision; normally release does not take place
until at least nine months of the sentence has expired. The system is essentially
remedial and educational, based on personal training by a carefully selected
staff. Emphasis is placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is
much freedom of movement, and many borstals are conducted in open
conditions. An initial period of classification ensures that each young offender
is sent to the institution best suited to his or her requirements.
Probation
The probation service is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender
while he remains at work or at school under the supervision of a probation
io6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
Special Inquiries
officer, whose duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature
of the service is that it relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before
making a probation order, the court must explain its effects and make sure
that the probationer understands that if he fails to comply with the require¬
ments of the order he will be liable to be dealt with for the original offence.
A probation order cannot be made without the consent of the person con¬
cerned unless (in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland only) he is under
14 years of age. The order usually requires the probationer to keep in regular
touch with the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to lead an
industrious life. It may also require him to live in a specified place, or to
submit to treatment for his mental condition. A probation order is made for
not less than one year and not more than three years.
Every magistrates’ court and superior criminal court must have available
the services of probation officers of both sexes. In London the appointment
of probation officers is the responsibility of the Home Secretary, and in
Northern Ireland of the Ministry of Home Affairs; elsewhere it is the
responsibility of probation committees appointed by magistrates in England
and Wales, and by local authorities in Scotland (except for certain ex officio
members), but first appointments are subject to confirmation by the Home
Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Training
facilities in England and Wales are provided by the Home Office on the
advice of the Probation Advisory and Training Board and are made available,
by arrangement, to Northern Ireland officers. In Scotland training is mainly
provided during the first year of appointment and before the officer enters on
the duties of the service.
Research into the causes and prevention of crime and into various methods
of dealing with offenders is increasingly recognised as of vital importance in
dealing with the problems of delinquency. A research unit of the Home Office
carries out a wide programme of research and maintains liaison with academic
organisations. Government grants for criminological research at universities
have risen to more than £50,000 a year and expenditure of over £80,000 is
planned for 1964-65.
The principal university research establishment is the Institute of Crimino¬
logy in Cambridge University, which, in addition to its research activities,
conducts advanced courses in criminology for people engaged in work relating
to the treatment of offenders and the administration of the criminal law, and
a postgraduate course in criminology. Research is also undertaken at many
other universities, including Oxford, London, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
In addition to research, special inquiries into particular questions are con¬
ducted, as necessary, by advisory bodies or specially appointed committees.
Reports have been issued on such matters as corporal punishment, the non-
residential treatment of offenders under 21 years, preventive detention, and
the organisation of after-care for discharged prisoners.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised and controlled on a local
basis under the guidance of those ministers of the Crown who are responsible
for the maintenance of law and order in their respective countries. In England
and Wales the responsible minister is the Home Secretary; in Scotland, the
Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland the police force is
LAW AND ORDER
POLICE IN
GREAT BRITAIN
Police Forces
107
controlled by an Inspector-General, who is responsible to the Minister of Home
Affairs.
There are 157 regular police forces in Great Britain: 126 in England and
Wales and 31 in Scotland. Each of these forces (between which there is close
and constant co-operation) is responsible for a separate police district. In
England and Wales the forces are defined according to area of responsibility1
as: county forces; borough forces; combined forces, which are forces whose
area of responsibility extends over two or more counties or boroughs; the
Metropolitan Police Force, which is responsible for an area of approximately
fifteen miles radius from Charing Cross, but excluding the City of London;
and the City of London force. In Scotland there are county forces, burgh
forces and combined forces.
In England and Wales and Scotland police forces vary considerably in size
according to the area and population which they serve. Thus the Metropolitan
Police Force has a strength of approximately 18,000, while that of the smallest
force in Scotland is 20.
The actual strength of the regular police force in Great Britain is approxi¬
mately 80,000, including women. This is below the desirable figure, but the
improvement in recruitment shown in recent years has been maintained.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are the River Tyne police, the
police forces maintained by certain public services, such as the statutory
transport authorities, the Service and departmental constabularies, and the
special constabularies attached to each regular police force.
Police
Authorities
and Chief
Constables
For each of the regular police forces there is a police authority with the duty
of securing the maintenance of an adequate and efficient force. In the counties
of England and Wales the authority is a standing joint committee of the
county council and the justices in quarter session, and in the boroughs the
watch committee, which consists entirely of members of the council. (Under
provisions of the Police Act, 1964, which will become operative in 1965, both
county and borough police authorities are to consist of councillors and
justices in a proportion of two to one.)
The police authority for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home
Secretary. In the City of London the Court of Common Council is the police
authority, although it usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all
police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the police authority for the counties is the county council; in
the large burghs it is the town council; and where there are combined forces
there is a joint police committee.
Police authorities provide the buildings and equipment needed by their
forces and, subject to the approval of the Home Secretary or the Secretary
of State for Scotland, fix the authorised establishment. They also appoint
the chief constable in their area, subject to the approval of the Home Secretary
in the provinces of England and Wales, of the Crown in the City of London, and
of the Secretary of State in Scotland. In the Metropolitan Police District the
chief officer of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the
Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police
forces, but are answerable to the police authorities for the efficiency with
1 The Home Secretary has certain powers, which have recently been strengthened, to
amalgamate existing police areas in England and Wales, and establish a combined
police force.
io8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Central
Authority
Police Officers
which they are used. The Police Act, 1964, empowers police authorities in
England and Wales to require information from chief constables and to retire
them, with the agreement of the Home Secretary, if it is in the interests of
efficiency. It also requires police authorities to keep themselves informed of
the way in which chief constables deal with complaints against police officers.
Under the Police Act, 1964, the Home Secretary has a general duty to exercise
his powers to promote the efficiency of the police in England and Wales. He is
empowered to retire a chief constable in the interests of efficiency and to call
for a report from a chief constable on any matters relating to the policing of his
area. He is also able to require co-operation between forces on any police
matter.
Uniformity in the conditions of service and in the administration of the
police is achieved through detailed police regulations which are made by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland under statutory
powers. The police regulations cover such matters as organisation, discipline,
pay, allowances, pensions, clothing and conditions of service of the members of
all the regular police forces and of the River Tyne police. Some of these are
first negotiable on the Police Council for Great Britain; the others are dis¬
cussed on representative advisory bodies along with any general questions
affecting the police service.
In his supervisory responsibilities the Home Secretary is assisted by Her
Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and eight inspectors. Each
inspector is responsible for a certain number of forces, and satisfies himself of
their continuing efficiency by annual inspection, ad hoc visits and consultations
when particular problems arise. The inspectors report to the Minister on the
condition of all the forces, with the exception of the Metropolitan Police Force.
The Secretary of State for Scotland is similarly assisted by Her Majesty’s
Inspector of Constabulary in Scotland.
All police authorities receive a Government grant equal to half their net
expenditure except the Common Council of the City of London, which
receives only one-third. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for
Scotland are empowered to withhold the grant, in whole or in part, permanently
or for such time as they may determine, if they are not satisfied that a police
area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly maintained and administered,
or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved by them.
There are several different kinds of police officer in Great Britain: regular
police officers who usually serve for 25 years or more and thereafter retire on
pension; members of the first police reserve, which is composed almost
entirely of police pensioners or men with previous police experience who are
prepared to give whole-time paid service to a particular force in an emergency,
whether national or local; and special constables, who are volunteers who
perform short periods of duty without pay in their spare time from their
normal occupations.1
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the
ages of 19 and 30, although an exception may be made, in special circumstances
approved by the Ministers and on the recommendation of the appointing
authority, in the case of men of over 30 years of age. Women entrants in
England and Wales must be between the ages of 20 and 35, and in Scotland
1 In Scotland the employment of special constables, other than in emergencies, is
subject to strict limitations.
LAW AND ORDER
Police Cadets
Civil Staff
Traffic Wardens
Police Duties
Co-ordination
between
Police Forces
109
between 20 and 30 years old. The standard police ranks in Great Britain,
except in the Metropolitan Police District, are: chief constable, superintendent,
inspector, sergeant and constable. Intermediate ranks may also be adopted in
areas where varying degrees of responsibility make them necessary. In the
Metropolitan Police District the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police
of the Metropolis. He is assisted by a deputy commissioner and four assistant
commissioners. Next in rank are commanders, then deputy commanders j
thereafter (i.e. from chief superintendent downwards) the ranks are the same
as in the rest of the country. In the City of London the ranks are the same as
in the provinces, except that the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police
and the second in command is an assistant commissioner.
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union, since it is a
basic principle of the service that its members must not only be free from
political bias, but must also be seen to be free of it. All ranks, however, have
their own representative associations which can make representations to
ministers or to police authorities on matters of interest or concern to their
members.
Police cadets are recruited by most forces from among youths between 16 and
18 years of age. They have no police powers but are given some training in
police work, partly as useful preparation for subsequent appointment as
constables and partly to give them sufficient insight into police duties to
enable them to decide whether or not they wish to make a career in the police
service. A few forces also recruit girl cadets.
A number of police authorities employ civilians as shorthand-typists, switch¬
board operators, mechanics, canteen staff and cleaners, in order to release
uniformed personnel for police duties.
Traffic wardens are employed in London and several other areas to assist the
police in dealing with the problems created by parked vehicles. In specially
designated areas traffic wardens have power to give motorists who have
committed certain parking offences an option to pay a fixed penalty to the
clerk of the appropriate magistrates’ court instead of having their cases tried.
Every police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public
office. His powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by common
law, are exercised by virtue of his office; he is not a servant of the police
authority. Hitherto a police officer has been solely liable at law for any
wrongful act he has committed; under the Police Act, 1964, the chief officer
of police has a vicarious liability for any wrongful act committed by police
officers in the performance of their functions as constables.
1 he many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from
the protection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic
control to criminal investigation and the apprehension of offenders.
All police forces have their own criminal investigation departments, and
many have other specialised departments, including motor patrols, river police
(in districts which include long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted
branch (for maintaining order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
During recent years a number of common services have been provided
for the benefit of all forces to supplement those provided by the police authori¬
ties for their own use. The most important of these services are: research and
planning, undertaken by the police research and planning branch of the Home
Office, which works in close co-operation with, and makes its findings available
no
POLICE IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to, all police forces in Great Britain; training services, which in England and
Wales provide ten residential training centres and a central police college and
in Scotland a central police college with courses of recruit training and higher
training; a forensic science service in England and Wales which provides
laboratories for the use of regional groups of forces; wireless depots, which in
England and Wales supply and maintain wireless equipment for the police; and
central and provincial criminal records which are available to all forces.
Services provided by the Metropolitan Police Force for other forces include
(i) the publication of the Police Gazette,1 which contains particulars of people
wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is supplied without
charge to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain other Com¬
monwealth and foreign forces; (2) the organisation and control of the special
branch of the criminal investigation department at New Scotland lard,
whose duties include the physical protection of royalty, some ministers, and
distinguished foreign visitors; and (3) the carrying out of extradition orders
made by the courts. The Metropolitan Police Force also provides the United
Kingdom bureau of the International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol).
For certain of these services, the Metropolitan Police Force receives an
additional Exchequer grant.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary comes under the direction of the Inspector
General, who is responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. It undertakes
the policing of the whole of Northern Ireland, its cost being borne by the
Northern Ireland Exchequer.
The strength of the Royal Ulster Constabulary is approximately The
Inspector General has, under his immediate command, a deputy inspector
general, a commissioner for the City of Belfast, and a county inspector for
each of the six counties. The area is further sub-divided into districts, each
district coming under a district inspector and each sub-district under a head
constable or a sergeant. Conditions of service and pay follow closely on the
lines of the police service in Great Britain, and the general duties pertaining
to the various ranks are much the same. Although the more senior ranks bear
different titles, the ranks of head constable, sergeant and constable are broadly
equivalent to the three junior ranks in the police service of Great Britain.
The Ulster Special Constabulary also comes under the direction of the
Inspector General. In the main, this force is a part-time body and, apart from
training, its duties consist in affording assistance to the Royal Ulster Con¬
stabulary on special occasions; if necessary, however, its part-time personnel
may be mobilised for full-time duty.
1 The Scottish Criminal Record Office in Glasgow is responsible for the publication
of the Scottish Police Gazette.
Ill
DEFENCE POLICY
Nuclear and
Conventional
Forces
Collective
Defence
4
DEFENCE
The defence forces of Britain are required for three main tasks: to maintain
the country’s security; to carry out Britain’s obligations for the protection
of its territories overseas and other territories to which a special duty is owed
by treaty or otherwise; and to contribute to the defence of the free world
and the prevention of war in accordance with arrangements made with
individual countries and under collective security treaties.
At the same time it is recognised that the most effective means of accom¬
plishing these purposes would be through international agreement on general
disarmament, with adequate international inspection and control, for which
Britain continues to work.
Britain’s defence policy provides for the maintenance of a balance between
nuclear and conventional strength, neither element being so small as to
encourage an aggressor to seek a quick advantage, or to risk a provocative
local incident which could develop quickly into a major war. It is estimated
that strategic nuclear weapons, and the means of delivering them, account for
some 10 per cent of the defence budget.
The object of nuclear defence policy is the deterrence of an aggressor by
the fear of devastating retaliation. Britain’s principal ‘nuclear deterrent’ is
at present the Blue Steel propelled stand-off bomb, carried by the V-bombers
of the Royal Air Force; these bombs greatly reduce the vulnerability of the
bomber as they can be released a long distance from the target. Long-term
nuclear strategy is based on the nuclear-powered submarine, equipped with
Polaris missiles (see p. 116). Further nuclear striking power will be provided
by a weapon to be carried by the TSR.2 aircraft (see p. 125).
Details of the main conventional forces are given in the sections on the
Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force (see p. 117-127).
The national defence policy has been increasingly based on the realisation
that no country can protect itself in isolation and the defence of Britain is
possible only as part of a system of collective defence. Britain maintains
forces in three areas of the world as contributions to the collective security
alliances of which it is a member—the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) and the Western European Union (WEU), the Central Treaty
Organisation (CENTO) and the SEATO defence system in South-East Asia.
Close liaison is maintained with other Commonwealth countries, facilitating
considerable standardisation of equipment and training and interchange of
personnel.
Britain’s contribution to NATO includes over three-quarters of the
operational and reserve fleets, half of the Royal Air Force front-line aircraft
including the whole of Fighter Command and the V-bomber force, the
Second Tactical Air Force in Germany, nearly all Coastal Command, and the
British Army of the Rhine. The British Polaris submarines will be assigned
to the NATO nuclear force. A further contribution is the provision of
facilities for a depot ship in the Holy Loch (Firth of Clyde, Scotland) for
the United States Polaris submarines.
112
The Five-Year
Defence
Programmes
THE MACHINERY
OF HIGHER
DEFENCE
PLANNING
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The main base for the support of CENTO is in Cyprus, where the Air
Officer Commanding-in-Chief is responsible for all British forces in the
Near East. Aden is the headquarters for Britain s land and air forces in the
Arabian Peninsula, Persian Gulf and East Africa, together with the naval
forces allotted to the Persian Gulf. In the Mediterranean there are Army
garrisons for local defence and naval and air operating facilities in Malta
and Gibraltar. .
Singapore is a base for all three Services and there are forces, including
Britain’s contribution to the Commonwealth Brigade Group (to which
Australia and New Zealand also contribute), stationed in Malaya. An
amphibious joint Service task force is maintained east of Suez.
Under an agreement between the British and United States Governments
signed in i960, a joint Ballistic Missile Early Warning Station has been built
at Fylingdales Moor, Yorkshire. The United States has provided equipment
for this station. The Fylingdales station completes the chain of three early
warning stations that would supply information about missile attacks to
western defence headquarters. The others are in Thule, Greenland, and
Clear, Alaska.
Britain’s defence policy is set out in the statement issued in 1962, The Next
Five Years (Cmnd. 1639), supplemented by the 1963 Statement on Defence
(Cmnd. 1936) and the 1964 Statement (Cmnd. 2270). The plans provide for
closely integrated well-trained, highly mobile, all-regular forces equipped with
the most modern weapons and organised on up-to-date lines; and for a central
Strategic Reserve maintained in Britain, with means of transport, including
airlift, to take it rapidly to the scene of any trouble.
Supreme responsibility for national defence rests with the Prime Minister
and the Cabinet, under the ultimate control of Parliament. Defence problems
and their implications for foreign and economic policy are dealt with on
the Cabinet’s behalf by the Committee on Defence and Oversea Policy, under
the chairmanship of the Prime Minister.
In 1964 major changes were made in the Government departments respon¬
sible for defence. A unified Ministry of Defence, under a Secretary of
State, was set up, absorbing what were formerly four separate departments—
the Ministry of Defence, the Admiralty, the War Office and the Air Ministry.
The Secretary of State for Defence is assisted by three Ministers of Defence
for the Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force respectively, who have a
particular responsibility for the management of the individual Services but
who also assist the Secretary of State in any general defence matters which
he delegates to them.
Command and administration of the armed forces is vested in the Defence
Council, under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State. The members of
the Defence Council are the three Ministers of Defence, the chief of the
Defence Staff and the Chiefs of Staff, the Chief Scientific Adviser and the
Permanent Under-Secretary of State. The Defence Council deals mainly with
major defence policy. The management of the three Services is delegated
to Admiralty, Army and Air Force Boards of the Defence Council, of each of
which the Secretary of State is chairman, although the appropriate Minister
of Defence normally acts for him.
The principal military advisers to the Government are the members of the
Chiefs of Staff Committee, which comprises the Chief of the Defence Staff
as chairman and the Chiefs of Staff of the three Services. The committee
DEFENCE
THE DEFENCE
BUDGET
TABLE 5
Defence Estimates
1964-65
MANPOWER
“3
is responsible to the Government for professional advice on strategy and
military operations and on the military implications of defence policy.
The Minister of Aviation is responsible for the supply to the Services
of aircraft, guided and nuclear weapons and electronic equipment. There is
close collaboration on these matters between his department and the Ministry
of Defence.
In recent years defence has accounted for about a quarter of all central
Government ordinary expenditure. The cost of the defence programme for
1964-65 was estimated at £1,998-5 million, or 7 per cent of the gross national
product. Britain’s contribution to the Western nuclear deterrent is less than
10 per cent of this total.
Britain’s contribution to the NATO shield forces involves a deployment
of forces overseas and a consequent heavy burden on the country’s balance of
payments. The Federal Republic of Germany relieved this burden to the
extent of about £54 million in each of the two years 1962-63 and 1963-64,
mainly by placing in Britain contracts for military (and some civil) goods, and
in 1964 agreed to make further purchases in the two years ending 31st March,
1966. In 1962 the expenditure in foreign currency for the maintenance of
British forces abroad and other military purposes amounted to some £246
million and in 1963 to some £247 million.
The allocation of finance between Government departments is shown in
Table 5.
Ministry of Defence (Central)
Ministry of Defence (Navy)
Ministry of Defence (Army) . .
Ministry of Defence (Air)
Ministry of Aviation
Ministry of Public Building and Works
Atomic Energy Authority
£ million
25-97
496-02
525-4I
503-80
274-96
165-58
6-8o
i>998-54
The Ministry of Defence (Central) Estimates consist mainly of contribu¬
tions to NATO and other international defence organisations. The Ministry
of Public Building and Works Estimates cover works services for the three
Services and the Ministry of Aviation.
Home defence expenditure by civil departments in 1964-65 is estimated at
£24-1 million.
The long-term financial planning and control of the defence programme and
the allocation of resources to the three Services is the responsibility of the
Permanent Under-Secretary of State, who co-ordinates the views of military,
scientific and civil administrative staffs.
Defence policy provides for a force of between 390,000 and 400,000 professional
Service men, with the highest possible proportion in effective combat units,
backed by an equal number of civilians. For the first time since 1939 the forces
now consist entirely of regular volunteers.
Under the National Service Acts, 1948 to 1955, National Service for young
men consisted of two years’ full-time service in the regular forces followed by
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 6
Active Strength
of the Armed
Forces, 1964—65
Commissioned
Ranks
three and a half years’ part-time service in an auxiliary force.1 While call-up
for National Service ceased in November i960, a temporary shortage of man¬
power during the transition to an all-regular army led to the Army Reserve
Act of 1962, which gave permissive power to retain or recall National Service
men for six months during their period of part-time service. It also provided
for a new form of volunteer reserve, known as the Territorial Army Emergency
Reserve (the ‘Ever-Readies’), within the Territorial Army (see p. 123).
An analysis of the strength of the forces in April 1964) with estimates for
1965, is given in Table 6. In addition, reserve and auxiliary forces with
training liability (volunteers and part-time National Service men) totalled
262,966 on 1st January, 1964.
Thousands
Regular (male) . .
Women (including
nurses). .
Boys
Totals
1st April, 1964
Royal
Navya
89-8
3- 7
4- 7
98-2
Army
171-7
6-6
11-6
189-9
RAF
126-0
6-1
4-0
136-1
Total
387-5
16-4
20-3
424-2
1st April, 1965 (estimate)
Royal
Navy*
92-1
3- 8
4- 9
100-8
Army
176-7
6-8
11-6
195-1
RAF
123-9
5-6
2-9
132-4
Total
392-7
16-2
19-4
428-3
“ Figures for the Royal Navy include the Royal Marines.
Arrangements for recruitment and training of regulars are summarised for
each Service separately later in this chapter. Pay and pensions are reviewed
at intervals of not more than two years and other steps, including an extensive
building programme, are being taken to improve the conditions of Service
life.
A Regular Forces Resettlement Service, set up by the Minister of Labour
in 1957, assists regular officers and other ranks to find civilian employment
on leaving the forces (see Chapter 16, Labour).
The following are the main commissioned ranks in the three fighting Services,
each rank is shown parallel to its equivalent in the other Services.
Royal Navy
Admiral of the Fleet
Admiral
Vice-Admiral
Rear-Admiral
Commodore
Captain
Commander
Lieutenant-Commander
Lieutenant
Sub-Lieutenant
Army
Field-Marshal
General
Lieutenant-General
Major-General
Brigadier
Colonel
Lieutenant- Colonel
Major
Captain
Lieutenant
Second Lieutenant
Royal Air Force
Marshal of the RAF
Air Chief Marshal
Air Marshal
Air Vice-Marshal
Air Commodore
Group Captain
Wing Commander
Squadron Leader
Flight Lieutenant
Flying Officer
Pilot Officer
1 The Navy, Army and Air Force Reserves Act, 1964, limits reserve service to men
who completed National Service after 3Ist December, 1962.
DEFENCE
Staff Colleges
SUPPLY OF
WEAPONS AND
EQUIPMENT
Production and
Research
ii5
Selected officers of all three Services who have had previous staff training or
have been to the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich (London), the Army
Staff College at Camberley (Surrey), or the Royal Air Force Staff Colleges
at Bracknell (Berkshire) or Andover (Hampshire) go to the Joint Services
Staff College at Chesham (Buckinghamshire), where particular attention is
paid to the inter-Service aspects of staff work. This college caters for about
150 students a year from the Navy, Army and Air Force, the Civil Service,
and from other Commonwealth countries. A few specially selected and more
senior officers from the Services, the Civil Service, and from other Common¬
wealth countries are sent to the Imperial Defence College in London.
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for the supply to the Services of
aircraft, guided weapons (including ballistic missiles), nuclear weapons, and
certain radar and other electronic equipment. The Ministry of Defence is
responsible for the procurement of other weapons, stores and equipment.
Under the new organisation, requirements for weapons and equipment are,
where possible, formulated on a Defence, rather than a single Service, basis.
Production for the Services is carried out to some extent by private industry
on a contract basis, but also by the Royal Ordnance Factories, the Royal
Dockyards and other establishments operated by the Ministry of Aviation
and the Ministry of Defence. The Ministry of Aviation’s research establish¬
ments carry out research and development related to their supply responsi¬
bilities. Among the most important of these establishments are: the Royal
Aircraft Establishments, Farnborough and Bedford; the Royal Radar
Establishment, Malvern; the National Gas Turbine Establishment, Farn¬
borough; the Guided Weapons Establishment (an outstation of the Royal
Aircraft Establishment) at Aberporth, Cardiganshire; the Rocket Propulsion
Establishment, Westcott, Buckinghamshire; and the Aircraft and Armament
Experimental Establishment, Boscombe Down, Wiltshire. Research establish¬
ments controlled by the Army Department include the Royal Armament
Research and Development Establishment, Sevenoaks, Kent; and the Fighting
Vehicles Research and Development Establishment, Chobham, Surrey. The
Navy Department research establishments (see p. 119) carry out research on
ships, maritime equipment and weapons and also on certain kinds of electronic
equipment on behalf of all three Services.
Development and production of nuclear warheads to meet Service require¬
ments are carried out by the Atomic Energy Authority (see p. 216) under
contract from the Ministry of Aviation, which is responsible for the completed
weapons. The Atomic Energy Authority is also co-operating with the
Navy Department in research on the development of nuclear propulsion
(see p. 119).
Service officers attend courses at the Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment, Harwell, and have also been attached to industrial firms manufacturing
guided weapons during the development stage.
Guided missiles are tested at the Ministry of Aviation’s research establish¬
ments, and guided and ballistic missiles at the Woomera range set up in
Australia under the Joint United Kingdom/Australia Guided Weapon
Project. Service firing trials of air-to-air and surface-to-air missiles are carried
out at Aberporth and at the Army gunnery range in Anglesey; a range for
testing surface-to-surface missiles has been set up on South Uist in the
Hebrides. There is close collaboration with the United States in the exchange
of information and visits by technical personnel.
n6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
of Nuclear
Weapons
Military research work and development of new military equipment are
extremely expensive and complex and Britain is pursuing a policy of inter¬
dependence in this field with its NATO and Commonwealth partners and
with other friendly nations. One example of an interdependence project is
the joint programme that has been agreed with the German Federal Republic
and the United States to obtain logistic and operational experience of vertical
take-off and landing using the British P.H2J aircraft; another is the tripartite
agreement with the German Federal Republic and France to develop the
Rolls-Royce lightweight lift engine, which should have important applications
in vertical take-off.
On the production side, Britain is taking a major part in the European
manufacture, under a NATO international agency, of the American Bullpup
short range, air-to-surface guided weapon which has been adopted by the
Royal Navy. Britain has also bought the French AS 30 air-to-surface guided
weapon for the RAF. British defence equipment has been adopted by allied
and friendly nations: for example, the United States, the German Federal
Republic, Denmark and Sweden are adopting the British 105 mm. tank gun,
while British early warning radar equipment has been adopted by several
countries and by NATO.
During the second world war British research workers played an essential
part in the allied project that led to the production of the first atomic bombs
in the United States. After the war the exchange of information on atomic
weapons was for a time prohibited by an Act1 of the United States Congress
(later amended), and Britain therefore developed its own independently.
The first test explosion of a British atomic weapon was carried out in 1952
in the Monte Bello Islands, off the north-west coast of Australia. Early
in 1954 it was announced that delivery of atomic weapons to the armed forces
had begun.
In 1955 the Government announced its intention to proceed with the
development of thermonuclear weapons. The first test explosions were
successfully carried out in May and June 1957 near Christmas Island in
the central Pacific. The production of British kiloton and megaton weapons
has proceeded steadily and the exchange of information with the United
States2 has enabled important technical advances to be made in the design
and production of nuclear warheads which will permit a significant increase
in the rate of production.
Under an agreement signed between the British and United States
Governments in April 1963, Britain will buy from the United States Polaris
missiles, to be fitted with British nuclear warheads, for submarines to be
built largely by Britain. Initially, five submarines will be constructed, each to
be equipped with 16 missiles.
In 1963 Britain, with the United States, the Soviet Union and many other
countries, signed a treaty prohibiting testing of nuclear weapons in the
atmosphere, outer space and under water.
1 The Atomic Energy Act, 1946 (known as the McMahon Act), subsequently replaced
by the Atomic Energy Act, 1954. Substantial relaxations were made by amending
legislation passed in 1958.
2 An Anglo-American agreement, signed in July 1958 made possible the exchange or
information on the design and manufacture of nuclear weapons. This agreement was
amended and supplemented by a further agreement, signed in May 1959, which con¬
tained provisions to enable Britain to buy from the United States component parts of
atomic weapons and weapons systems, other than actual warheads, and to make possible
the exchange of nuclear materials between the two countries.
DEFENCE
THE ROYAL
NAVY
Commands
The Fleet
117
The Royal Navy is governed by the Admiralty Board of the Defence Council,
composed of the Secretary of State for Defence, as chairman, the Minister of
Defence for the Royal Navy, who normally acts for him, and nine other
members. The other civilian members are the Parliamentary Under-Secretary
of State for Defence for the Royal Navy (a junior minister), the Second
Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Royal Navy) (a civil servant and
secretary of the Board) and the Chief Scientist (Royal Navy). The naval
members are the Chief of the Naval Staff and First Sea Lord; the Chief of Naval
Personnel and Second Sea Lord; the Controller of the Navy, whose responsi¬
bilities include ship construction and repairs, research and the provision and
repair of naval aircraft; the Chief of Naval Supplies and Transport and Vice-
Controller, who is also responsible for maintenance and dockyard organisation;
the Vice-Chief of the Naval Staff, who assists the First Sea Lord; and the
Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff, responsible for stating requirements for ships,
aircraft and weapons and for laying down naval policy on aircraft research and
development.
The Navy’s main home commands are Portsmouth, Plymouth, Scotland
(Rosyth) and the Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet. In the North Atlantic
and Mediterranean area, United Kingdom naval forces (assigned to NATO)
are equipped predominantly for an anti-submarine role and consist of one
aircraft carrier, one cruiser and a number of destroyers, frigates and sub¬
marines. East of Suez the fleet (with its main base at Singapore) is an all¬
purpose force of two aircraft carriers, one commando ship and one cruiser
together with destroyers, frigates, submarines and smaller vessels. Naval
command in the Middle East rests with the Flag Officer, Middle East, and in
the Far East with the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Far East. Smaller
naval forces operate under the Commander-in-Chief, South Atlantic and
South America Station, and the Senior Naval Officer, West Indies Station.
The new Navy that is coming into being is smaller than that of the past but
highly mobile and flexible. The aircraft carrier will continue to be the core,
and grouped round the carriers will be supporting ships carrying the latest
weapons for dealing with air, surface and underwater attacks and capable of
acting by themselves on detached service. Seaborne task forces will include
commando ships and assault ships designed to carry a striking force of
troops with their tanks, guns and logistic backing.
During 1963 there were 145 ships in the operational Fleet (including
4 aircraft carriers, 2 commando ships, 2 cruisers, 55 destroyers and frigates
and 37 submarines), together with 49 engaged on trials and training and
93 support ships and auxiliaries.
The modern carriers are equipped with the angled flight deck, the steam
catapult, the automatic aircraft positioning device, and the mirror and
‘Audio’ landing aids (all British inventions).
HMS Eagle will be the first ship fitted with the revolutionary Action Data
Automation system, giving command and control facilities in advance of any
system at present known. For the 1970s a force of three aircraft carriers is
planned, two now in the Fleet and a third which is being designed. Two
former aircraft carriers, the Bulwark and the Albion, have been converted into
commando carriers, designed to carry a Royal Marine commando (some 750
men), together with helicopters, landing craft and vehicles. Two assault ships
of entirely new design have been launched, the Fearless and the Intrepid.
They will greatly increase the Navy’s facilities for amphibian operations
n8
The Polaris
Programme
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by their speed, improved communications and larger troop-carrying capacity
and their ability to land tanks, heavy vehicles and equipment.
Three ‘Tiger’ class cruisers, with fully automatic armament and the latest
control equipment, have been completed. Of six ‘County’ class guided
missile destroyers planned for the Navy, four have joined the active fleet.
Their armament includes the Seaslug missile, a most effective weapon for
the interception of attacking aircraft, and the shorter range Seacat missile
for close air defence.
The seven Type 81 ‘Tribal’ class frigates, embodying the new gas turbine
boost machinery pioneered by the Royal Navy, are now operational. Six
fast long-range conventional submarines of the ‘Porpoise class are now in
service, as well as eleven of the highly manoeuvrable ‘Oberon’ class. The Navy’s
first nuclear-propelled submarine, the Dreadnought, was commissioned in
1963. It incorporates a United States nuclear propulsion unit. The second
nuclear submarine, Valiant, of British design, was launched later in 1963.
Afloat support to the Fleet for replenishment at sea, or in harbours or
anchorages, is provided by the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service, comprising
tankers, store-issuing ships, tugs and salvage vessels. These ships fly the Blue
Ensign and are manned by Merchant Navy officers and seamen.
The dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport, Chatham and Rosyth provide
the Navy with major supplies and repair facilities at home. Singapore and
Gibraltar are the main dockyards overseas.
It is intended that the first Polaris submarine should be ready for patrol in
mid-1968, and four by the end of the decade. Work is in hand on the con¬
struction on the Gareloch (north of the Clyde Estuary) of a Polaris base,
part of which will be a training school for crews; until the school is ready,
in 1966, crews will be trained in the United States.
Fleet Air Arm
The Buccaneer, Sea Vixen and Scimitar provide the main strike and fighter
strength of the Fleet Air Arm. The United States air-to-surface guided
missile, Bullpup, is fitted to all three aircraft, improving the accuracy of high-
explosive delivery. The Buccaneer is a long-range low-level strike aircraft now
in squadron service; a Mark II version with more powerful engines is being
introduced; ultimately all Scimitar aircraft will be replaced by the Buccaneer.
The Mark I version of the Sea Vixen fighter carries the air-to-air missile
Firestreak but this is being replaced by a Mark II version, which has an
improved weapon system incorporating the new Red Top air-to-air missile,
giving increased effectiveness against high-flying and supersonic targets. The
United States Phantom aircraft, powered by Rolls-Royce Spey engines, will
eventually replace the Sea Vixen. .
Helicopters are being increasingly employed by the Navy. Reinforcing the
Whirlwind, a more powerful all-weather helicopter, the Wessex, is in front
line service as the Navy’s main anti-submarine aircraft. It carries both
homing torpedoes and dipping sonar (sound navigation and ranging) sub¬
marine detection equipment. It is in service with carriers and the guided
missile-carrying destroyers, and a commando troop-carrying version armed
with the SS11, a French anti-tank guided missile, is serving with the
commando ships. The Wasp helicopter forms part of an advanced anti¬
submarine weapon system for the ‘Leander’ and ‘Tribal’ classes of frigates.
With the latest detection equipment and a new lightweight homing torpedo
it greatly increases the effectiveness of the Navy’s escort forces against
high-speed submarines.
DEFENCE
Research and
Development
Royal Marines
Recruitment
and Training
for the
Regular Navy
“9
Much experimental work has been carried out, with the Atomic Energy
Authority, on nuclear propelled submarines and a nuclear submarine power
unit prototype at Dounreay (see p. 216) began operations in 1963. The
hunter-killer nuclear submarines, with new detection equipment of advanced
design and an armament of homing torpedoes, will be specially effective
anti-submarine weapons. To provide the Navy with facilities for basic educa¬
tion in nuclear engineering and research, a low-power training reactor has
been installed at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich.
Research and development work to meet the Navy’s modem requirements
for weapons is now concentrated in two establishments. At Portsdown (near
Portsmouth), the design and development of ship-borne gunnery and guided
missile systems is carried out. At Portland (Dorset), all aspects of work on
underwater detection are co-ordinated with work on underwater weapons.
The Corps of the Royal Marines is a body of men trained for service on sea
or land. Its official existence dates from 1664. The present-day functions of
the corps are: to provide personnel for Commandos; to provide crews for
minor landing craft and certain other parties required for amphibious assault;
and to supply for H.M. ships detachments which take part in the routine
duties, including guard duty, and provide emergency landing parties.
The main entry for naval officers is the Cadet Entry. Cadetships on the
General List (Seaman, Engineering, and Supply and Secretariat) are available
to young men between the ages of about 17 and 19! Those selected enter
Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, where they spend a year doing
Basic Naval Training, ashore and afloat, followed by a year as midshipmen at
sea in the Fleet. The Seaman and Supply and Secretariat Officers then return
for a further year at Dartmouth for academic training, followed by specialist
courses and a further year at sea. The Engineer Officers study for a degree, for
which specially selected officers go to Cambridge, the others reading for an
external London degree at the Royal Naval Engineering College, Manadon.
There is an entry into the Engineering specialisation of the General List
for graduates in mechanical engineering under the age of 25 and graduates
and holders of diplomas in technology who are under 24 can become Seaman
Officers on the General List. A few direct entry permanent commissions as
Instructor Officers are also available to graduates.
Special commissions on the Supplementary List for Seaman duties, for
aircrew duties with the Fleet Air Arm or in the electrical engineering specialisa¬
tion are available to young men with appropriate qualifications. Doctors, dental
surgeons and instructor officers can enter on short service commissions after
completing their professional training; cadetships leading to short service
commissions have been introduced in the Medical and Dental Branches.
Permanent commissions are awarded according to the vacancies available.
Ratings may qualify for a commission on the General List, on the Supple¬
mentary List for seaman and aircrew duties, and on the Special Duties List.
Commissions in the Royal Marines are gained through similar procedures
as for Royal Navy Cadet Entry. Age limits for entry are 17I-19I years.
Successful candidates are given a special training, part naval and part military,
which lasts three and a half years. Men in non-commissioned ranks may
qualify for commissions on the Royal Marines General or Special Duties
Lists. Short service commissions are open to men aged 17! to 23.
The age limits for entry as a rating in the Navy are as follows: seaman,
engineering mechanic, electrical mechanic, naval air mechanic and naval airman
E
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
branches, and stores and cook ratings in the supply and secretariat branch,
15 to 28; communications and writer and steward ratings in the supply
and secretariat branch, 16 to 28; artificer apprentices, 152 to i7i> mechanician
apprentices, 172 to 23; sick berth branch, 16 to 28; artificers (trained), up to
28. The initial engagement is for a period of 9 years over the age of 18,
plus a period of up to three years in the Royal Fleet Reserve. Exceptionally,
for artificer apprentices it is 12 years over the age of 18. Age limits for entry
into the ranks of the Royal Marines are: marines, 17 to 28, junior entry
(general service duties), 16 to 17; boy buglers, 15 to 16^; junior musicians,
14 to 17I; musicians (trained), 17^ to 28.
On entry, all naval ratings and Royal Marines non-commissioned ranks are
given a basic training at the appropriate school or shore establishment and,
in most branches, are given further training during their careers.
Women’s The Women’s Royal Naval Service (WRNS) is an integral part of the Navy.
Naval Services Its members serve both at home and overseas. It has its own disciplinary
code. Nursing services for the Navy are provided by Queen Alexandra s
Royal Naval Nursing Service (QARNNS). Women may enter the Women’s
Royal Naval Service between the ages of 17! and 28 for an initial period of
4 years; most WRNS officers are selected from serving ratings. After entry,
WRNS ratings are given basic and further training in the same way as male
ratings.
Reserve and The Royal Naval Reserve (RNR) consists of volunteer reserves—serving at
Auxiliary Forces sea in the Merchant Navy or the fishing fleets or in civilian employment
ashore—who carry out training in time of peace to meet the Navy’s mobilisa¬
tion requirements. Other reserves include the Royal Fleet Reserve (RFR),
composed of certain ex-regulars; the Royal Naval Special Reserve (RNSR),
which consists of those men who complete their full National Service liability
(or equivalent service) after 1962; the Royal Naval Volunteer Supplementary
Reserve (RNVSR), consisting of officers who are unable to meet the commit¬
ments of the RNR but who are willing to be recalled to the service in any
emergency; the Royal Marine Forces Volunteer Reserve (RMFVR); and the
Women’s Royal Naval Reserve (WRNR).
The Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, a civilian organisation composed of
men and women volunteers, is responsible in time of war for minewatching
duties around the coast and the waterways, for providing the basic support
staff for naval organisations at commercial ports in Britain, and for manning
the naval organisation required in Britain to control the movements of
merchant ships.
Sea Cadet Corps The Sea Cadet Corps is a voluntary youth organisation for boys between
12 and 18 years of age. It is administered by the Sea Cadet Council on behalf of
the Navy League and is sponsored by the Admiralty Board which provides
for the naval training of the Corps. It aims at developing in the cadets qualities
which make for good citizenship, and through its discipline and sea training
it greatly assists those boys who wish to make their career at sea in the Royal
Navy, Royal Marines or Merchant Navy.
THE ARMY The Army is administered by the Army Board of the Defence Council,
composed of the Secretary of State for Defence, as chairman, the Minister
of Defence for the Army, who normally acts for him, and nine other members.
The other civilian members are the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
DEFENCE
121
Commands
Organisation of
the Active Army
Equipment
for Defence for the Army (a junior minister), the Second Permanent Under¬
secretary of State (Army) (a civil servant who is secretary of the Board) and
the Chief Scientist (Army). The Service members are the Chief of the General
Staff, who is assisted by the Vice-Chief of the General Staff, responsible for
strategic policy and plans, operations and intelligence, and the Deputy Chief of
the General Staff, responsible for organisation, equipment, weapons and
training, the Adjutant-General, responsible for manpower, personnel,
discipline, medical services, welfare, education, and the women’s services;
the Quartermaster-General, responsible for supplies, transport and, jointly
with the Second Permanent Under-Secretary, works services; and the
Master-General of the Ordnance, responsible for research into, and the
design, development, production and procurement of Army stores.
Within the United Kingdom, the Army is organised into Eastern, Northern,
Northern Ireland, Scottish, Southern and Western Commands. There are
four main commands overseas: Middle East Land Forces (Arabian Peninsula),
British Land Forces Kenya,1 Far East Land Forces, and the British Army of
the Rhine (which forms part of Britain’s contribution to the NATO forces).
As the strengths of overseas garrisons are reduced, increased importance
is being attached to a central strategic reserve, based mainly in Britain.
The active Army is organised in 30 arms and services,2 which include the
Household Cavalry, the Royal Armoured Corps (the historic Cavalry Regi¬
ments and the Royal Tank Regiment), the Royal Regiment of Artillery,
the Corps of Royal Engineers, the Royal Corps of Signals (which provides
land and wireless communications), the five regiments of Foot Guards (the
Brigade of Guards), the regiments of the Infantry of the Line (grouped into
brigades and the Parachute Regiment), the Army Air Corps (which operates
light aircraft on reconnaissance and undertakes aerial observation and liaison
work), the Royal Army Service Corps (responsible for the provision of food
and fuel supplies and transport vehicles), the Royal Army Medical Corps,
the Royal Army Ordnance Corps (responsible for most equipment and
stores), and the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (responsible for
most repairs).
The Army is being extensively re-equipped with a new range of weapons,
vehicles and other equipment. To achieve strategic mobility much of the
Army’s new equipment is, or is planned to be, transportable by air. Many
items of equipment, such as tanks and self-propelled guns designed for use in
BAOR, can be deployed in war overseas only if they are stockpiled in the area
of operation or are transported there by sea. Equipment transportable by air
includes, or will include, all the infantry battalion weapons, the 105mm pack
howitzer for close artillery support, medium level surface-to-air guided
weapons, armoured scout and reconnaissance vehicles, and certain engineer
equipment including bridging.
To improve tactical mobility within a theatre of operations, new engineer
equipment for rapid construction and repair work and new bridging equip¬
ment are now coming into service or are planned. The introduction into
service in BAOR of the new tracked armoured personnel carrier and the
Stalwart high mobility load carrier will improve immeasurably the mobility
1 By agreement between the British and Kenya Governments almost all British forces
are to be withdrawn from Kenya by the end of 1964.
2 These arms and services include the women’s corps.
122
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Recruitment
and Training
for the
Regular Army
of the battle group. Increased mobility and firepower for the battle group
will also result from the introduction into service over the next few years of
the Chieftain main battle tank, the Abbot self-propelled close support gun, the
175mm (Mioy) self-propelled heavy gun (of American origin) and a new
self-propelled medium gun. The Centurion tank is meantime being equipped
with more powerful armament. The fire-power of infantry battalions will be
improved by the introduction into service of the Wombat and Carl Gustav
anti-tank weapons, the Vigilant and, subsequently, the Swingfire anti-tank
guided weapons, the 81mm mortar and the general purpose machine gun,
replacing both the Vickers and the Bren. A long-range version of Szvingfire,
mounted on the armoured personnel carrier and Ferret scout car, will be
issued to armoured units.
Surface-to-surface guided weapon regiments in service with BAOR are
equipped with the Corporal, and composite regiments with the American
Honest John, missiles and the eight-inch howitzer. The medium level air
defence surface-to-air guided weapon system, Thunderbird I, is in service and
will be replaced by an improved, more mobile version of the same system.
A low-level surface-to-air guided weapon is being developed.
Weapons with longer ranges, greater dispersal of forces on the battlefield,
increased mobility and the heightened tempo of war will necessitate improved
surveillance and reconnaissance by day and night. Improved weapon locators,
tactical radars, airborne devices for use in aircraft and drones and night vision
aids are all coming into service. Automatic data-processing and display
systems are planned to assist in the collation and dissemination of intelligence.
Radio communications are being greatly improved with new equipment.
The American Bell helicopter is to be integrated into Royal Armoured
Corps, Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers and infantry units and, together
with the Scout helicopter and the Canadian Beaver fixed-wing light liaison
aircraft, comprise the future group of Army aircraft.
The normal method of entry for a regular commission in the Army is through
the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst (Camberley), where selected cadets
undergo a course lasting two years before receiving their commissions. This
course gives a general military and academic background for all arms and
services. On leaving Sandhurst young officers attend special courses to
prepare them for their own arm, some attending technical courses at the
Royal Military College of Science, Shrivenham (Berkshire), and at Cambridge
University, while a limited number attend Arts courses at Oxford and other
universities.
The Army also maintains a boarding school, Welbeck College, at Worksop,
Nottinghamshire, where 150 boys are educated for two years between the
ages of 16 and 18 years. These boys pass into the Royal Corps of Signals,
Royal Army Ordnance Corps or the Royal Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers. A few may be commissioned into the Royal Artillery, Royal
Engineers and Royal Army Service Corps.
Candidates for short-service commissions are trained at the Officer Cadet
School, Mons Barracks, Aldershot, which they enter either directly from
civilian life or through the ranks. Long-service regular commissions may
be granted to officers already on short-service commissions.
Men wishing to enlist in the ranks must be British subjects between the
ages of 17 and 30, of good character, medically fit and able to pass an
intelligence test. Those with certain trade qualifications may be accepted up
to the age of 33. Men can sign on for 22 years (with the option of finishing
DEFENCE
Women’s Army
Services
The Reserve
\rmy
123
their Colour Service at the end of six years or at the end of any consecutive
period of three years thereafter, provided they give six months’ notice in
writing). Recruits may choose the corps in which they wish to serve and their
wishes regarding trade training are met as far as possible.
On entry into the Army, men are trained at the depots or with the training
units of the arms or services they will join. The initial training consists of
six weeks’ basic military training and a further period of specialised training
which varies in length of time, for example, four weeks for an infantryman
and 22 weeks for a Royal Signals electronic technician.
A boy can enlist in the Army as an apprentice tradesman, between the
ages of 15 and 17; a junior leader, between the ages of 15 and i6|; a junior
tradesman, between 15I and 17; and a drummer, band boy, piper or tailor,
between the ages of 15 and 17J. These ages depend upon school-leaving age.
After the age of 18, Army apprentice tradesmen serve nine years with
the Colours and three years in the Reserve. Boys enlisted for training in all
other junior soldiers’ units may serve either for nine years with the Colours and
three years in the Reserve, or six years with the Colours and six years in the
Reserve.
The Women’s Royal Army Corps (WRAC) and the Queen Alexandra’s
Royal Army Nursing Corps (QARANC) are both corps of the Regular Army,
their officers and other ranks being subject to military law and the Queen’s
Regulations in the same way as members of the other corps. Women may
enlist into the Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps or into the
Women’s Royal Army Corps between the ages of 17 and 33.
With a smaller Regular Army, the Reserve Army, consisting of the Regular
Reserve, the Army Emergency Reserve and the Territorial Army, including
the Territorial Army Emergency Reserve, has an increasingly important part
to play. The Navy, Army and Air Force Reserves Act, 1964, imposes on all
regular soldiers enlisting after July 1964 a liability to recall after their army
engagements, including reserve service, have ended, up to the age of 45, when
men of the army reserve are called out for home defence service or by
proclamation.
The Regular Reserve consists of officers and other ranks who have served
in the Regular Army and are liable to be called out to reinforce the Regular
Army in an emergency.
The Army Emergency Reserve has as its main function to provide essential
communications and the technical and administrative services required on
mobilisation by the Regular Army. It consists of specialist units and pools
of skilled men—both volunteers and part-time National Service men—who
can be called upon at short notice to fill gaps in regular units. A special
category of the Army Emergency Reserve consists of units and individuals
willing to be called for service with the Regular Army on the authority of
the Secretary of State for Defence before a proclamation of mobilisation has
been issued.
The Territorial Army consists of volunteers (including women), the
Territorial Army Reserve of Officers and the Territorial Army Reserve to
which qualified other ranks, who have served in the Territorial Army, may
transfer. If general war were threatened, they would reinforce the Regular
Army overseas (particularly BAOR), support the civil authorities and the
Regular Army in Britain and provide a framework on which the general
preparation for war could be built up. Volunteers are required to attend
124
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cadet Forces
THE ROYAL
AIR FORCE
Commands
Aircraft and
Equipment
annual camp and to carry out a minimum number of training periods. Selected
units undergo civil defence and fire-fighting training as preparation for a
nuclear emergency. While the military authorities are responsible for policy,
training and discipline, local administration of the Territorial Army is carried
out largely by county territorial and auxiliary forces associations.
The Territorial Army Emergency Reserve (the ‘Ever-Readies’) provided for
in the Army Reserve Act, 1962, is designed to provide a trained reserve
ready to supplement the Regular Army at short notice. Volunteers, who are
paid a bounty and would receive Regular rates of pay on call-up, sign on for
a period of one year, which is renewable, and are liable to be called up for a
period not exceeding six months during any individual contract.
The Combined Cadet Force (CCF) and the Army Cadet Force (ACF) provide
training on Service lines for boys between the ages of 14 and 18. The CCF
provides training in schools in which education is continued to the age of
17 years or above. Cadets receive a general basic training and then specialised
training in the Royal Navy, Army or Royal Air Force sections. Contingents
are affiliated to regular units and establishments of the Services. The ACF
is recruited from schools which do not raise contingents of the CCF, and
from boys who have left school. Like all the pre-Service organisations, these
forces provide citizenship and character training as well as specifically military
training. There is a training centre for the CCF and ACF at Frimley Park,
Surrey.
The Royal Air Force is administered by the Air Force Board of the Defence
Council, composed of the Secretary of State for Defence, as chairman, the
Minister of Defence for the Royal Air Force who normally acts for him, and
eight other members. The other civilian members are the Parliamentary
Under-Secretary of State for Defence for the Royal Air Force (a junior
minister), the Second Permanent Under-Secretary of State (Royal Air Force)
(a civil servant who is secretary of the Board) and the Chief Scientist (Royal
Air Force). The Service members are the Chief of the Air Staff, who is re¬
sponsible for strategic policy and the fighting efficiency of the RAF; the
Vice-Chief of the Air Staff, responsible for inter-Service policy, operations,
intelligence, liaison with other air forces, standardisation and ground defence;
the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff, responsible for the preparedness for war
of the RAF, for command, staff and air training, and for policy regarding
future aircraft and weapons; the Air Member for Personnel; and the Air
Member for Supply and Organisation.
The Royal Air Force is organised into commands:
At Home: Bomber, Fighter, Coastal, Transport, Flying Training,
Technical Training, Maintenance and Signals Commands.
Overseas: The Near East Air Force (headquarters in Cyprus), Air Forces,
Middle East (headquarters in Aden), the Far East Air Force
(headquarters at Changi, Singapore) and Royal Air Force,
Germany (Second Tactical Air Force), stationed in Germany
as part of Britain’s contribution to the NATO forces.
The spearhead of the RAF is the force of Vulcan and Victor four-engined
jet bombers. They can carry the Blue Steel propelled stand-off bomb, which
has a warhead in the megaton range, and they are capable of being refuelled
DEFENCE
125
in flight, giving them an increased range. Valiants, converted as flying tankers,
are being replaced by Victors. The V-bombers will thus contribute an effective
deterrent force under independent British control for some years to come. The
TSR.2, now being developed, although its main role is tactical strike recon¬
naissance, will also be capable of a strategic nuclear role and has an exceptional
all-round performance. The present reconnaissance force is composed of
Victors, Valiants and Canberras.
The tactical strike forces, made up of Canberras and Hunters, can be brought
quickly into action. The Canberra light bomber and reconnaissance aircraft
continues to give good service in Germany and the Near East; it can carry
the French AS30 guided bomb.
Squadrons are being equipped with Bloodhound 2, an advanced air defence
missile which is transportable by air for overseas reinforcement. Manned
fighters continue to be needed to deal with manned aircraft, the stand-off
bomber and radar-jamming aircraft, to prevent reconnaissance and to inves¬
tigate unidentified intrusions. Fighter Command is equipped with Lightning
and Javelin aircraft. Both carry the air-to-air guided missile Firestreak. The
Lightning, the RAF’s first supersonic fighter, is fitted with an electronic
computer to aid bomber interception. Lightning 3, which carries the Red Top
air-to-air missile, is now being introduced. The Hawker P.1154 supersonic
vertical take-off and landing aircraft is being developed for the future replace¬
ment of the Hunter fighters.
Coastal Command’s long-range maritime reconnaissance force, which is
committed to NATO, is wholly equipped with Shackleton aircraft. An
improved version—the Shackleton Mark 3—is in service, and earlier marks
have been modernised to an equivalent standard.
Transport Command is being re-equipped to provide increased mobility
for the strategic reserves of both land and air forces. A Comet 2 squadron
formed in 1956—the first all-jet transport squadron in any air force—has
proved very successful, and the first Comet 4CS came into service in 1962.
Two squadrons of Britannia aircraft are in service for long-range transport
and eleven VC 10 troop carriers are on order. The Beverley and Hastings
freighters are to be replaced by the HS 681 short take-off and landing tactical
transport, which will be capable of conversion to vertical take-off and landing.
The Belfast (formerly known as Britannic) aircraft is now in production as
a strategic freighter able to carry large military loads quickly over long
distances. The Armstrong Whitworth Argosy is in service as a tactical freighter
also used for trooping and the dropping of parachutists. Twin Pioneer short-
range aircraft are in service and the Andover (formerly Avro 748) has been
ordered as a close support aircraft. The Beagle 206 has been ordered for light
communications work.
Increasing use is being made of helicopters for operations in support of
the Army in the field and for the Search and Rescue Organisation of Coastal
Command, which in peace time also operates for the rescue of civilians
involved in shipping accidents or other difficulties in coastal waters. The
twin-rotor Belvedere and the gas-turbine engined Whirlwind are both in
service and so is the Wessex 2, which has a greatly improved load capacity,
particularly in tropical conditions and at high altitudes.
Basic flying training schools have been equipped with the Jet Provost
and Gnat trainers. The DH123 is on order to replace the Varsity for advanced
navigational training. A training version of the Lightning is in service. The
RAF was the first air force to adopt all-jet training.
The system of control and reporting, which has been built into a highly
126
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Recruitment
and Training
for the Regular
Air Force
Women’s Air
Services
efficient organisation, is closely linked with the radar systems of Continental
allies. A reconstructed radar chain now covers the whole of the United
Kingdom. A new high-performance radar system, which includes computers
and data-handling equipment for the interception of supersonic aircraft, is
being introduced. The Royal Air Force commands and operates the joint
UK-US ballistic missile early warning station at Fylingdales, Yorkshire
(see p. 112).
Pilots, navigators and air electronics officers are appointed to commissions
in the General Duties Branch, the flying and executive branches of the RAF.
They enter either on the General List, with an assurance of a pensionable
career to the age of 55> <->r Direct Entry Commissions. Appointment to
commissions on the General List may be obtained through a cadetship at the
RAF College, Cranwell, Lincolnshire (pilots and navigators only), by entry
as a university graduate or a university cadet (university entrants undertaking
a full career commission go to university as commissioned officers), or under
a special arrangement for other well-qualified entrants. The majority, how¬
ever, are appointed to Direct Entry Commissions of varying lengths, with
opportunities of permanent commissions which offer a pensionable career
initially to about the age of 38, with the possibility of leaving with a gratuity
at an earlier stage and with opportunities of serving to the age of 55. Except
for those entering through Cranwell, where the course lasts three years, flying
training takes about 18 months for pilots and one year for navigators and
air electronics officers.
Officers in ground branches are usually found from people in civil life,
some of whom already hold professional qualifications, who enter the Royal
Air Force on short service or permanent commissions. Short service officers
may be selected for permanent commissions while in the Royal Air Force.
Permanent commissions may also be obtained through cadetships at the
Royal Air Force Technical College, Henlow, Bedfordshire (Technical Branch),
or the RAF College, Cranwell (Secretarial and Equipment Branches and
RAF Regiment), or through university cadetships for the Technical Branch.
University graduates are also eligible for permanent commissions under
special conditions.
Applicants for enlistment for service as airmen must be British subjects
of good character and medically fit. Men between the ages of 17! and 39 may
be enlisted as trained tradesmen or otherwise for training in any RAF trade
for which they may be suitable. Enlistment is for one of specified periods.
Airmen may re-engage to serve for 22 years’ reckonable service for pension
and towards the end of that period may apply to continue to serve to the age
of 55. A recruit training course of 8 weeks is followed by trade training where
necessary. Boys may enlist between the ages of 15 and 17 as apprenticed
advanced tradesmen or between the ages of 15^ and i6| as boy entrants for
training in skilled trades. Apprentices and boy entrants enlist for 12 years or
9 years plus 3 years’ reserve service from the age of 18.
The Women’s Royal Air Force (WRAP) is an integral part of the Royal Air
Force and its members train with and work alongside airmen in the same
trades, serving both in the United Kingdom and overseas. Nursing services
are provided by Princess Mary's Royal Air Force Nursing Service.
Women between the ages of 17 and 39 may enlist for normal service as
airwomen for periods of 3, 4, 5 or 6 years. Women, like airmen, may re-engage
to serve for 22 years’ service reckonable for pension and towards the end of
DEFENCE
Auxiliary and
Reserve Forces
Royal Observer
Corps
Air Training
Corps
The Civil
Defence
Programme
Warning of Attack
127
that period may apply to continue in the Service until the age of 55. Women
between the ages of 17 and 52 may enlist for local service as airwomen for
2 years, which period may be extended by one or two years at a time. Women
of at least 18 years of age and of the requisite educational standard may be
selected for short service commissions in a variety of branches. Opportunities
exist for both short service officers and airwomen to gain permanent
commissions.
The Royal Auxiliary Air Force consists of three maritime headquarters units
and a maritime support unit. The units are raised and maintained by local
Territorial and Auxiliary Forces Associations and functionally controlled by
Coastal Command. In addition the Royal Auxiliary Air Force General List
comprises officers specially selected for service in war appointments.
The Royal Air Force Reserve consists mainly of officers and airmen who
have served in the Air Force. It includes the Royal Air Force Volunteer
Reserve, whose members, like the officers, airmen and airwomen of the Royal
Auxiliary Air Force, have a liability to carry out training on a part-time
basis. University air squadrons (established at 17 universities) form part of
the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve.
Ex-regular airmen with a liability for reserve service carry out this liability
in Class E of the Royal Air Force Reserve.
The Royal Observer Corps is a predominantly civilian and voluntary organisa¬
tion, administered by Fighter Command. Its present strength is over 15,000
men and women whose principal task would be the measuring and reporting
of radioactivity in the event of nuclear attack. Some 1,500 underground
operation centres have been built for the corps.
The Air Training Corps provides pre-Service training for boys between the
ages of 14 and 20. Like the other pre-Service formations, it seeks to teach
good citizenship as well as training for the RAF. There is also an Air Section
of the Combined Cadet Force (see p. 124).
HOME DEFENCE
The second world war showed the importance of having trained and organised
bodies of men and women ready to mitigate the effects of enemy air attacks
on the civil population; and the Civil Defence Act, 1948, recognised that a
permanent system of civil defence was an integral part of the country’s
defence plan. At the same time, the main defence objective, made imperative
by the development of nuclear weapons, is not to prepare for war but to
prevent it.
Following a nuclear attack there would be enormous and immediate devasta¬
tion: there would also be millions of survivors in need of help. The civil
defence programme is designed to ensure as many survivors as possible and to
safeguard their well-being by making the best use of essential supplies and
services after an attack.
A national warning and monitoring organisation has been set up to warn the
public of the threat of air attack. The organisation would also provide civil
and military authorities in Britain (and neighbouring NATO countries) with
a scientific appreciation of the path and probable intensity of fall-out. Warning
128
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Dispersal and
Shelter
Supplies and
Communications
Organisation of
Civil Defence
Regional
Organisation
would be given by siren from 15,000 points throughout the United Kingdom
and by BBC broadcasts.
Information about nuclear bursts and radioactive fall-out would be collected
by the Royal Observer Corps (see p. 127).
A scheme has been drawn up for the voluntary dispersal from the larger towns
of people who would be at a special disadvantage in times of enemy attack
some 43 per cent of the population of the dispersal areas. These are mainly
children and their mothers, expectant mothers and those disabled, aged and
infirm people who are dependent on others taking part in the dispersal scheme.
It would be impossible to provide protection by shelter within any area of
complete devastation caused by nuclear explosion, and beyond the country’s
resources to provide specially constructed underground shelters all over the
country as a protection against blast, heat and fall-out. Nevertheless, protective
shelter against some of the effects of nuclear explosions could be provided
relatively simply for most households and advice on this is given in civil
defence publications.
Plans have been made for safeguarding essential supplies of food, electricity,
gas and water and for maintaining the functioning of ports, shipping and rail¬
ways. Provision is also being made for stockpiling, storing and distributing
oil and emergency medical supplies. Special attention is being given to
safeguarding telephone communications and broadcasting.
Civil defence planning in Britain is the responsibility of a number of ministers
each of whom undertakes the duties which, in war time, would represent a
natural extension of his peace-time functions. The central Government has
enlisted the assistance of local government authorities, of industry and
commerce and of public bodies of many kinds, including voluntary organisa¬
tions such as the Voluntary Aid Societies and the Women’s Voluntary Service,
for the local execution of the plans.
In England and Wales the Home Secretary co-ordinates the work of
Government departments in home defence planning and supervises the civil
defence activities of the police and fire services, the Civil Defence Corps
and the Industrial Civil Defence Service. Other Government departments have
direct responsibility for the civil defence applications of the services which
they control; for example, the Ministry of Health is responsible for the hospital
and first-aid services, and the Post Office for telecommunications.
In Scotland the Scottish Home and Health Department deals with questions
corresponding to those dealt with by the Home Office in England and Wales,
and is responsible for such matters as the hospital and first-aid services.
In Northern Ireland the Civil Defence Act (Northern Ireland), 1950,
places responsibility for civil defence matters on the Ministry of Home Affairs,
which may arrange for other departments to undertake some functions on
its behalf.
Co-ordination of government activity in war time would be undertaken in
the nine civil defence regions in England by Regional Commissioners, who
would assume full responsibility if control by the central Government were
disrupted. Similar arrangements would apply in Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland would be under one central control.
In England and Wales the regions are divided into two or more sub-regions
in each of which the main Government departments, the police, fire service
DEFENCE
The Civil
Defence
Services
129
and public utilities would be represented, so that effective government
would continue if communications with the regional headquarters were cut
off. Below sub-regional level, control is based on administrative counties and
county boroughs and within counties, on county districts. In these areas the
warden organisation would operate through sector and wardens’ posts.
Civilian volunteers in Great Britain who undertake regular training provide
in times of peace the following part-time services:
1. The Civil Defence Corps (265,900 members in March 1964), which
helps authorities to carry out their civil defence functions. The Corps is
the nucleus of an organisation which would be greatly expanded in war.
2. The Industrial Civil Defence Service (172,200 members in October
1963), formed in the larger industrial and commercial establishments.
3. The Auxiliary Fire Service (13,700 members in March 1964), which in
war time would reinforce the fire brigades trained by local authorities
in peace time. The Fire Service would become a national organisation
in time of war.
4. The National Hospital Service Reserve (65,900 members in 1964),
limited at present to trained nurses and people willing to be trained as
nursing auxiliaries, reinforces the National Hospital Service in England
and Wales. In Scotland there is also an Ambulance Section of the
Reserve.
In Northern Ireland there are three main services: the Civil Defence
Corps, the Auxiliary Fire and Rescue Service, and the Hospital Service
Reserve.
The Civil Defence Corps is recruited and organised by certain local
authorities (the councils of counties and county boroughs in England and
Wales, or counties and large burghs in Scotland) in local divisions. The
local divisions are subdivided into five sections:
Headquarters: control of civil defence operations, communications,
reconnaissance (including scientific matters).
Wardens: public guidance and control, reporting of damage and
radioactive fall-out, organisation of immediate self-help
measures, and the local control of life-saving operations.
Rescue:
rescue of trapped persons and rendering first aid to them.
Ambulance first aid, conveyance of casualties to Forward Medical Aid
and First Aid: Units and to hospital, and the organisation of stretcher-
bearers.
Welfare: assistance with dispersal, care of the homeless, rest centres,
billeting, emergency cooking and feeding, public infor¬
mation centres.
In Scotland there is a First Aid Section; the ambulance services are
organised by the Scottish Ambulance Service.
In Northern Ireland the Civil Defence Corps, which is organised directly
by the Ministry of Home Affairs and not by the local authorities, consists
of three sections—Headquarters, Wardens and Welfare; the Ambulance
Service forms part of the Hospital Service, and the Rescue Section has been
integrated with the Auxiliary Fire Service to form the Auxiliary Fire and
Rescue Service.
130
Training
The Police
Role of the
Armed Forces
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Members of the Civil Defence Corps must undertake a standard training
in the section in which they enrol, and have two years in which to complete
this. Those who pass the standard training test may take advanced training
(Class A) and if they undertake to perform a total of 45 hours’ approved duty,
including advanced training, may qualify for a bounty of £ 10 to £15, according
to rank. Others may perform less onerous training (Class B) or pass to the
Civil Defence Corps Reserve.
Units of the Industrial Civil Defence Service are trained and organised
in much the same way as the Civil Defence Corps and in war would operate
closely with it.
Civil defence instructors are trained either at one of the three Home Office
Civil Defence Schools or locally under arrangements made by local authorities.
Courses and studies for senior officials are held at the Civil Defence Staff
College at Sunningdale, Berkshire, and in Scotland, at the Civil Defence
School at Taymouth Castle, Perthshire.
Auxiliary firemen are trained by officers and men of the regular brigades.
In addition, both regular and auxiliary firemen receive special training in
emergency fire-fighting at the Home Office Fire Service Training Centre at
Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. Auxiliary firemen are encouraged to
gain practical experience of fire-fighting by performing stand-by duty at fire
stations to enable them to respond, with regular members of the brigade, to
calls to fires. Exercises are also held, involving the control and operation of
large numbers of pumping and other fire-fighting appliances. New regulations
similar to those for the Civil Defence Corps were introduced in the Auxiliary
Fire Service in July 1962, under which auxiliaries are expected to do 50 hours’
standard training before they go on to advanced training to qualify for a
bounty of £10 to £15. Those who do not wish to qualify may pass into the
Auxiliary Fire Service Reserve, in which they are required to attend a minimum
of one annual exercise or parade.
In time of war the police would continue to be responsible for the prevention
of crime, for the maintenance of law and order and for the control of essential
service routes. They are also likely to have duties in connection with dispersal,
care of the homeless and other specialised civil defence tasks. In all these
duties they would have the aid of the Special Constabulary.
The Secretary of State for Defence plans the part to be played by the armed
forces in home defence and co-ordinates the plans of the military and civil
authorities. The main ways in which the armed forces can render assistance
are: by helping the civil authorities to maintain control and by giving assistance
to the police and the fire services; helping in the reception and care of the
homeless; in the treatment and evacuation of casualties and in the clearance
of radioactive fall-out zones; providing guards, helping to maintain road, rail
and water communications and undertaking light rescue, reconnaissance and
the provision and running of camps.
All Army units are trained in peace time for the civil defence tasks they may
be expected to perform in war. In addition, a number of men of the Royal
Air Force have been trained in emergency fire-fighting operations at Home
Office training centres to enable them to serve as firemen in a National Fire
Service. Certain units of the Territorial Army are trained each year in
emergency fire-fighting techniques.
SOCIAL WELFARE
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
Britain the State is now responsible, through either central or local govern¬
ment, for a range of services covering family allowances, social insurance,
help for war victims, financial assistance when required, health and welfare
services for mothers and young children, the sick, mentally disordered,
elderly and handicapped and for families in difficulties of various kinds, and
the care of children lacking a normal home life (all described in this chapter);
and for education (see Chapter 6), housing (see Chapter y) and employment
services (see Chapter 16). Public authorities in the United Kingdom are
spending nearly ^4,660 million a year on this range of services; that is, over
£85 a year per head of the population.
Voluntary organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of
nearly all the social services. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics,
dispensaries, and social and recreational clubs before these were provided by
the State. They made themselves responsible for the welfare of the very
young and the very old, the homeless and the handicapped, before it was
generally accepted that the whole community had a responsibility towards
these people. Where the services and the facilities they provided were
adequate, they have been encouraged to continue. The State now supplements
these voluntary services and provides financial assistance, sees that essential
services are brought within the reach of every citizen, and ensures that the
necessary standards are maintained.
Many voluntary social services surround and supplement the State services.
The two types are complementary, not competitive, and they merge into
each other. State services often work through voluntary agencies specially
adapted to serve individual or special needs. The officers of central and local
government, in carrying out their duties, co-operate with the workers of
many voluntary social service societies, while the residential provision made
by the State and by local authorities for the care of the chronic sick and the
aged is supplemented by voluntary homes of various types for the care of
the sick and elderly, most of whom receive State pensions or benefits.
The Charity Commission, a Government department, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their trusts and purposes
when necessary; it maintains a Central Register of Charities in which informa¬
tion about all the charities in England and Wales is being gathered together;
and it works to promote co-operation between charities and State services.
The number of voluntary charitable societies and institutions in Britain
runs into thousands; they range from national organisations to small individual
local groups. Most organisations, however, are members of larger associations
or are represented on local or national co-ordinating councils or committees.
Some are chiefly concerned with giving personal service, others in the
formation of public opinion and exchange of information.
Organisations concerned with personal and family problems and mis¬
fortunes include the voluntary family casework agencies, of which the Family
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Welfare Association, working mainly in London, is the best known; marriage
guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage Guidance Council; and
the Family Service Units. . . ,
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled in general is given by the British
Red Cross, the St. John Ambulance Brigade and the St. Andrew’s Ambulance
Association, but a number of societies exist to help sufferers from particular
disabilities, such as the Royal National Institute for the Blind, the Royal
National Institute for the Deaf, the National Association for Mental Health,
and the constituent members of the Central Council for the Disabled.
Bodies working on a national scale whose work is specifically religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the
Committee on Social Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of
England Children’s Society, the Church of England Council for Social Work,
the Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian
Association, the Society of Friends, the Crusade of Rescue, the Society of
St. Vincent de Paul, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Jewish
Board of Guardians. . ,
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women s
Voluntary Service, which ‘lends a hand’ in every kind of practical difficulty,
brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and old people, minds
children, and visits the sick in hospital, as well as doing relief work in
emergencies. . . , ~
A central link between different voluntary organisations and official bodies
concerned with social welfare is provided in England and Wales by the
National Council of Social Service, which brings together most of the principal
voluntary agencies for consultation and joint action, either as a whole or m
groups of those concerned with particular aspects, such as youth work or old
people’s welfare. There are also the Scottish Council of Social Service and the
Northern Ireland Council of Social Service, which perform similar co¬
ordinating functions in the voluntary sphere. It was the National Council
of Social Service which set up the Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, of which there
are now about 430 in Great Britain. The primary role of the bureaux is to
give explanation and advice to the citizen who is in doubt about hls rights
or who does not know about the State or voluntary service which could help
him.
Social Workers
While the voluntary worker giving full-time or part-time service has done
pioneer work in many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an
essential part, social services of all kinds increasingly depend for their operation
chiefly on the professional social worker, that is, the full-time salaried worker
trained in the principles and technique of social work. Training for many
forms of social work consists of a basic university degree, diploma or certificate
course in social science followed by a university course in applied social
studies or specialised training for a particular service. The latter is sometimes
organised by the profession concerned. Under the Health Visiting and Social
Work (Training) Act, 1962, a Council for Training in Social Work was
set up to promote the training, in the first instance, of workers in the loca
authority health and welfare services and similar services run by voluntary
bodies. Full-time general courses lasting two years, now being provided
by eleven colleges of further education, lead to the Council’s Certificate in
Social Work. It is expected that more courses will be arranged in future.
Voluntary organisations were the pioneers in the employment and training
of social workers, but Government departments and local authorities now
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
employ a considerable number of trained social workers, for example, in
child care, youth work, almoning (medical-social work), psychiatric social
work, and the probation service.
SOCIAL SECURITY
National Insurance, Industrial Injuries Insurance, Family Allowances and
National Assistance together with, in a special category, War Pensions,
constitute a comprehensive system of social security in the United Kingdom
which ensures that in no circumstances need any one fall below a certain
minimum standard of living.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance administers the first
three of these services in Great Britain; in Northern Ireland they are adminis¬
tered by the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance. National Assistance
is administered by the National Assistance Board in Great Britain, and in
Northern Ireland by the National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland.
Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their dependants are
the responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance through¬
out the United Kingdom. Appeals relating to claims for insurance benefits,
family allowances or war pensions, or to applications for assistance, are not
decided by the Ministries or the Boards but by independent authorities
appointed under relevant legislation.
Although the development of public provision for social security in Britain
can be traced back for several centuries (the Poor Relief Act of 1601 may be
regarded as specially important in England and Wales), the modern system
of comprehensive provision is a creation of the twentieth century. Non¬
contributory old age pensions were introduced in 1908, and the first con¬
tributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans in 1926. A contributory
National Health Insurance Scheme was begun in 1912, and in the same year
a scheme of unemployment insurance was introduced which in 1920 was
extended to cover the great majority of employees. By the beginning of
the second world war social security provision in Britain was among the
best in the world, but lacked co-ordination by the very fact of its piece¬
meal development, and not everyone came within its scope. In the immediate
post-war years a series of Acts introduced the present comprehensive system,
which became fully operative on 5th July, 1948. Adjustments have been
made by a number of subsequent Acts. Statutory provision for the war
disabled goes back to the end of the sixteenth century, but the main lines of
the present war pension provisions were laid down during the first world war.
Family allowances and national insurance benefits or allowances, other than
maternity, unemployment or sickness benefit, are included in the taxable
income on which income tax is assessed. On the other hand, various income
tax reliefs and exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the
support of dependants. War disablement pensions are not taxable.
Reciprocity
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate
as a single system. Reciprocal agreements on industrial injuries, family
allowances and all, or most, national insurance benefits are in operation with
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Jersey, Norway, the Federal Republic of
Germany and Yugoslavia. Agreements with France, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey cover industrial
injuries and most national insurance benefits. With Australia, Canada and
134
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FAMILY
ALLOWANCES
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
Contributors
New Zealand there are agreements on family allowances and some, or most,
national insurance benefits. There is an agreement with Guernsey on family
allowances only, with Cyprus on national insurance, and one with the Irish
Republic which covers some national insurance benefits; it also contains
some industrial injuries provisions relating to seafarers. Northern Ireland and
the Isle of Man, as well as Great Britain, are party to most of the agreements
with other countries.
Family allowances are provided in Great Britain under the Family Allowances
Act, 1945, and in Northern Ireland under the Family Allowances Act (Nor¬
thern Ireland), 1945. Nearly 6 million allowances are being paid in Great
Britain to about 3! million families with two or more children and over a
quarter of a million in Northern Ireland to 118,000 families. An allowance is
paid for each child other than the first or only child below the age limits. The
age limits are 15 years for children who leave school at that age, 16 years for
certain incapacitated children, and 19 for children who remain at school or are
apprentices. The rate of the allowance is 8s. a week for the second child below
the age limits and 10s. a week for the third and each subsequent child.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to
benefit the family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid
either to the mother or to the father. There is no insurance qualification for
title to the allowances, but there are certain residence conditions.
The National Insurance Acts, 1946-64, apply, in general, to everyone over
minimum school-leaving age (15 years) living in Great Britain. There are
similar schemes in Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man.
The National Insurance scheme provides benefits in specified contingencies
to insured persons who have paid the required contributions. The benefits
are paid for partly by insured persons’ contributions, partly by the contribu¬
tions of employers in respect of their employees, and partly by a contribution
made by the Exchequer out of general taxation. Up to April 1961 the rates
of contributions and benefits were standard amounts varying only with the
sex and insurance class of the insured person (with lower rates for those
under 18). In April 1961 the scheme was modified by the introduction of
the graduated scheme. This applies to all adult employed persons earning
over £9 a week and not ‘contracted out’ of the graduated scheme and provides
for them to earn additions to flat-rate retirement pension (but not to any other
benefit) in return for graduated contributions, related to earnings between £9
and £18 a week and normally paid in addition to the flat-rate contribution.
Employees whose job provides them with an occupational pension, at least
equivalent to the maximum State graduated pension, may be ‘contracted out
of the scheme. About 4! million employees are contracted out in Great
Britain and nearly 37,500 in Northern Ireland.
Contributors under the National Insurance scheme are divided into three
classes:
Class 1. Employed persons. Those who work for an employer under a
contract of service or are paid apprentices—over 23 million. This class
falls into two groups: those who are, and those who are not, participating
in the graduated part of the scheme.
Class 2. Self-employed persons. Those in business on their own account
and others who are working for gain but do not work under the control
of an employer—nearly million.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Contributions
Benefits
^5
Class 3. Non-employed persons. All persons insured who are not in class 1
or 2—over a quarter of a million.
This general classification is subject to certain modifications, made by
regulations, to meet special circumstances. Married women engaged only in
their own household duties are, in general, provided for by their husbands’
insurance and need not pay contributions. They can choose to pay contri¬
butions provided they were insured persons when they married. (Those who
were already married when the scheme began to operate on 5th July, 1948,
cannot be insured in their own right unless they were then insured under
the old scheme and continued to pay contributions as non-employed persons,
or unless they have since taken up paid work.) Employed married women
may choose whether to pay separate contributions themselves or to rely on
the cover provided by their husbands’ contributions, which make them
eligible for maternity and home confinement grants, retirement pension at
lower rate, widow’s benefit and death grant, but they must pay graduated
contributions if they are employed in a participating employment and their
earnings are over £9 a week. Students receiving full-time education and
unpaid apprentices need not pay contributions. Up to the age of 18, contri¬
butions are credited to them. Over that age they may, if they wish, pay as
non-employed persons (class 3) and thus safeguard their title to widow’s
benefit and to retirement pension at full rate. Self-employed and non-
employed persons whose income is not more than £208 a year can apply to
be excepted from liability to pay contributions. They too may pay as non-
employed persons to safeguard entitlement to pension.
An insured person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions
at the age of 70 for men, 65 for women, or when he retires, or is deemed to
have retired, from regular employment after reaching minimum pension
age (65 for men, 60 for women), whichever is the earlier. If such a person
does any work as an employed person thereafter, he must pay an industrial
injuries contribution; the employer still has to pay his full share of the flat-rate
contribution.
All three classes pay flat-rate contributions. Table 7 shows the main weekly
rates of these contributions (including the National Health Service contribu¬
tion, which for convenience is paid with it though the two services are separately
administered). The table also shows the range of graduated contributions
which are payable by employed persons aged 18 or over (unless they have been
‘contracted out’) who earn more than £9 a week, at the rate of approximately
4J per cent of that part of their weekly pay between £9 and £18. The employer
pays the same amount.
Flat rate contributions are normally paid on a single contribution card by
national insurance stamps bought from a post office. It is the employer’s
responsibility in the first place to see that the class 1 contributions are paid,
but he can deduct the employees’ share from their wages. Graduated contri¬
butions are collected through the same machinery as is used to collect Pay As
You Earn (deduction at source) income tax. The self-employed and non-
employed must stamp their own cards. Contributions are usually credited
for weeks of unemployment, sickness or injury, or if widow’s benefit is being
paid.
The scheme provides payments to contributors in case of unemployment (if
normally working for an employer), sickness (if normally working for an
employer or self-employed), and confinement and the weeks immediately
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
136
TABLE 7
Weekly National
Insurance and
National Health
Service
Contributions®
Class 1
Employed persons
taking part in the
graduated pension
scheme:
Paid by employee. .
Paid by employer. .
Totals
Employed persons
contracted out:
Paid by employee. .
Paid by employer. .
Totals
National
Insurance
flat rate6
Class 2
Self-employed persons
Class 3
Non-employed persons
Graduated
Contribution
from
d.
8 Hi
9 (H
18 0
11 4|
11 Si
22 10
13 4
10 2
d.
to
s. d.
7 8
7 8
15 4
Health
Service
s. d.
2 8i
7i
3 4
2 8i
7i
3 4
2 10
2 10
Totals
from
s. d.
11 9
9 9
21 6
to
s. d.
19 4
17 4
36 8
s. d.
14 1
12 1
26 2
16 2
13 0
0 The rates given are those paid by men. Women and boys and girls under 18 years
of age contribute at various lower rates.
b Including, for Class 1, the industrial injuries insurance contribution of 8d. from
employee and pd. from employer.
before and after (for women normally working for an employer or self-
employed and paying national insurance contributions at the full rate).
Retirement pensions are paid to people who have reached 65 (60 for women)
and who, if under 70 (65 for women), have retired from regular work; widows
receive benefit in the first 13 weeks after bereavement and subsequently
while they have young children or if they have reached the age of 50 when
widowed or when their children have grown up; and there are two kinds of
allowance in respect of orphan children where a widow’s pension is not
payable. The scheme also provides lump-sum cash grants for three expensive
contingencies—the birth of a child, a confinement at home (or elsewhere,
otherwise than at public expense), and a death (though not for the death of
someone already over minimum pension age when the scheme started).
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First,
before benefit can be paid at all, a minimum number of contributions must
actually have been paid since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate
of benefit cannot be paid unless a specified number of contributions have
been paid or credited over a specified period. There are special rules to help
a widow who does not become entitled to a widow’s pension at widowhood
or when her children have grown up, to qualify for sickness or unemployment
benefit in the period before she can have established or re-established herself
in insurance through her own contributions; there are also provisions to help
divorced women who were not paying contributions during their marriage.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Amounts
Duration
*37
The basic standard rate of the majority of benefits is now £3 7s. 6d. a week
which may be reduced if insufficient contributions have been paid, but is not
affected by other unearned income or the previous level of earnings. Earnings
made while the benefit is in payment, however, may cause its reduction or
withdrawal: unemployment benefit cannot be paid to a person earning more
than a specified amount from a subsidiary occupation; widows (although a
widowed mother’s benefit can never be totally withdrawn for this reason),
and retirement pensioners under the age of 70 (65 for women), have their
pensions reduced in step with earnings over certain specified amounts;
sickness benefit, though not affected by continued payment of wages during
illness, is not normally payable to a person doing any actual work. Exceptions
to the basic standard rate are the higher rate of £4 15s. a week payable to
widows, without regard to any earnings, during the first 13 weeks after
bereavement, the increased retirement pension earned by someone who has
continued at work and paid contributions beyond minimum pension age,
and the lower rate of £2 6s. a week unemployment or sickness benefit payable
to a married woman who is not either separated from her husband and
receiving maintenance of less than £1 is. 6d. a week from him or else main¬
taining an invalid husband. The standard rate of retirement pension for a
woman on her husband’s insurance is £2 is. 6d. a week.
Standard increases are payable for dependants at the rate of £2 is. 6d.
for an adult (generally a wife), ^1 for the first or only child under the family
allowances age limits and 12s., over and above any family allowances payable,
for other children. However, the amounts payable to widows for their children
are appreciably larger: £1 17s. 6d. for each child, inclusive of any family
allowance payable.
The allowance provided for a child who has lost both parents (one of
whom must have been insured under the National Insurance Acts) is a
guardian’s allowance of £1 17s. 6d. a week. It is paid to the person in whose
family a child is, for the time being, included. For certain fatherless children
there is a child’s special allowance also at £1 17s. 6d. a week inclusive of
family allowances; this is payable to a woman whose marriage has been
dissolved or annulled and who has not re-married, if her former husband
dies and she has a child to whose support he was contributing before he
died.
Graduated contributions add 6d. a week to retirement pension for each
£7 1 os. of graduated contributions paid by a man, with the matching £7 10s.
paid by his employer, and for each £9 paid by a woman, with the matching
£9 paid by her employer.
The rates of grants are varied: £16 maternity grant is payable for a con¬
finement and a further £16 grant for each additional child born at the same
confinement living 12 hours after its birth; £6 is paid for a confinement at
home or elsewhere other than at public expense; and £25 death grant on
the death of an adult (less for a child, or for an adult who was within 10 years
of minimum pension age when the scheme started).
In general, National Insurance payments are paid as long as the situation
requiring them lasts. However, sickness benefit cannot be paid for more than
a year if less than 156 contributions have been paid (possible within three
years for a contributor continuously at work) and unemployment benefit is
payable in the first instance for 30 weeks, after which it may be continued
up to a maximum total of 19 months in all, according to the person’s record of
contributions paid as against unemployment benefit drawn in recent years.
138
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
(INDUSTRIAL
INJURIES)
Benefits
Injury Benefit
Disablement
Benefit
Death Benefit
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Maternity allowance begins 11 weeks before the expected week of confinement
and ends after the sixth week following the expected week or the actual
confinement if this is later.
Similarly, widowed mothers’ allowances at the full rate cease when the
children reach family allowance age limits, though a mother can continue to
receive £3 7s. 6d. a week for herself while she has living with her a son or
daughter above the age limits but under 19. The widow’s pension payable
to the childless widow, provided she is over 5° (and had been married at
least three years when her husband died), and the similar pension normally
paid to the widowed mother who has reached 50 when her widowed mother’s
allowance ends, continues until she has reached minimum pension age and
retired, or at most till age 65- If she has satisfied the conditions she then
becomes entitled to a retirement pension.
The Industrial Injuries Insurance scheme, which, in July 1948, replaced the
Workmen’s Compensation scheme (first introduced by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act of 1897), provides benefits for personal injuries caused
by accidents arising out of, and in the course of, employment, and for
prescribed diseases due to the nature of employment. It covers practically
everyone in class 1 of the National Insurance scheme and certain others.
Like the National Insurance scheme, the Industrial Injuries scheme is
financed partly from contributions (see Table 7) and partly from taxation.
The relevant acts are the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946
to 1964. Similar cover against industrial injuries and diseases in Northern
Ireland is provided by the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts
(Northern Ireland), 1946 to 1964.
Injury benefit for an adult is ^5 I5S- a wee^ plus £2 is. 6d. for an adult
dependant, £1 for the first or only child under the family allowances age
limits and 12s. for each other eligible child, in addition to any family allowance
payable. It is paid when the insured person is incapable of work as a result
of an industrial accident or prescribed disease, and payment can continue
for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning on the date of the accident or develop¬
ment of the disease.
Disablement benefit may be paid (but not at the same time as injury benefit)
when, as the result of industrial accident or prescribed disease, there is a
loss of physical or mental faculty. The amount depends on the extent of the
disablement as assessed by a medical board; it varies from £5 15s. for 100 per
cent disablement to £1 3s. a week for 20 per cent disablement, but for disable¬
ment of less than 20 per cent a gratuity is normally paid, ranging up to
£380.
In certain circumstances disablement benefit may be supplemented as
follows: unemployability supplement, at the weekly rate of £3 7S- "> constant
attendance allowance of up to £2 10s. weekly, or at a special rate of £5 a
week in exceptionally severe cases; a special hardship allowance of up to
£2 6s. for a person who is unfit to return to his regular job or work of an
equivalent standard; and hospital treatment allowances which raise the
benefit to that for a 100 per cent assessment during hospital treatment for
the industrial disability. Increases of benefit for dependants are payable with
unemployability supplement and hospital treatment allowance.
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit
may be paid to the dependants.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
For a widow a pension of £4 15s. a week is payable for the first thirteen
weeks of widowhood. Thereafter, the widow can receive a pension of £3 15s.
a week if (1) entitled to a child’s allowance or over the age of 40 on ceasing
to be so entitled, or (2) over 50 years of age or permanently incapable of
self-support at the time of her husband’s death, or (3) not entitled to child’s
allowance, but having residing with her a young person under the age of 19
who was or could be treated as being in her late husband’s family, or (4) over
40 years of age when (3) ceases to apply, or (5) pregnant by her late husband.
If none of these conditions is satisfied, the widow may receive a pension of
£1 a week. If she had been living apart from her husband, the pension is
limited to the weekly rate of maintenance he was paying, if less than the rate
otherwise appropriate.
In addition, allowances are paid for children under the family allowances
age limits. For widows, these allowances together with any family allowance
payable amount to £1 ys. 6d. a week for each child. For other beneficiaries,
the rate is £1 for the first child and 12s. a week for each later child.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, may be
entitled to pensions (of up to £1 a week), allowances or gratuities.
WAR PENSIONS
AND RELATED
SERVICES
Pensions and allowances for persons disabled or bereaved through the wars
or subsequent military service are paid under Royal Warrants and other
instruments administered by the Ministry of Pensions and National
Insurance.
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private
soldier is ^5 15s. a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the
degree of disablement. The latter is assessed by comparing the general
condition of the disabled person as affected by service with that of a normal
healthy person of the same age and sex. Allowances for a wife and children
are paid in addition to the basic pension. There is a wide range of supple¬
mentary allowances, the main ones being for unemployability (£3 14s. a
week), constant attendance (up to £2 10s. and, exceptionally, £5 a week),
comforts (10s. or £1 a week), and lowered standard of occupation (up to
£2 6s. a week). An age allowance (at rates varying between 5s. and 15s. a
week) is payable to disablement pensioners who are aged 65 or over and whose
assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary allowances are
free of income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any
allowance payable under the Family Allowances Acts.
Pensions are also paid to war widows and war orphans. The standard rate
of pension for widows of private soldiers is ^4 10s. a week, with additional
allowances for their children {£2 is. 6d. for each child), and, in certain cases,
an allowance for rent (up to £1 14s. a week). There is an additional allowance
of 1 os. a week for widows aged 70 or over. Parents or other relatives who were
dependent on a person whose death resulted from military service may
receive pensions if they are in financial need.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance maintains a welfare
service for war pensioners, with a special branch for war orphans, which is
available to help any pensioner who requires advice and assistance. War
pensioners have priority (except over more urgent cases) for treatment of
their war disabilities in National Health Service hospitals.
Many voluntary associations, such as the British Legion and other ex-
Service organisations, give financial aid and personal service to disabled
ex-Service men and women and their families. The Ministry’s welfare officers
140
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
NATIONAL
ASSISTANCE
WELFARE
SERVICES
Services for
the Blind, the
Deaf and the
Disabled
work in close co-operation with these voluntary bodies and with the specialist
government welfare agencies.
The National Assistance Act, 1948, abolished the existing Poor Law in Great
Britain and, in place of the various services for the relief of need previously
provided from both central and local government funds, established for the
first time a comprehensive State service of financial assistance according to
need which is administered by the National Assistance Board. The parallel
legislation in Northern Ireland made similar provision.
Application to the Board for financial assistance can be made, with certain
exceptions relating to people in full-time work or involved in a trade dispute,
by anyone over the age of 16 who is in need. The need for assistance is
decided by reference to general standards (which are amended from time to
time) laid down in regulations approved by Parliament. These regulations
contain rules for ascertaining the requirements of the person or family group
for whom assistance is to be provided and rules for the treatment of their
resources, whether of income or capital (for instance, sickness benefit and family
allowances are taken fully into account, while some part of other specified
resources may be disregarded). The regulations make special provision for
higher rates for blind people and certain tuberculous ones, and also allow
the Board’s officer to adjust the amount payable to suit the particular circum¬
stances of every case. The help given is in this way related directly to the needs
of the individual or family. There is a right of appeal if the person is dissatisfied
with the officer’s decision.
There are few conditions attached to the grant of assistance, but help
given to able-bodied men or women of working age is normally conditional
on their registering for work at an employment exchange of the Ministry of
Labour; the assistance is then paid at the exchange. Otherwise assistance is
normally received as a weekly cash payment at a post office.
All local welfare authorities have schemes, made under the National Assistance
Act and approved by Ministers, under which they provide welfare services for
people who are blind, deaf or dumb, or otherwise severely and permanently
handicapped. These services are provided either by the local authorities
themselves or through the agency of a voluntary body; voluntary bodies also
give important help outside formal agency arrangements. The schemes require
local authorities to maintain registers of all the handicapped people in their
areas who seek the help of their services.
Services for the blind include a home visiting and teaching service, employ¬
ing qualified home teachers, to assist the blind to adjust themselves to their
blindness (special attention is given to the newly blind and to those with
more than one disability, such as the deaf-blind); instruction in craft work
and in the use of embossed symbols for reading and writing; social clubs,
holiday and other recreational facilities; the supply or loan of apparatus, such
as wireless sets, embossed and recorded books, adapted tools and games;
residential social rehabilitation; and an advisory service on the special
financial and other benefits available to the blind (including preventive and
medical treatment, special education, training for employment and placement
in suitable occupations). Voluntary organisations for blind welfare include
local blind societies and also national bodies, notably the Royal National
Institute for the Blind, the National Library for the Blind, St. Dunstan’s (for
those blinded in the wars), the Scottish National Federation for the Welfare
of the Blind and the Scottish National Institution for the War Blinded.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Old People’s
Welfare
Residential
Accommodation
I4I
The welfare services for people with handicaps other than blindness or
deafness are on similar lines to those provided for the blind and include, in
particular: help with personal and family problems arising from disability;
assistance in overcoming the effect of disability, including adaptations in
the home and the provision of aids to meet individual needs; teaching of
handicrafts and help in disposing of any saleable articles produced; provision
of occupation and social centres, recreational facilities, outings and holidays;
and hostels for those for whom training is being provided by the Ministry of
Labour under the Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts. (Training is
provided in Northern Ireland by the Ministry of Labour and National
Insurance.)
The emphasis in services for the deaf, including the hard-of-hearing, is on
achieving communication and promoting social welfare, help with personal
problems, assistance in obtaining and keeping employment, encouragement
and help to improve lip-reading and speech; and generally on relieving the
isolation which deafness can bring. Local voluntary associations play a large
part in providing welfare services for the deaf and have on their staff specialised
welfare officers qualified to communicate with the deaf and to help them in
all aspects of their life.
A number of home services for old people are provided by statutory and
voluntary bodies to help them to go on living in their own homes for as long
as possible. Local health authorities supply, under the National Health
Service, home nursing and domestic help (see p. 151); over half the district
nurses’ time is spent on the aged or the chronic sick and the same group
makes the heaviest demands on the home help service.
Local authorities are enabled by the 'National Assistance Act to provide
meals and recreation for old people either directly or through the agency of
voluntary organisations. They also have power to assist voluntary organisations
by contributing to the cost of the services, giving or lending furniture, vehicles
or equipment, permitting organisations to use premises belonging to the local
authority and making available the services of local authority staff.
Local Old People’s Welfare Committees have been formed and are aided
by the National Old People’s Welfare Council, an associated group of the
National Council of Social Service widely representative of voluntary and
statutory bodies having direct contact with old people, or by the Scottish
Old People’s Welfare Committee, a committee of the Scottish Council of
Social Service, or by the corresponding committee in Northern Ireland.
There is also a National Corporation for the Care of Old People; its function
is to stimulate and to give financial support to schemes for the welfare of the
aged, to maintain an expert technical advisory service, and to encourage and
undertake research and experiment for the welfare of old people. It is now
concentrating its main effort on home services.
Local authorities provide residential accommodation, under the National
Assistance Act, for the aged, infirm and others, and temporary accommodation
for people who lose their homes, for example, in some disaster such as fire
or floods. The newer homes provided by local authorities for aged and other
infirm people usually have accommodation for 40 to 60 residents. These
smaller homes are gradually replacing the larger institutions inherited from
the past. As well as over 1,700 local authority homes in Great Britain, there
are over 2,500 homes for old and disabled people run by voluntary bodies or
by private individuals.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Assistance Board, which is responsible for influencing
‘persons without a settled way of living’ to lead a more normal life, provides
temporary accommodation for them in reception centres, sometimes through
the agency of local authorities. For men who have become demoralised by
long unemployment and who are in receipt of national assistance grants or
are using reception centres, it runs one non-residential and two residential
re-establishment centres where they are given help to fit them again for
work.
Welfare
Services in
Northern
Ireland
In Northern Ireland the services provided under the Welfare Services Act
(Northern Ireland), 1949 (as amended), are broadly similar in scope to those
provided in Great Britain under the National Assistance Act, the only notable
exception being the inclusion in the welfare code of domestic help services,
which in Great Britain are provided under the National Health Service Act.
Local welfare services are provided by the six county and two county borough
councils. Welfare authorities have provided 33 homes for the aged and infirm,
which have completely replaced the old ‘workhouse’ institutions, and other
specially built homes are under construction. The cost of the services is
shared, as in Great Britain, between local taxation and the Exchequer.
CHILD WELFARE Local authorities in Great Britain have a duty under the Children and
Local Young Persons Act, 1963, to make available such advice, guidance and
Authority assistance as may promote the welfare of children by diminishing the need
Services to receive or keep them in the authority’s care or to bring them before a
juvenile court. This help may include assistance in kind or, exceptionally,
financial help, and may be given through a voluntary organisation or directly.
However, if a child seems to be in need of care, protection or control because
of adverse circumstances in which it is not receiving the standard of care to
be expected from a good parent or because it is beyond the control of parent
or guardian, the local authority may initiate court proceedings and the child
may be committed by the juvenile court to the care of a ‘fit person’, usually
the local authority, till he or she reaches the age of 18. Local authorities have
a further duty, under the Children Act, 1948, to receive into their care any
child under the age of 17 who has no parent or guardian, or who has been
abandoned or whose parents are unable to provide for him temporarily or
permanently. A child so received remains in the care of the local authority
until he is 18 years old unless the authority finds it to his advantage to return
him sooner to his parents or guardian or to entrust him to friends. Both
categories of children are to be treated so as to further their best interests and
afford them opportunity for the proper development of their character and
interests.
When practicable, children in care are boarded out with foster parents,
who receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home
cannot be found for a child, or he is not suitable for boarding out, he may
be placed in a children’s home provided by a local authority or a voluntary
organisation. Many children’s homes are now provided in small houses, on
housing estates or in ordinary streets, where a group of twelve or fewer
children live in the care of a housemother or houseparents, the husband
following his normal employment. Other children may be placed in hostels
or lodgings or in other accommodation specially suited to their needs. The
desirability of returning a child to his family circle as soon as possible is
fully appreciated, and work is carried out to rehabilitate the family where
this is necessary.
SOCIAL WELFARE
H3
Voluntary
Organisations
Adoption
To carry out its functions under the Children Act, 1948, each local authority
(county council and county borough council or, in Scotland, council of a
large burgh) is required to appoint a children’s committee and a children’s
officer to be responsible for the care and upbringing of children in the
authority’s care. Children’s officers are assisted by a staff of child care officers
who undertake inquiries and who supervise children placed in foster homes.
Regulations for England and Wales safeguarding the boarding out of children
by local authorities and voluntary organisations and the conduct of children’s
homes have been made by the Home Secretary, and, for Scotland, by the
Secretary of State for Scotland. The cost of the local authorities’ child care
service, including the provision of training for houseparents and child care
officers, is shared between the local authorities and the Exchequer.
In Northern Ireland the Children and Young Persons Act (Northern
Ireland), 1950, gave to the welfare authorities of each county and county
borough (under the general direction of the Ministry of Home Affairs) the
duty of caring for homeless and neglected children. Legislation relating to
children and arrangements for their care follow the same general principles
as in Great Britain.
War orphans are the responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions and National
Insurance (see p. 139).
Voluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care, con¬
tinue to play a valuable part in this work. The larger societies, such as
Dr. Barnardo’s, the Church of England Children’s Society and the Catholic
Child Welfare Council, are constituent societies of the National Council of
Associated Children’s Homes, to which a large number of smaller voluntary
homes are also affiliated. In Scotland a valuable contribution is also made by
the Children’s Homes and Hostels under the auspices of the Church of
Scotland Committee on Social Service, and by other voluntary organisations.
Children’s homes provided by voluntary organisations (of which there are
nearly 630 in Great Britain and 23 in Northern Ireland) are required to be
registered under the Children Act (in Northern Ireland under the Children
and Young Persons Act). The boarding out of children and all children’s
homes, whether local authority or voluntary homes, are subject to inspection
by the Child Care Inspectorate of the Home Office, of the Scottish Office
or of the Northern Ireland Ministry of Home Affairs.
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own homes
include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units, which
undertake prolonged and intensive casework with families. The old-established
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and its Scottish
counterpart between them maintain inspectors and visitors throughout the
United Kingdom for the investigation of cases of reported cruelty to, or neglect
of, children in their own homes; when necessary, they resort to law after
consultation with the local authority, but they prefer to achieve their purpose
by warning and advice.
Provision for legal adoption was first made in England and Wales in 1926,
in Northern Ireland in 1929 and in Scotland in 1930. Over 18,000 adoption
orders are made annually by the courts in Great Britain and some 250 in
Northern Ireland; there are always more would-be adopters than children
available for adoption. Adoption is now regulated by the Adoption Act, 1958,
in Great Britain and by the Adoption of Children Act (Northern Ireland),
1950, in Northern Ireland. The Registrars General keep registers of adopted
i44
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PUBLIC HEALTH
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
children; adoption societies (there are over 70 societies which arrange adop¬
tions) must be registered with the local authority (in Northern Ireland with
the Ministry of Home Affairs).
HEALTH
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of
the years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second
half of the nineteenth century was notable for the growth of the environmental
or public health services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal
of refuse and cleaning of streets, and the first half of the twentieth century
for the development of publicly provided personal health services, as distinct
from environmental services, culminating in the introduction in 1948 of a
comprehensive National Health Service available to every citizen. Scientific
discoveries of importance to medicine and health, including the development
of new drugs, and the improved services of the last fifty years, particularly
in maternity and child welfare, school health services and school meals, are
reflected in declining mortality rates (see p. 10) and improved physique.
Diseases now in the forefront of research programmes include cancer and
diseases of the central nervous system, such as muscular dystrophy. Efforts
are also being made to combat some of the most prevalent diseases which
include, besides the common cold and influenza, heart diseases, rheumatism
and bronchitis.
The Public Health Act of 1936 brought up to date and consolidated preceding
Acts; it constitutes the present basic public health code in England and
Wales. Local authorities are mainly responsible for its implementation and
they have extensive powers for the making and administration of by-laws
relating to matters of public health. The local authorities chiefly concerned
are the councils of county and non-county boroughs, urban and rural district
councils, and, to a limited extent, parish councils.
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed
on much the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on
separate Acts and there is a different allocation of services between the various
types of local authority. The Public Health (Scotland) Act, 1897, and the
Burgh Police (Scotland) Act, 1892, constitute the basic legislation for
Scotland. The local authorities concerned are the councils of counties and
burghs. In Northern Ireland the councils of county and non-county boroughs
and urban and rural districts are mainly responsible for administering the
Public Health Acts (Northern Ireland), 1878-1962.
Local authorities are responsible for the investigation by their Medical
Officers of Health of outbreaks of infectious diseases and for disinfection and
other measures advised by them for preventing the spread of infectious
diseases in the area. They are also responsible to the Ministry of Health (or
the Welsh Board of Health or the Secretary of State for Scotland or the
Ministry of Health and Local Government for Northern Ireland) for recording
notifications of the prescribed infectious diseases.
Port health authorities have a general responsibility for supervising the
operation of health control at seaports and airports, the primary object of
which is to prevent the introduction of infectious disease into the country.
This health control is undertaken by health authorities using the services of
medical officers, public health inspectors, rodent inspectors and others.
SOCIAL WELFARE
H5
Pure Food
Other Public
Health Duties
THE NATIONAL
HEALTH SERVICE
Health Service
Administration
in Great Britain
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by legislation
consolidated for England and Wales in the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, for
Scotland in the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act, 1956, and for Northern
Ireland in the Food and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland), 1958. In England
and Wales the Act and regulations made under it are, in general, carried out
and enforced by food and drugs authorities (county councils, county borough
councils and, generally, the larger borough and urban district councils) in
relation to composition, adulteration and description, and by local authorities
(county borough, borough, urban district and rural district councils) in relation
to soundness, purity and hygiene; the Ministry of Health and the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are the central departments responsible
for advising and for making regulations under the Act. Places where food for
sale for human consumption is prepared, sold or stored must conform to
certain hygienic standards. Authorised officers of the councils concerned may
take for analysis or for bacteriological or other examination samples of any
food for sale for human consumption. Special regulations are in force for
certain foods such as milk, meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of
counties and large burghs; the central department is the Scottish Home and
Health Department.
In Northern Ireland administration is in the hands of the county and
county borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry
of Health and Local Government.
Local authorities are also responsible for the public health aspects of water
supply, sewerage and drainage; street paving and housing; and the abatement
of noise nuisance. They have power to establish smoke-controlled areas to
secure cleaner air.
The Acts setting up the National Health Service—the National Health
Service Act, 1946, the National Health Service (Scotland) Act, 1947, and the
Health Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1948—came into force simultaneously
on 5th July, 1948.
The object of the National Health Service Act, 1946, is ‘to promote the
establishment in England and Wales of a comprehensive health service
designed to secure improvement in the physical and mental health of the
people of England and Wales and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment
of illness, and for that purpose to provide or secure the effective provision
of services’. The National Health Service (Amendment) Act, 1949, and the
National Health Service Acts, 1951 to 1961, made some modifications in the
scheme for Great Britain and provided for charges to be made for certain
parts of the service, which is otherwise available free of charge to all according
to medical need without regard to any insurance qualification, although
national insurance contributors are required to pay a separate weekly national
health contribution under the National Health Service Contribution Acts,
1957 to 1961 (see Table 7). Visitors from other countries who come to Britain
for treatment are expected to pay for it, but treatment can be given under
the emergency provisions of the National Health Service to any who have
the misfortune to fall ill during a visit to Britain.
In England and Wales the Minister of Health has direct responsibility for
the provision on a national basis of all hospital and specialist services, including
those for mental disorder. He has power to conduct, or assist others to conduct,
146
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Health Service
Finance
research work into matters relating to the causation, prevention, diagnosis
or treatment of illness or mental disorder, and he provides a public health
laboratory service and a blood transfusion service. He has indirect responsibility
for the general practitioner services and local health authority services. He
is advised by the Central Health Services Council and by standing advisory
committees on various aspects of the service.
The hospital and specialist services are administered through regional
hospital boards and hospital management committees and, in the case of
teaching hospitals, by boards of governors. The hospitals are administered
in groups, of which there are nearly 400 under the control of hospital manage¬
ment committees, which are in turn under the control of 15 regional hospital
boards. The regions are arranged so that the hospital and specialist services
can conveniently be associated with a university school of medicine.
The members of a hospital management committee are appointed by the
appropriate regional hospital board. The committees, by their constitution,
reflect the communities concerned, for they usually include not only medical
practitioners but members of local authorities, trade unionists and others.
The regional hospital boards are appointed by the Minister of Health and
are similarly constituted. The boards of governors of teaching hospitals are
appointed by the Minister, a proportion of the members being nominated
by the teaching faculty of the university, the regional hospital board and the
medical and dental teaching staff. All appointments to hospital management
committees, regional hospital boards and boards of governors are honorary.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the Minister; but
it is his responsibility to provide clinical facilities for the training of medical
students. The universities are responsible for the provision of teaching.
The general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and supplementary ophthalmic
services are administered by 138 executive councils, most of which cover
the area of a county or county borough; in a few cases two areas are combined
under one council. Doctors, dentists and pharmacists are represented on the
executive councils and each profession also forms a local committee. Each
council has an ophthalmic services committee responsible for administering
the supplementary ophthalmic service. Councils of counties and county
boroughs are the 148 local health authorities in charge of local health services.
In Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland is the responsible minister;
31 county councils and 24 town councils of large burghs are the local health
authorities; hospital and specialist services are administered by five regional
hospital boards appointed by the Secretary of State, assisted by 79 boards
of management (the equivalent of hospital management committees in
England); and there are 25 executive councils, each serving the area of one
or more local health authorities. The teaching hospitals in Scotland come
under the control of the regional hospital boards, but special medical education
committees consider matters relating to medical teaching. The Scottish
Health Services Council and the standing advisory committees advise the
Secretary of State and keep closely in touch with the Central Health Services
Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 153.
Annual expenditure on the National Health Service in the United Kingdom
amounts to just over 4 per cent of the total national income. The greater
part of the cost falls on the Exchequer, to be met from general taxation, and
a small part is met from local rates. Other income is derived from the national
health service contribution paid with the national insurance contribution and
SOCIAL WELFARE
Practitioner
Services
I47
from the payments for those parts of the service for which charges are made.
These charges, first introduced in 1951 and since increased, are designed to
help to limit rising costs without reducing the services offered.
There is a charge of 2s. for each item entered on a prescription form. Charges
are also made for dentures (except for children under 16 or still at school,
and expectant and nursing mothers) and spectacles (except children’s spectacles
in standard frames), for elastic hosiery supplied in the family doctor service
or hospital out-patients’ department, for certain appliances supplied to out¬
patients, for treatment in the dental service (but not for examination only
or for treatment given to people under 21 years or to nursing or expectant
mothers), and for some local health authority services. Certain exemptions
or refunds are made and anyone may apply to the National Assistance Board
for help in meeting any of these charges. Under the 1946 Act, a limited
number of beds may be made available for hospital patients wishing for privacy,
provided that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds for
non-paying patients. Charges for these ‘amenity’ beds are fixed by statutory
regulations. Provision is also made at certain hospitals for patients who wish
to occupy private patients’ accommodation on payment of the whole cost of
this accommodation and treatment. Such patients may make private arrange¬
ments for treatment by doctors of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried, or part-time; part-
time medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept
private patients. General medical practitioners in public service are remunerated
mainly by capitation fees according to the number of people on their lists.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees according to the treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists
dispensing on their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions
they dispense. Doctors and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the supple¬
mentary ophthalmic service are paid prescribed fees for each sight test made;
opticians who dispense spectacles are paid according to the number and type
of pairs supplied.
The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to
individuals by doctors and dentists of their own choice, from among those
enrolled in the service. Doctors and dentists normally work at their own
surgeries; in a few places they practise in health centres established under
the National Health Service Acts. About 23,500, or almost all, general
medical practitioners (principals and assistants) in Great Britain take some
part in the service.
Doctors previously in practice were entitled to join the service at its start
in the place where they were practising. Those now wishing to enter practice
have to apply through their executive councils to the central Medical
Practices Committee, so that a better distribution of doctors throughout the
country may be facilitated. The maximum number of patients’ names per¬
mitted to be on a family doctor’s list is normally 3,500; the average number
in England and Wales is about 2,300. It is normally through the patient’s
own doctor that access to most other parts of the health service is obtained.
There are over 10,000 dentists in England and Wales and over 1,000 in
Scotland in the general dental service.
Over 800 ophthalmic medical practitioners and just under 7,000 ophthalmic
and dispensing opticians in England and Wales, and over 70 ophthalmic
medical practitioners and nearly 750 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in
Scotland, are engaged in the supplementary ophthalmic service. These services
148
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hospital and
Specialist
Services
Hospitals
Rehabilitation
provide for the testing of sight and provision of spectacles. Cases requiring
treatment are dealt with through the hospital eye service.
Nearly all retail pharmacists (numbering some 20,000 in Great Britain)
take part in the National Health Service. They are responsible for the dispens¬
ing of all prescriptions except for the small number dispensed by certain
general practitioners.
The hospital and specialist services provide hospital accommodation of all
kinds, including district general hospitals with treatment and diagnostic
facilities both for in-patients and out-patients, hospital maternity departments,
infectious disease units, psychiatric hospitals and units, convalescent homes,
and rehabilitation centres; all forms of specialised treatment; and the services
of specialist and other staff required for the hospitals.
A large proportion of the 3,000 hospitals in the National Health Service in
Great Britain were built in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins
to much earlier charitable foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’s
and St. Bartholomew’s Hospitals in London. Much has been done in recent
years to improve and extend existing hospitals and a start has been made on
the building of new hospitals. In 1962 ten-year plans for hospital development
were published by the Government, setting out the probable future pattern
of the hospital services. The plans are revised annually and revisions covering
the ten years to 1973-74 provide for expenditure of £750 million in England
and Wales and £105 million in Scotland.
Over 2,500 of the existing hospitals in the National Health Service are
in England and Wales, including the 26 teaching hospitals in London (actually
groups of hospitals comprising about 100 hospitals, convalescent homes,
branches, annexes, or treatment centres) and the 10 teaching hospitals
elsewhere in England and Wales (comprising some 70 hospitals and other
establishments). They have nearly 467,000 beds available for use and a nursing
and midwifery staff of 170,000 full-time and about 58,000 part-time nurses
and midwives. There are 380 hospitals in Scotland with about 64,000 beds
and over 24,000 full-time and nearly 8,000 part-time nurses and midwives.
A small number of hospitals remain outside the service for special reasons.
Most of these are run by religious orders. Some, such as the Italian and
French Hospitals, serve a special group of patients; others are maintained
for the chronic sick or for convalescents by charitable organisations. There
are also private nursing homes, which must be registered.
Rehabilitation is an important aspect of medical care and today hospital
treatment is not limited to the relief of pain or cure of pathological conditions
but aims at helping people to resume normal living as soon as possible.
Specialised rehabilitation facilities are provided at the main hospitals and in
a few special centres. The work is carried out under the guidance of the
appropriate medical specialist by physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts,
occupational therapists and social workers, working as a team. Experience
has shown that efficient medical rehabilitation reduces the stay in hospital,
the incidence of permanent disability and the period of incapacity for full
work. The hospital departments work in close association with the Disablement
Resettlement Service of the Ministry of Labour. Rehabilitation methods have
been applied with advantage in the care of the chronic sick, the mentally
disabled, the aged and the handicapped and have enabled many patients to
become self-sufficient or to be discharged from hospital and to resume an
independent life in their own homes.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Medical and
Psychiatric Social
Work
Blood Transfusion
Miniature
Radiography
Bacteriological and
Virological
Laboratory Services
Drug Safety
Mental Health
Services
J49
Many hospitals have an almoners’ department staffed by medical-social
workers trained to apply the principles of social casework to the problems
of the hospital patient. The almoners’ main function is to co-operate with
the medical staff in their treatment of the patient; to limit, by social action,
the personal anxieties, family difficulties and other problems which arise
during illness; and to arrange, if necessary, for after-care and help with
adjustment to normal life or continuing disability. Psychiatric social workers
are specially trained for work in the mental health services and in child
guidance clinics. They make an invaluable contribution, not only to hospitals
but also to the local health and education services, in assessing the environ¬
mental factors in mental abnormalities and in helping patients to make the
necessary adjustments.
The National Blood Transfusion Service in England and Wales is adminis¬
tered by the regional hospital boards under the National Health Service.
Each region maintains an organisation for collecting blood from voluntary
donors in the region, who give their blood without payment. The blood is
kept in the regional blood bank, or issued to area blood banks maintained at
general hospitals in each region. Each regional transfusion centre acts as a
reference centre for all transfusion problems arising in the region. There are
two central laboratories administered by the Medical Research Council on
behalf of the Ministry of Health: the Blood Group Reference Laboratory,
which prepares grouping serum and investigates blood grouping problems
referred to it, and the Blood Products Laboratory, which prepares dried
plasma and plasma fractions. In Scotland the Blood Transfusion Service is
under the direction of the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Association,
which is an independent voluntary body but is supported in the main by a
grant from the Scottish Home and Health Department. A close liaison is
maintained with the National Blood Transfusion Service, the Blood Group
Reference Laboratory and the Blood Products Laboratory.
Miniature radiography, provided by 103 mobile and static units, is part of the
Chest Radiological Service, available throughout the National Health Service.
The miniature units X-rayed over 3 million people during 1962.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological
and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct
research and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic
diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection
°f Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms.
In Scotland and Northern Ireland, where there is no separate public
health laboratory service, bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital
laboratories.
Since the beginning of 1964 the Committee on Safety of Drugs, set up by
the Health ministers, has been responsible for considering reports of toxicity
testing and clinical trials of new drugs and for studying reports of adverse
reactions to drugs in use. Members of the manufacturers’ organisations have
undertaken not to start clinical trials or to market a new drug against the advice
of the Committee.
Treatment for mental disorder is provided as part of the National Health
Service. Patients can consult the family doctor and receive specialist advice
IS®
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Welfare Foods
Service
Local Health
Services
Welfare Centres
Maternal Care
at hospital out-patient clinics as they would for any other kind of illness and
can enter hospital for in-patient treatment without formalities.
Under the Mental Health Act, 1959, and in Scotland the Mental Health
(Scotland) Act, i960, mentally disordered patients can, where necessary in
the interests of their health or safety or for the protection of other people,
be compelled to enter hospital for treatment. There are procedural safeguards
to protect patients from unnecessary detention in hospital and, in England
and Wales, they or their nearest relatives may apply to a Mental Health
Review Tribunal for discharge; in Scotland they may apply to the sheriff.
Local health authorities have a duty to make arrangements for helping the
mentally disordered in the community, for their care and after-care. Recent
developments in treatment of mental illness, enabling patients to be discharged
from hospital more quickly provided support is available in the community,
are adding to the demands for these services. Arrangements may include
facilities for training or occupation, and residential accommodation. If
necessary, the local health authority can place a mentally disordered person
under guardianship within the community. In Scotland education authorities
share the responsibility for providing training or occupation.
Under the welfare foods service expectant and nursing mothers, children
under five and certain handicapped children can obtain a pint of milk a day
at a reduced price from their usual milk supplier by means of tokens supplied
by the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. Other welfare foods are
distributed by local health authorities. These foods are dried milk, as an
alternative to liquid milk and at an equivalent price; orange juice, cod liver oil
and vitamin A and D tablets at cost price. Families who cannot afford to pay
for any welfare food can apply to the National Assistance Board for special
tokens to enable them to obtain supplies free of charge.
The Local Health Services administered by the county and county borough
councils (county and large burgh councils in Scotland) consist of the maternity
and child welfare services (including welfare centres, maternity care, dental
care and day nurseries), the services for the prevention of illness, for care and
after-care, including vaccination and immunisation, health visiting, home
nursing and domestic help, and care in some cases of mental disorder; the
ambulance services in England and Wales (for Scotland and Northern
Ireland see p. 152) and the provision, equipment and maintenance of local
health centres. A White Paper (Cmnd. 1973) was laid before Parliament in
April 1963 setting out the plans of local authorities in England and Wales for
the development of the health and welfare services over the decade 1962 to
1972. In Scotland fundamental studies of services are being carried out as a
guide to authorities in their plans for expansion.
Maternity and child welfare centres are part of the advisory and preventive
services of the local health authority; they offer regular supervision by doctors
and nurses to expectant and nursing mothers and young children. Special
sessions are held for vaccination and inoculation and for early testing of
babies for deafness and other defects, and a feature of the service is the
education of mothers by means of talks, discussion groups, demonstrations
and classes. About 81 per cent of all babies are taken to the centres.
The expectant mother may arrange to have her baby at home or in hospital
according to the advice given by the doctor or midwife, or according to her
own preference if sufficient hospital beds are available over and above those
SOCIAL WELFARE
Other Maternity
and Child Welfare
Services
Health Visiting
Home Nursing
Domestic Help
151
required for piiority cases, i.e. those for whom domiciliary confinement is
inadvisable for medical or obstetric reasons or because of adverse home
conditions. The proportion of confinements taking place in hospital varies
considerably between different areas; the national average has increased over
the past 25 years and is now 65 per cent for England and Wales and 77 per
cent for Scotland.
Tor a home confinement a mother may have the services of either a general
practitioner obstetrician or her own family doctor, if he is willing to undertake
her maternity care, besides those of a trained midwife in the domiciliary
service of the local health authority. The doctor carries out ante-natal and
post-natal examinations, attends at the confinement and gives any other
medical care required. The services of a consultant obstetrician are also
available if the doctor wishes to ask for his advice. Routine supervision and
advice is given by the midwife, who visits regularly before the confinement to
examine the mother and give her advice and help generally. In addition, the
expectant mother may attend the ante-natal clinic for instruction in preparation
for motherhood and in some cases for interim ante-natal supervision. Fre¬
quently it is the midwife who undertakes the actual delivery. Both she and
the doctor attend during the ten days after confinement. Midwives work in
close touch with the welfare centres in the care of the mother both before
and after the birth of the child.
Many local health authorities make special arrangements for premature
babies remaining in their own homes, by lending equipment and appointing
experienced nursing staff to supervise their care.
There are about 530 day nurseries for children under five in Great Britain
provided by local health authorities or voluntary associations working with
them. The National Health Service Act, 1952, gave local authorities power
to make charges for the use of day nurseries. Private or factory nurseries (of
which there are about 950 in Great Britain) must be registered with the local
health authorities; this regulation applies also to persons paid for looking
after more than two children who are not all of the same family.
Most local authorities contribute to the cost of the work done by voluntary
denominational and other bodies which care for unmarried mothers and
their babies; a few authorities make direct provision for their special needs
through their health departments. The voluntary associations employ specially
trained workers to help the unmarried mother in making plans for herself
and her child. Most homes and hostels for the ante-natal and post-natal care
(and, in some cases, the confinement) of these mothers are provided by such
organisations.
Health visitors (see p. 154) are employed by local health authorities to visit
people in their own homes to give advice on the care of young children,
expectant and nursing mothers, people suffering from illness, including
mental illness, and any injury or disability requiring medical or dental
treatment, and on measures necessary to prevent the spread of infection. Their
duties include health education and attendance at ante-natal and child welfare
clinics. They may also undertake tuberculosis visiting and school nursing.
The employment of nurses to attend patients who require nursing in their
own homes is the responsibility of the local health authorities. Most authorities
employ nurses directly for this purpose, although some have arranged for
voluntary district nursing associations to provide a service on their behalf.
Local health authorities (welfare authorities in Northern Ireland) have the
power to make arrangements for domestic help (commonly called ‘home help’)
F
152
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ambulance Services
Prevention of
Illness: Care and
After-care
Vaccination and
Immunisation
in households where it is needed owing to illness, confinement, or the
presence of children, or old people. This service is mainly used in the care
of old or chronically sick people, in maternity cases and, to a lesser extent
but increasingly, for families where such help is needed to prevent children
having to be cared for away from home, for example, during the absence
of the mother. The authorities may recover from those assisted such charges
as it is considered they can afford to pay, but the service may be provided
without charge to people with very small incomes.
Free conveyance by ambulance in England and Wales between home and
hospital or clinic is provided, where needed, by local authorities either
directly or by arrangement with voluntary organisations. The Hospital Car
Service (organised by the St. John Ambulance Brigade, the British Red Cross
Society, and the Women’s Voluntary Service) augments the ambulance
service in many areas for the conveyance of sitting patients. In Scotland
ambulances are run by the Scottish Ambulance Service (St. Andrew’s
Ambulance Association and the Scottish branch of the British Red Cross
Society) on behalf of the Secretary of State. In Northern Ireland they are
run by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
Local health authorities are responsible for prevention, care and after-care
arrangements for mental disorder (see p. 149) and tuberculosis. They are
responsible for BCG vaccination and other preventive measures against
tuberculosis and also for rehabilitation, but not for diagnosis and treatment,
which are the responsibility of the hospital service and are provided through
hospitals and chest clinics. The chest physicians in charge of the clinics are,
however, often employed jointly by the hospital authorities and local
authorities to ensure co-ordination of all phases of treatment. They are
assisted by tuberculosis health visitors and nurses, and by almoners or other
social workers.
Care and after-care arrangements are made to varying extents for other
types of illness; in particular there are certain services for people being
nursed at home, such as the loan of special equipment or the laundering of
bed linen. A chiropody service is provided in many areas. As part of their
preventive work, local health authorities may give help and advice to families,
particularly those in difficulties and in danger of breaking up, where there
is a danger to the physical or mental health of the children.
A charge may be made for some of these services if the person wishing
to make use of them can reasonably be expected to contribute towards their
cost.
Local health authorities may make arrangements with statutory water
undertakings for fluoride to be added to water supplies to help in preventing
dental decay.
All local health authorities have arrangements for vaccination, without charge
and as part of the National Health Service, against diphtheria, poliomyelitis,
smallpox, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough.
Vaccination against poliomyelitis by local health authorities is normally
restricted to people under 40 years of age (apart from people liable to special
risk who are eligible for vaccination at any age); those over 40 may be vac¬
cinated, free of charge under the National Health Service, by their general
practitioner. BCG vaccination against tuberculosis by local health authorities
is available to children of ten years and upwards and to others particularly
exposed to risk of tuberculous infection.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Health Centres
Problems of the
National Health
Service
HEALTH
SERVICES IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
IS3
Eighteen health centres which provide primarily for the association of
general medical practice with maternity and child welfare services and the
school health service have been set up by local health authorities in England
and Wales. This is one form of co-operation between the different elements
in the health service. Other forms of co-operation are growing, such as the
siting of group practices adjacent to local health authority clinics, the atten¬
dance of midwives for ante-natal sessions at general practitioners’ surgeries
and the attachment of health visitors to particular practices for the whole or
part of their time. The provision of the three health centres in Scotland is
the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland and not of local
health authorities.
The National Health Service is not without its difficulties and shortcomings.
For example, the original ideal of comprehensive free treatment for all has
to some extent been breached by the introduction of charges for some parts
of the Service which the majority of the users have to pay. In spite of these,
the total cost of the Service has continued to rise, because of such factors as
increases in prices and in staff salaries, the high cost of many new drugs and
of modern equipment, the increased use made by the public of the services
provided, extensions and improvements of the Service and an increased rate
of capital expenditure. More doctors, dentists, midwives and nurses are
needed by an expanding service. There is also some disparity between different
parts of the country; some areas have more family doctors than others, more
hospital beds for confinements of mothers who would prefer to have their
babies in hospital though they do not need specialist medical care, and more
extensive local authority services.
Against these shortcomings may be set the steady improvement in the
country s vital statistics to which the National Health Service has largely
contributed, the decrease in ill health from neglected ailments, and the
removal of anxiety about the cost of treatment, from which many of those
who now use the Service previously suffered.
The health services established under the Health Services Act (Northern
Ireland), 1948, correspond fairly closely to the medical care system established
under the National Health Service in Great Britain and they are financed
in the same way as in the rest of the United Kingdom.
The hospital and specialist services are administered by the Northern
Ireland Hospitals Authority (which corresponds approximately to a regional
hospital board in Great Britain) through hospital management committees.
In hospital administration the role of the central government is not quite
so immediate and direct as in Great Britain: hospital property, for example,
is vested not in the Minister of Health and Local Government but in the
Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority, which has under its control 75 hospitals
containing in all about 17,000 beds. The administration of the general
medical, dental, pharmaceutical and supplementary eye services is in the
hands of the Northern Ireland Health Services Board, which takes the place
of the executive councils in Great Britain. Local health services are adminis¬
tered by the six county councils and the two county borough councils in
Northern Ireland. The range of local authority services and the arrangements
made by the Northern Ireland General Health Services Board for the
provision of services, and for the remuneration of the people providing
them, are similar to those already described for the rest of the United
Kingdom.
154
VOLUNTARY AID
FOR THE
SICK AND
HANDICAPPED
THE MEDICAL,
DENTAL AND
ALLIED
PROFESSIONS
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A number of voluntary organisations provide extensive welfare services for
sick and handicapped people in co-operation with, or supplementary to, the
provision made by central and local authorities. Many convalescent homes
and homes for the infirm and for people with specific handicaps are, or were
originally, provided by voluntary effort. In many areas invalid children and
others needing care in their own homes are visited and helped by voluntary
organisations. Though the need for material aid from private sources becomes
less as public provision extends, many forms of help to meet individual
needs that would not otherwise be met are given by voluntary agencies.
Their most valuable role is probably to provide small personal services and
the continued personal interest that can mean so much to a sick or handi¬
capped person. These voluntary agencies usually depend largely on the work
of part-time or full-time unpaid volunteers.
A great deal of help is given to hospitals by voluntary bodies and individual
voluntary helpers. The majority of the hospitals in England and Wales have
their own Leagues of Friends or similar bodies of voluntary workers who
organise and undertake a variety of services. Many hospitals also have help
from the British Red Cross Society, the St. John Ambulance Brigade, the
Women’s Voluntary Service, or a similar organisation. The operation of
canteens for out-patients, and trolley-shops and book and picture library
services for in-patients, visiting in the wards, receiving new patients, and
mending linen are among the tasks commonly undertaken.
Only persons whose names are on the medical register can practise as doctors
under the National Health Service. Apart from registered medical prac¬
titioners, only persons whose names are on the dentists’ register can practise
the full range of dentistry in Britain; dental auxiliaries who have undergone
a two-year training course may do some simple work under supervision. The
minimum qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven years’
training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year s experience
as a resident assistant doctor in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years
at a dental school are required. The governing body of the medical profession
is the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858; that of the dentists is
the General Dental Council, which succeeded the Dental Board in 1956.
The British Medical Association is the main doctors’ professional association;
that of the dentists is the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registration
as a general trained nurse is three years. Training is available also in sick
children’s, mental, and mental subnormality nursing. An enrolled nurse takes
a two-year course. The examining body of the nursing profession is the
General Nursing Council. Midwives must have the certificate of the Central
Midwives Board. Most pupil midwives are already state registered general
nurses or sick children’s nurses; for them the two-year midwifery training
period is reduced to one year and, for state enrolled nurses, to 18 months.
The Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Midwives are the
professional bodies for nurses and midwives. Health visitors are state registered
general or sick children’s nurses who have undergone at least the first part
of the midwifery course or obstetric nursing before taking a year s course in
health visiting, promoted by the Council for the Training of Health Visitors.
Only registered pharmaceutical chemists may practise as pharmacists or
describe themselves as such, and qualifications requiring four to five years’
academic study and practical training are necessary for registration. The
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain is the governing body of the profession.
SOCIAL WELFARE
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Medical
Research
Council
155
Under the Opticians Act, 1958, a General Optical Council regulates the
professions of ophthalmic optician and dispensing optician; only registered
ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practitioners) may test sight.
Training of ophthalmic opticians takes three years followed by a year under
supervision.
For the professions of chiropodist, dietitian, medical laboratory technician,
occupational therapist, physiotherapist, radiographer, remedial gymnast and
speech therapist a good general education is required, followed by professional
training, mostly of two or three years. Only people with approved qualifi¬
cations may be employed in these professions in the National Health Service;
with the exception of speech therapists, these professions have their own
professional boards, supervised by the Council for Professions Supplementary
to Medicine.
Almoners must obtain the certificate of the Institute of Almoners, or have
taken a recognised university course to qualify them for membership of the
Institute. Psychiatric social workers are required to have a certificate showing
they have attended the mental health course provided at certain universities.
Medical research in Britain receiving support from Government funds is
carried out by the Medical Research Council (see below), the universities and
their associated medical schools, and also in hospitals in the National Health
Service.
Further support for medical research is provided by private organisations,
of which the British Empire Cancer Campaign and the Nuffield Foundation
are among the largest. There is close co-operation between the Medical
Research Council and these organisations to ensure the best allocation of their
respective resources. Research is also undertaken by the pharmaceutical
industry.
The Medical Research Council’s programme of work is carried out both in
its own research establishments and by independent scientists, in the
universities and elsewhere, with support from the Council in the form of
research grants. The programme includes fundamental studies of the structure
and natural processes of the body; clinical and laboratory studies of disease;
the development and evaluation of special methods of treatment and also of
prophylaxis and diagnosis; and the study of social and occupational factors
affecting health and the efficiency of body and mind.
In planning and carrying out its programme, the Council is assisted by
special advisory committees which it appoints. Three of the more important
of these are the Clinical Research Board, set up in consultation with the
health departments to assist the development of clinical research, and the
Tropical Medicine Research Board, appointed in consultation with the Depart¬
ment of Technical Co-operation, to advise on the promotion and co-ordination
of research in this field; and the newly established Biological Research
Board, which advises on the promotion of research in the non-clinical field.
156
6
EDUCATION
Educational
Administration
There are nearly nine million children and young people in full-time
attendance at schools, universities, training colleges or technical colleges in
Britain. The great majority of schools, attended by over 90 per cent of school
children, are publicly provided or aided. Most technical colleges and other
centres of further education are publicly maintained. Universities are autono¬
mous self-governing institutions but are aided from public funds, as are
nearly 90 per cent of their students.
Many schools and colleges continue to benefit from the endowments
provided by benefactors in past centuries but the bulk of the expenditure on
education in Britain comes from public funds. Total public expenditure on
education, including university education (but excluding school meals and
milk), was over £1,360 million in 1963-64.
In England and Wales the main development of publicly provided primary
education dates from 1870, and that of secondary education from the beginning
of the present century. In 1833 the Government began to make annual
grants to the voluntary societies which were providing schools, and the
Elementary Education Act of 1870 accepted the principle of compulsory
education. By the end of the nineteenth century elementary education had
become virtually both compulsory and free of charge. Public provision of
secondary education (already begun in Wales) started in England under the
Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now governs public education in
England and Wales.
The Scottish and Northern Ireland educational systems both have long
histories independent of that of education in England, but the same general
policy is now being implemented throughout the United Kingdom, with
some national variations.
A rising birth rate, a decline in the numbers of early school leavers and a
more widespread recognition of the value of higher education has increased
the demand for educational facilities and stimulated expansion at all
levels.
All aspects of education in England and Wales, and of universities and civil
science throughout Great Britain are the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Education and Science. (There is an Education Office for Wales
within the Department of Education.) The Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland are responsible through
their Departments for all education, apart from the universities, in their
respective countries. In April 1964 the new Department of Education
and Science absorbed powers previously exercised by the Ministry of Educa¬
tion in England and Wales (for Scotland, see p. 62), the Treasury (through
the University Grants Committee) and the Office of the Minister for
Science.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is
divided between the central Government departments, local education authori¬
ties, and various voluntary organisations. The relation between these three
EDUCATION
SCHOOLS
157
groups is based on consultation and co-operation, both by direct contact
between the parties and through Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Education who
act as liaison officers, particularly between local education authorities and the
departments. In England and Wales, the Schools Council for the Curriculum
and Examinations, representative of all educational interests, was set up in
1964 to act as an advisory body on all aspects of the school system.
The local education authorities are responsible for ensuring that adequate
provision is made in their areas for the two stages of school education
(primary and secondary), and that those pupils who would profit by proceeding
to a university are not deterred by lack of financial means. They are also
responsible for the provision of all forms of further education, i.e. post¬
school education below university standard (see p. 168).
The planning of the curriculum is largely in the hands of the head teacher
of each school and the individual teachers.
In England and Wales teacher training colleges are under the financial and
administrative control of local education authorities or voluntary organisations,
but the organisation of courses is based on university institutes of education.
In Scotland (where they are known as colleges of education) teacher training
institutions are under the control of specially appointed governing bodies,
and in Northern Ireland under the direct control of the education
department.
The universities are administratively independent of the Department of
Education and Science; their governing bodies are appointed according to
the terms of their individual charters.
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive
efficient full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of
5 and 15. The school-leaving age is to be raised to 16 in 1970-71; it is
estimated that this will increase the school population by 425,000.
At present there are over 8f million school children. In England and Wales
there were about 7 million children in publicly maintained schools in 1963,
besides some 124,000 others at schools receiving direct grants from the
Department of Education. There were also about 480,000 children of all ages at
about 4,000 independent schools. In Scotland 885,000 children were attending
publicly maintained or aided schools and nearly 18,000 were at independent
schools. In Northern Ireland 292,000 children were attending publicly
maintained or aided schools; there were very few at independent schools.
The number of school children in Britain is increasing as more stay on each
year beyond the minimum school-leaving age. Moreover, the birth rate has
continued to rise steadily since 1955, so that primary school numbers are
very high. There is, therefore, a continuing need for more teachers and more
school buildings.
In England and Northern Ireland it is usual for boys and girls to be taught
together in primary schools. In England and Wales over half and in Northern
Ireland less than half the secondary schools are for boys or girls only. Mixed
schools are more common in Wales; and in Scotland all but a few city schools
take both boys and girls.
The majority of independent schools are for boys or for girls only, except
in classes for small children. There are a few which are co-educational.
In England and Wales three kinds of school are supported from public
funds: county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained
by local education authorities, i.e. their full cost falls on public funds;
voluntary schools (mostly ‘aided’ or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been
158
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fees
Curricula
provided by a voluntary body, usually of a religious denomination, but which
are maintained by local education authorities1; and direct grant schools which
are completely independent of local education authorities but receive a
grant-in-aid from the Department of Education and Science. These last (the
smallest group) mostly provide education of the grammar school type; they
include some schools of ancient foundation.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided
by education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this
term is used for a type of independent school of which there are also a few in
Scotland and Northern Ireland, see p. 161). There are also a few grant-aided
schools (some of ancient foundation) conducted by voluntary managers and
receiving grants direct from the Scottish Education Department.
In Northern Ireland there are county schools, managed by local education
authorities, and voluntary schools, under voluntary management; both types
are grant-aided by the government.
In England and Wales no fees are charged to parents of children attending
schools maintained by local education authorities, and books and equipment
are supplied free. Direct grant schools, which are mostly of the grammar
school type, charge fees, but must offer 25 per cent of their places free to
pupils who have attended grant-aided primary schools for at least two years;
these places are usually offered through, and paid for by, local education
authorities. The direct grant schools must also put a further 25 per cent of
their places at the disposal of local education authorities, if required, for
candidates who have not necessarily attended grant-aided primary schools.
Tuition fees for the remaining places are payable, but relief may be claimed
in accordance with an income scale approved by the Department of Education
and Science; the Department pays the governors of the school the amount
of the fees so remitted.
In Scotland education authorities may charge fees in certain schools
provided that this does not prejudice the provision of free education for all
who desire it.
In Northern Ireland no fees are charged to parents of children attending
any county or voluntary primary, intermediate or special school; qualified
pupils at county and voluntary grammar schools receive scholarships from
the local education authorities which cover the whole or most of the fees
charged by the school.
In England and Wales teachers are not subject to direction from the central
department on questions relating to curricula or methods. Her Majesty’s
Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of all schools including
independent schools, review and report on the content and value of the
education provided and, during their visits, are available as advisers. Local
education authorities also employ inspectors to advise on the schools which
they maintain. In Scotland the broad outline of schemes of work in primary
and secondary schools is subject to the approval of one of Her Majesty’s
Inspectors. In Northern Ireland the curriculum of each grant-aided school
1 Aided schools have more independence than controlled schools, but they are partly
responsible for maintaining their buildings (see p. 164) whereas controlled schools are
not. Over a third of the 30,000 schools maintained by local education authorities in
England and Wales are voluntary schools and the majority of these are Church of
England schools. There are some 2,000 Roman Catholic voluntary schools and smaller
numbers belonging to other religious bodies.
EDUCATION
Primary
Schools
Secondary
Schools
England and Wales
159
is subject to the approval of the Ministry of Education. In both countries
considerable latitude is afforded in the scope both of the curriculum and the
teaching methods employed.
A child’s primary education continues until about the age of eleven in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland and twelve in Scotland. There are some nursery
schools and classes for children between two and five years old. In England
and Wales there are infant schools, or departments, for all children between
five and seven and junior schools for those aged seven to eleven, while in
Scotland there are primary departments for children aged five to twelve
years.
In Scotland primary pupils must be taught reading, writing, arithmetic,
English, music, art and handwork, nature study, physical training and, at
the appropriate stage, history, geography, and written composition; girls
must learn needlework. Religious instruction is also given. In England, Wales
and Northern Ireland, the curriculum is similar in scope (although not
regulated), with the addition in Wales of the teaching of Welsh. (Children who
speak Welsh at home normally receive the early stages of their primary
education in Welsh and are taught English as a second language.)
The aim of the public system of secondary education is to give all children
an education suited to their particular abilities.
Since the organisation of schools is a responsibility of local education
authorities in England and Wales, subject to the approval of the Department
of Education and Science, the type of provision made for secondary education
varies to some extent between areas. In some areas, different types of school
specialise, particularly in the later years, in different types of course, with
arrangements for the transfer of pupils between schools where desirable; in
other areas flexibility is achieved by an overlap of the courses provided in
different types of school. There are, however, two main types of publicly
maintained secondary school in England and Wales: grammar and secondary
modern.
Grammar schools take children who hope to reach a university and others
likely to profit from an academic type of education. In England and Wales
these schools are attended by about one secondary school pupil in four.
Secondary modern schools form the largest group of secondary schools. They
give a general education, with a practical bias, closely related to the interests
and environment of their pupils. Secondary technical schools offer an education
related to industry, commerce and agriculture, but still general, and not
vocational, in purpose. Schools which provide all three, or any two, types of
education in separately organised streams are known as multilateral and
bilateral schools.
Some local education authorities have established comprehensive schools
providing all types of secondary education for all, or most of, the children of
a district. In urban areas such schools tend to be larger than the other types
of school and may have as many as 2,000 pupils. A few authorities have
introduced ‘two-tier’ schooling, which provides comprehensive schooling for
three years, followed by a grammar school course for those who want it.
Each local education authority decides how the selection shall be made for
its secondary schools: generally speaking, this selection depends upon an
assessment of the child’s ability as shown in the primary school, often coupled
with tests taken at about eleven years of age, which are commonly known
i6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Special Schools
as ‘the eleven-plus’.1 Both the system of allocating children to different types
of secondary school at the age of eleven and the selection methods used have
been the subject of much public discussion and critical thought and local
education authorities are constantly experimenting with methods of selection
to minimise strain on children or their parents. The comprehensive schools,
by avoiding selection, are providing one solution to this problem, but most
authorities arrange for pupils to transfer from one course or school to another
for educational reasons. In addition, many modern schools now offer courses
of the grammar or secondary technical school type.
Most grammar school pupils remain at school until they are 16 years old
and the rest leave between the ages of 17 and 19; most secondary modern
pupils leave at the age of 15. The number of pupils remaining at school
beyond the minimum leaving age has been increasing steadily for some
years and now amounts to about 40 per cent of all pupils. Thirty-four per
cent of the 15- to 16-year-old age group in England and Wales are in full-time
education at maintained schools or technical colleges, and over 16 per cent
of the 16- to 17-year-old age group.
Scottish secondary schools fall into two main categories, those providing
courses extending normally to three years, generally called junior secondary
schools, and those providing courses of four, five or six years, known as senior
secondary schools. In each type of school the courses are intended to provide
a general education, but they are differentiated in character to suit the varying
needs and abilities of the pupils, and include literary, commercial, boys’
technical, domestic and rural courses. While some schools are purely junior
secondary and some purely senior secondary, there are also many schools of
the comprehensive type, traditional in Scotland, in which all kinds of courses,
both junior secondary and senior secondary, are provided. Over one-third
of all pupils go on to senior secondary courses on reaching secondary school age.
Promotion from the primary to the secondary school takes place usually
between the ages of 11J and iz\. The fitness of pupils to profit from the various
types of secondary course is assessed on the basis of teachers’ estimates of
attainment, intelligence tests, and attainment tests, with due regard to the
wishes of the parents. There is provision for an appeal to the Secretary of
State for Scotland in the event of a dispute between the education authority
and the parent and also for the reconsideration of original allocations if,
later, transfer to another course appears to be necessary.
In Northern Ireland there are grammar schools, secondary intermediate schools,
which are the equivalent of the secondary modern schools in England and
Wales, and technical intermediate schools, which offer the same facilities as
secondary technical schools in England and Wales. Some changes in organisa¬
tion are likely as the result of the 1964 White Paper, Educationa„ Development
in Northern Ireland.
Special educational treatment, either in special schools or otherwise, is
provided between the ages of five (or less) and 16 for children who require it
on account of any physical or mental handicap, including maladjustment.
There are about 970 special schools in Britain, including hospital schools,
day and boarding schools. There are also boarding homes for handicapped
children attending ordinary schools.
1 By the Education Act, 1964, local education authorities and voluntary bodies in
England and Wales may, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State for Education
and Science, organise new schools so that the age of transfer is not necessarily at 11.
Independent
Schools
Secondary
School
Examinations
EDUCATION l6l
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland there are ten categories of
handicapped pupils for whom local education authorities must provide special
educational treatment: blind, partially sighted, deaf, partially hearing,
delicate, educationally subnormal, epileptic, maladjusted, physically handi¬
capped, and children suffering from speech defects. (There is no separate
category for the delicate in Scotland.)
All independent schools in England and Wales must be registered with the
Department of Education and Science, to show that they conform to certain
minimum standards. Schools achieving certain higher standards may apply
for recognition as ‘efficient’; nearly two-thirds of the independent schools are
so recognised. Similar registration arrangements exist in Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Fees at independent schools (for tuition and boarding) range between
£300 and £550 a year. A number of them offer scholarships. The largest and
most important of the independent schools in Britain are known as public
schools, although not all schools classed as public schools are independent
(those which are not are mostly direct-grant schools) and public schools
form only a minority of all independent schools. (These schools should not
be confused with the State-supported public schools in Scotland.)
The public school for boys has made a notable contribution to English
education. Many public schools date from the sixteenth century, some are
older (for example, Winchester, founded in 1382, and Eton, founded in 1440),
and most have some income from endowments. Each is controlled by its own
board of governors. Public schools have emphasised the importance of
character-building, and in these schools the prefect and house systems were
developed. By the prefect system day-to-day discipline is largely maintained
by the pupils themselves; by the house system a school is divided into groups
of about 50 pupils, each under the care of a housemaster. The public school
is also characterised by a high staffing ratio and a high proportion of pupils
doing advanced work. A public school is often, although not necessarily, a
boarding school; day boys are also taken at some of them. The usual age of
entry to the independent public schools for boys is 13 and the leaving age
about 18. There are some girls’ public schools modelled to a certain extent
on the public schools for boys.
Independent schools also include preparatory schools, many of them
boarding schools, for boys aged from about 8 to 13 years, most of whom are
intending to enter public schools; some similar schools for girls; and a wide
range of other day and boarding schools covering every age group and grade
of education and every variety of educational method. Some of these schools
are owned and managed, often under a trust deed, by independent non-
profit-making bodies. Others are privately owned by proprietors for whom
the running of the school provides a living.
There is no national leaving examination in England or Wales, but secondary
school pupils and candidates not attending school may take an examination
known as the General Certificate of Education (GCE). This examination,
which is on a single subject and not a grouped subject basis (i.e. no subject
is obligatory and individual subjects may be taken at different times), is
conducted at ‘ordinary’ and ‘advanced’ levels. Most candidates for the ordinary
level are about 16 years of age, although many take it earlier, at the discretion
of their head teacher. Most grammar, direct-grant and independent school
pupils and an increasing number from other secondary schools take the
ordinary examination, and passes in various subjects are widely accepted for
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
l62
entry to courses of vocational training. The advanced examination is at
university entrance level (supplemented, since 1963, by special papers to
help university authorities in selecting students) and is accepted also for
purposes of entry to many forms of professional training. From 1965 pupils
who have completed five years’ secondary education but who are not taking
GCE may take the Certificate of Secondary Education (CSE) examination;
this will be on a single subject basis and will be controlled by teachers serving
in the schools providing candidates.
In Scotland courses in senior secondary schools lead to examinations
conducted by the Scottish Education Department. School pupils in the fourth
year of secondary courses sit an examination at 16 years for the award of
passes on the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education, and
pupils in the fifth year can obtain passes on the Higher grade of the Scottish
Certificate of Education. Examinations at both grades are open to candidates
who have left school.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the GCE, as in England and
Wales, or examinations based on group subjects: the Junior Certificate
Examination, at about the age of 14 and the Senior Certificate Examination,
at about the age of 17.
Teachers Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing
bodies or managers. In 1963 there were about 328,000 full-time teachers in
publicly maintained primary and secondary schools in Britain, an average
of one teacher to 25 pupils; but because of the shortage of teachers, particularly
those for younger children, and their uneven distribution throughout the
country, many classes have more than the statutory maxima of pupils (40
pupils for primary and 30 for secondary school classes in England and Wales;
in Scotland 45 for primary, 40 for classes in the first three years and 30 for
classes in subsequent years of secondary departments). The rise in school
population has created a need for more and more teachers and although
greater numbers are entering the teacher training colleges, more university
graduates are turning to teaching, and some married women, formerly
teachers, are returning to the profession, yet more are needed if the Govern¬
ment’s aim of reducing the number of oversize classes is to be achieved.
There are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
institutions maintained from public funds in England and Wales, in Scotland,
and in Northern Ireland; and these scales influence the salaries paid to
teachers in independent schools. There are also national superannuation
schemes which are administered by the central departments.
In England and Wales arrangements for salary negotiations are under
review. Hitherto, agreed salary scales were submitted to the Minister of
Education (now Secretary of State for Education and Science) by joint com¬
mittees of representatives of local education authorities’ and teachers’
associations. (The best known of these committees are the Burnham Com¬
mittees dealing with the salaries of teachers in primary and secondary schools
and in establishments of further education). The Minister could accept or
reject, but not modify, the committees’ recommendations and make the
approved scales mandatory on local education authorities. The Secretary of
State for Scotland can modify the recommendations he receives from the
Scottish negotiating body.
Over 1,700 teachers left Britain in 1962-63 for posts in schools, teacher
training colleges, technical colleges and universities in other parts of the
Commonwealth, including 600 who went to serve in the developing countries
EDUCATION
Religion in
Schools
Health and
Welfare of
School Children
School Building
163
of the Commonwealth. Steps taken by the Government to encourage teachers
to serve for a period overseas have included the establishment of a National
Council for the Supply of Teachers Overseas and a Committee for University
Secondment and the introduction of special measures to safeguard teachers’
interests both while abroad and on their return home. Outside these schemes,
an increasing number of volunteers are going overseas for one or two years,
a large number to teach. Many of them go with the support of voluntary
bodies which receive some financial assistance from the Government.
Interchange schemes, under which teachers in Britain exchange posts for
a year with teachers overseas, include one with the United States and another
with Commonwealth countries, whereby each year over 100 British teachers
exchange posts with teachers from Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.
Official exchange schemes also operate between Britain and several European
countries both for teachers and for temporary assistants’ posts for language
specialists.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools
receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of worship
unless their parents object. In county schools, and in certain circumstances in
voluntary schools, religious instruction of an undenominational Christian
character is given. In all kinds of voluntary school there is opportunity for
denominational instruction. In county schools in Northern Ireland clergy
have a right of access to give religious instruction to children of their denom¬
ination for a limited period each week. In Scotland, subject to safeguards
for the individual conscience, matters relating to religious instruction are in
the hands of the school managers, but there are a number of denominational
schools conducted by education authorities.
Services in the school chapel and religious teaching are an essential part
of the life and education of the independent public schools and at most of
these schools conform to the teaching of a particular church (in the majority
of cases, Anglican).
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum
of all schools.
The School Health Service provides periodic medical inspection and
certain free treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local
education authorities. Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child
guidance centres. (There are also child guidance clinics in the National
Health Service.) In Northern Ireland the School Health Service is operated
by the health authorities.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to all school children
who wish to have it, and the School Meals Service provides a daily dinner at
a subsidised price (remitted where there is need) to just over half the pupils
in county and voluntary schools. Education authorities have power to provide
free transport for children who live more than a certain distance from the
schools they attend.
Local education authorities are responsible for providing the schools and
other buildings needed for public education in their areas. The central
departments exercise control by approving annual building programmes,
put forward by local education authorities, framing regulations and
fixing cost limits; they also offer guidance to authorities by means of building
bulletins and in other ways.
164
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HIGHER
EDUCATION
An extensive school building programme has been carried out in recent
years. This has resulted in the completion of over 7,400 new schools in
Britain between 1947 and 1963; together with extensions, alterations and
remodelling of existing schools, over 4 million new places have been provided,
at a cost of £947 million. In England and Wales new work to the value of
£65 million has been authorised to start in 1964-65, rising to £80 million a
year in 1965-66 and 1966—67. In Scotland the comparable authorisations are
for £14 million and £17 million. In Northern Ireland expenditure is expected
to be £3 million a year.
Under the Education Act, 1959, grants for alterations, improve¬
ments and external repairs up to 75 per cent of the approved cost may
be made to voluntary schools by the Department of Education. Grants
may also be made for building new aided secondary schools needed
for children from aided primary schools which existed on 15th June,
1959. The Northern Ireland grants amount to 65 per cent of the total
cost of the expenditure by voluntary bodies on both new schools and
improvements.
The extensive school building programme has been accompanied by new
ideas and methods in design and construction. Industrialised building
techniques have been widely adopted. The new schools are light and airy
with a high standard of finish and generous provision of teaching area and
outdoor games space.
Expansion is taking place in all branches of higher education—universities,
teacher training colleges, Scottish colleges of education, and technical colleges
of various types where certain courses are of advanced level (see p. 167). In
1963 the report of the Committee on Higher Education in Great Britain, under
the chairmanship of Lord Robbins, was published. The Government
accepted its main recommendations, which were based on the assumption
that all students with appropriate qualifications should be entitled to higher
education. The target figures to be achieved by a ten-year programme are
328,000 full-time students in higher education in 1967-68, of whom 197,000
should be in universities, and 390,000 in 1973-74, with 218,000 at universities.
The committee also recommended that there should be a total of 60 univer¬
sities, including the ten Colleges of Advanced Technology, certain Scottish
institutions, and six entirely new universities. It suggested the establishment
of five special university institutions for technological education (four
probably from existing institutions) and two major postgraduate schools for
business and management studies; changes in the organisation of teacher
training colleges which, renamed Colleges of Education, should be attached
to universities and should have facilities for four-year degree courses; and,
in view of the increasing amount of work of university standard being
done outside universities, the establishment of a Council for National
Academic Awards with the power to award degrees to students on
suitable courses outside universities. The committee recommended an
emergency programme up to 1967-68. The Government accepted the
recommendations that grants to university institutions should be increased
and that the Colleges of Advanced Technology and some of the Scottish
institutions should have university status. It also accepted the recom¬
mendations concerning business schools and the Council for National
Academic Awards (see p. 167). A committee under the chairmanship
of Sir John Lockwood is studying higher education in Northern
Ireland.
EDUCATION
Universities
Students
165
There are 32 universities in Britain: 25 in England, five in Scotland, the
University of Wales, and the Queen’s University of Belfast in Northern
Ireland, St. David’s College, Lampeter, Wales, grants degrees in Arts and
Theology. A new Scottish university is to be set up at Stirling (announced
in July 1964).
The English universities are: Birmingham, Bristol, Cambridge, Durham,
Exeter, Hull, Keele, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Manchester,
Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Sheffield, South¬
ampton, and the new Universities of Sussex, at Brighton (opened in October
1961), of York (1963), East Anglia, at Norwich (1963), Essex, at Colchester
(1964), Lancaster (1964), Kent, at Canterbury, and Warwick, at Coventry
(both of which are due to open in 1965). The Scottish universities are:
Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, St. Andrews and Strathclyde.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge are each composed of a number
of residential colleges. These colleges are corporate bodies governed by their
own Fellows and distinct from the university. Most of the Fellows of the
colleges are university teachers or officers and the majority of university
teachers are also Fellows of colleges. The universities, as distinct from the
colleges, own the main libraries, laboratories, and other buildings used for
teaching and research.
The other universities in Britain (except for Keele) are in the main non-
residential and most are non-collegiate. Those composed of groups of largely
autonomous colleges are London, which, with nearly 24,000 students, is by
far the largest of Britain’s universities, St. Andrews, which consists of
colleges in St. Andrews itself and in Dundee; and the University of Wales
which comprises the University Colleges of Aberystwyth, Bangor, Cardiff
and Swansea, and the Welsh National School of Medicine at Cardiff.
Although the Department of Education and Science is responsible for
providing nearly three-quarters of the universities’ income it does not control
their work or teaching. State aid is given mainly in the form of block grants
to the University Grants Committee, whose members are appointed for their
personal academic or industrial experience. The Committee distributes the
grants to individual universities.
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no
religious test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with
men, but at Cambridge their numbers are limited by statute. The general
proportion of men to women students is nearly three to one; at Oxford it is
six to one, and at Cambridge ten to one.
Despite recent expansion programmes, applications for places at universities
still exceed the number available. In 1963 a ‘clearing house’ scheme to
simplify university entrance came fully into operation with applications for
admission in October 1964. Prospective candidates apply for places through
the Universities Central Council on Admissions instead of to individual
universities and the ‘clearing house’ automatically passes on rejected appli¬
cations to the next university of the candidate’s choice. The colleges of
Oxford and Cambridge and the medical and dental schools of London
University are not at present participating in the ‘clearing house’; neither are
the Scottish universities, except for Edinburgh. Oxford and Cambridge will
join it in the year 1966-67.
166
Staff
Studies and
Degrees
University
Finance
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
At the beginning of the academic year 1963-64 there were 129,000 full-time
university students in Britain. This total, more than double the pre-war
figure, is to be still further expanded (see p. 164).
In 1962-63 there were over 14,000 full-time university teachers in Britain;
about 11 per cent of them were professors. The ratio of staff to students was
about 1 to 8.
Courses in arts and science are offered by all universities and at nearly all
universities courses are available in one or more applied sciences. At the
beginning of the academic year 1963-64, 43 per cent of full-time university
students in Great Britain were taking arts courses and 57 per cent were
studying science or technology (including medicine).
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though
in medicine five or six years are required. The first degree of Bachelor
(Master in Scotland) is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending
on satisfactory examination results. In most universities an ordinary (or pass)
degree or an honours degree can be taken, although the majority of students
in England and Wales take honours courses. Further study or research is
required at the modern universities for the degree of Master and by all
universities for that of Doctor. Actual degree titles vary according to the
practice of each university; some differentiate between the arts and sciences
and some do not. Diplomas and certificates are awarded after shorter courses
in some subjects.
The tutorial system of individual tuition to supplement lectures is a
traditional feature of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; it has been
developed to some extent in other universities and colleges.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all
universities there are postgraduate students engaged in research. There has
been an expansion of research in science and technology, particularly in
recent years (see p. 208).
The proportion of the Government direct contribution to the universities’
income in Great Britain rose from 67 per cent in 1953-54 to about 70 per cent
in 1962-63. Recurrent grants for 1963-64 amounted to ^72 million, compared
with £22 million in 1953-54, and will rise to over £101 million in 1966-67.
Capital grants of £40 million were made in 1963-64 and were expected to
rise to £52 million in 1964-65, compared with nearly £6 million in 1953-54.
Total expenditure on building projects, including the cost of equipment and
sites, was £99 million in the period 1957-62. The figures for building projects
exclude the amount for the special programme for the expansion of the
Imperial College of Science and Technology in the University of London,
which by 1964 was £17! million. Both recurrent and capital grants, together
with additional sums (equal to nearly a half of the building grant) for the
purchase of sites and properties, for professional fees and for provision of
equipment for new buildings, are met from Exchequer funds, administered
by the University Grants Committee. Further sums are raised by the
universities themselves.
About 70 per cent of capital expenditure in each year’s programme for the
period 1957-62 was for buildings to accommodate teaching and research
in the various faculties; over half for science subjects and technology. The
remaining 30 per cent was for general service buildings, such as halls of
residence, student unions, refectories and libraries.
Architect’s model of new buildings
for Glasgow university.
Britain’s new universities
The new University of Sussex, Brighton.
g;;p:K;a:::::;::ts'
m
•***
m
*44
The new General Post Office
telecommunications tower in London.
Top section contains a revolving restaurant.
New road suspension bridge over the
Firth of Forth is longest in Europe.
gsssari
,T»» ai ■■ u ■< i,
MAJOR
ENGINEERING
PROJECTS
IN 1964
Birmingham’s new
Bull Ring Centre.
The M 4 flyover
in West London
under construction.
The Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey, a major centre for cancer research.
Six-million-volt accelerator at the hospital.
EDUCATION
Technology
Teacher
Training
Scholarships
and Other
Awards
167
In Northern Ireland nearly £3^ million was spent on building projects
between 1957 and 1962 and further expansion at the rate of about £1 million
a year is planned in the period 1965-70. Recurrent expenditure was estimated
at £1-7 million in 1963-64.
The recent expansion of technological education started in 1953 when three
university centres (Imperial College, London; Glasgow and Manchester) were
singled out for special development; in 1956 the Colleges of Advanced
Technology were established. Most technological education outside the
universities is given on advanced courses in institutions of further education.
(Advanced courses are defined as those above the standards required for the
Advanced level of the General Certificate of Education.)
It is intended that students on suitable advanced courses should be able
to obtain degrees. These will be administered by the Council for National
Academic Awards, an autonomous body set up in 1964 by the Secretary
of State for Education and Science. Its responsibilities include those
previously exercised by the similarly constituted National Council for
Technological Awards (see p. 169) but will extend to the whole of Great
Britain.
Under present arrangements technological education is closely linked with
the system of further education and is described on p. 169.
Teachers in grant-aided schools must hold qualifications approved by the
education departments. In England and Wales and Northern Ireland the
majority qualify by obtaining a diploma awarded after a three-year course of
studies at a teacher training college. University graduates and certain specialist
teachers are qualified by their degree or specialist qualification although many
do a one-year course at a university or teacher training college. There are
special shortened courses for well qualified older students. In Scotland all
qualified teachers must hold a Teachers’ Certificate, awarded after a course at
a college of education (teacher training college); additionally, all secondary
school teachers and all men teachers of general subjects in primary schools
must be graduates.
In England and Wales there are 150 training colleges (of which 12 are for
day students only), 25 university departments of education, four colleges for
training teachers for technical institutions and 16 art teacher training centres.
In 1963-64 there were 54,000 students in the training colleges (including
2,500 in the day colleges), 4,000 in the university departments of education,
and 1,000 and 600 in the technical training and art training establishments
respectively. The number in the training colleges is expected to rise to 80,000
in 1970-71. In Scotland there were seven teacher training institutions, with
7,000 students, in 1963-64. In Northern Ireland there were six teacher
training institutions and one university education department.
The education departments, universities, local education authorities and
other bodies provide a variety of short courses for practising teachers. In
England and Wales special courses are run for married women to encourage
them to return to teaching.
Scholarships and other awards are now very widely available, for it is the
national educational policy that no able boy or girl shall be prevented by
lack of means from taking an advanced course at a university or elsewhere.
About 90 per cent of university students in Great Britain are aided from
public or private funds.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
168
In England, Wales and Scotland all British students with certain qualifica¬
tions are eligible for awards from public funds in order to attend full-time
at a university, teacher training college or other major further education
establishment. The present awards system in England and Wales was
established by the Education Act, 1962, which made it the duty of local educa¬
tion authorities to provide awards. In Scotland students’ allowances for
advanced courses are awarded by the Scottish Education Department. An
award depends upon the income of the student or his parents. Studentships
for advanced postgraduate study are offered annually by the Department
of Education and Science and by the Scottish Education Department. In 1964,
2,500 studentships were offered in the sciences and 1,000 in arts and social
sciences—an increase on previous years.
In Northern Ireland university and further education scholarships, which
may supplement grants from other sources, are awarded by the local
education authorities. Postgraduate awards and teacher training scholarships
are given by the Ministry of Education.
FURTHER Further education is available to all above school-leaving age. It is provided
EDUCATION at all levels, full-time or part-time, and may be vocational or non-vocational.
Most of the further education institutions are conducted by local education
authorities.
Institutions In England and Wales, of the institutions catering for further education the
ten Colleges of Advanced Technology (CATs) are at the highest level,
concentrating entirely on advanced, including postgraduate, work and
research. They are self-governing institutions receiving direct grants from
the Department of Education and Science and are shortly to be given full
university status. They are: the Birmingham College of Advanced Technology;
the Bradford Institute of Technology; the Welsh College of Advanced
Technology, Cardiff; Loughborough College of Technology; the Royal
College of Advanced Technology, Salford; the Bristol College of Science and
Technology; and in London, the Battersea College of Technology, the
Chelsea College of Science and Technology, Northampton College of
Advanced Technology and Brunei College.
There are 25 regional colleges doing work up to and beyond degree standard
which are maintained by the local education authorities. There are seven
national colleges linked to a particular technology and administered jointly
by the industry and the Department of Education and Science: for example,
the colleges for rubber technology, food technology and the National Foundry
College; the national colleges receive direct grants. There are a number of
agricultural institutions (see p. 343) and art colleges (see p. 226), and nearly
500 other major institutions providing technical or commercial courses,
including the bulk of the operative and technician courses.
In Scotland there are 14 Central Institutions for further education doing
advanced work and about 80 local further education colleges offering full and
part-time day courses and a number of evening courses. In Northern Ireland
the system is similar to that in England and Wales.
Finance Since most of the technical colleges and other further education establish¬
ments in Britain are either maintained or aided from public funds, tuition
fees are moderate, and often nominal for young people under 18 years of age.
Many full-time students are helped by awards from local education authorities.
The awards are generally based on the results of the General Certificate of
EDUCATION
Students
Technological
and Technical
Courses
169
Education or a corresponding examination; they are assessed to cover tuition
fees and a maintenance grant, but parents who can afford to contribute
towards the cost are required to do so. There are also some scholarships
available from endowments, and others are awarded under schemes organised
by particular industries or companies for the most promising of their young
workers.
Capital expenditure for all further education institutions in Great Britain
was over £128 million in the ten years 1954-64, of which £17-5 million was
expenditure in Scotland. The Government increased the capital fund available
for new projects at institutions of further education in England and Wales
(excluding CATs) from £16 million in 1964-65 to £24 million in 1965-66.
Similar expenditure for CATs is to increase from £2 million in 1963-64 to
£4. million in both 1964-65 and 1965-66. In Scotland £3-3 million was
allocated for capital expenditure on institutions of further education in
I9^3~^4- Northern Ireland in the period i955~^3 capital expenditure
amounted to £4 million.
In 1963 there were 198,000 full-time and sandwich course (see below) students
and if million (including evening) part-time students in technological,
technical, ait and commercial colleges. At Colleges of Advanced Technology
in England and Wales 12,000 students were on full-time and sandwich
courses, 5,000 were on part-time day courses and 5,000 on evening courses.
The total number of students on advanced courses in England and Wales was
147,500, in Scotland, 4,500 and in Northern Ireland, 550.
The courses provided are full-time, sandwich (three to five years in length,
consisting of alternate periods of about six months of full-time study in
technical college and supervised experience in industry), block release (on
similar principles, but for shorter periods), day release (generally attendance at a
technical college for one day a week during working hours), and evening classes.
Sandwich courses are popular at advanced levels. For lower level courses
day release courses will become much more widespread as the result of the
Industrial Training Act, 1964. This provides for day release for young
workers on the terms laid down by the Training Board for their particular
industry (see p. 473).
A wide variety of craft courses is available for young workers in various trades
and occupations, leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course
of three to five years. Some experiment is taking place with courses of a more
professional character which are suitable for technicians or for those who aim
ultimately at membership of a professional institution. There are many others
leading to the National Certificates approved by joint committees representa¬
tive of the education departments and the appropriate professional body (for
example, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers). These courses are normally
at two levels, ordinary and higher. The Ordinary Certificate courses last two
years and students usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19. The
Higher Certificate (an advanced course) requires a further two years’ part-
time study and is generally considered to reach a level corresponding to a
pass degree in the subject concerned. Similar in standard are the Higher
Diploma courses, awarded by joint committees in the same way as the
Higher National Certificate. These require three years’ full-time or sandwich
study.
Equivalent in standard to a university honours degree (and likely to be
replaced by a degree in 1965 or 1966) is the Diploma in Technology, which
requires a four years’ sandwich course. It is administered by the National
170
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Business Courses
Management
Studies
Council for Technological Awards. There is also a postgraduate award: the
Membership of the College of Technologists. In addition, external first degree
courses can be followed in the Colleges of Advanced Technology, the regional
colleges and a number of major technical colleges. There are also a number of
courses for external higher degrees (predominantly in the CATs). Six of the
Scottish Central Institutions have full-time courses of three or four years
leading to their own diplomas or associateships; they are comparable in scope
and standard to university degree courses.
There is in technical colleges an increasing number of courses of post¬
graduate standard, in both technical subjects and management studies, for
students who have already obtained a first degree, the Diploma in Technology,
or a Higher National Certificate. A wide range of advanced short courses of a very
specialised nature is also offered for senior technical staffs engaged in industry.
There is provision at all levels of business education; subjects covered
include law, economics, accountancy and modern languages. Some business
education is related to the specialised examination requirements of various
professional bodies; more than half of the candidates taking such courses do
so through correspondence courses. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland
there are part-time courses leading to the Ordinary National Certificate and
Higher National Certificate in Business Studies. There are also more advanced
full-time and sandwich courses leading to the Ordinary National Diploma and
Higher National Diploma in Business Studies.
A fair proportion of evening institutes and some independent colleges offer
courses in shorthand, typing and bookkeeping. Most local technical colleges
offer some lower level work; higher level work is generally concentrated in
technical colleges with a department of commerce or in specialised colleges
of commerce. The Scottish Council for Commercial Education awards senior
and advanced commercial certificates to students aiming at professional
careers in commerce. In 1963 a Certificate in Office Studies for young entrants
to clerical and other non-technical posts was introduced in England, Wales
and Scotland.
Management studies are provided by universities and technical colleges,
by individual companies and by trade and industrial federations. Certain
independent colleges specialise in management training. Several universities
have introduced management studies into the curriculum and courses for the
postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies are run by certain technical
colleges. In Scotland courses leading to the Certificate of Business Administra¬
tion are provided for students in junior supervisory positions. In Northern
Ireland also there is a Diploma in Management Studies. In Great Britain, as
a result of the recommendations of the Robbins report and the report of a
private committee under Lord Franks, two postgraduate business schools
are to be set up, at the Universities of London and Manchester. The future
of management education in Northern Ireland is being considered by a
committee appointed by the Minister of Commerce.
An Advisory Council on Management Education for the United Kingdom
was established in 1961 to keep under review provision for management
education in CATs, Scottish Central Institutions and other technical colleges
and colleges of commerce and to advise interested bodies.
Adult Education Adult education is generally taken to mean courses of non-vocational education
for people over 18. In this context it comprises the courses provided by the
residential colleges of adult education and courses of a mainly non-vocational
EDUCATION
I7I
character provided, either separately or in conjunction, by the extra-mural
departments of universities, the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA) and
other voluntary bodies, and by local education authorities.
The residential colleges, the university departments and the voluntary
bodies, such as the WEA, recognised by the education departments as com¬
petent to provide adult education, are grant-aided. Voluntary bodies with a
particular viewpoint, such as the National Council of Labour Colleges and
the Co-operative Union, are not.
A major share in the provision of adult education is increasingly being
assumed by local education authorities. Most of it is on a part-time basis,
mainly in the 8,000 or so evening institutes, which have a total of over a million
students, and also in schools of art, adult education centres, community centres,
literary institutes and youth clubs. There are about 30 short-term residential
colleges in Great Britain, maintained or aided by local education authorities,
providing courses varying in length between a weekend and a fortnight. Many
of the courses are practical, but there are widespread opportunities for
academic study.
The village colleges of Cambridgeshire, Leicestershire, Peterborough,
Huntingdonshire and Derbyshire, combining facilities for secondary and
adult education, are another local education authority development. Com¬
munity centres, though aided by the local education authority, are usually
managed by community associations many of which are affiliated to the National
Federation of Community Associations.
Seven residential colleges provide courses of one or two years, some of
which lead to a diploma. The colleges vary in character, although they all
aim at providing a liberal education.
A number of voluntary bodies provide adult education as part of their
services. The Women’s Institutes and Townswomen’s Guilds, for example,
generally offer courses in social studies, arts, drama and handicrafts. These
too are aided by local education authorities.
In general, courses at the highest levels in liberal studies are provided by
the extra-mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time
staff appointed for this purpose and can call on the services of other members
of the university staff; and by the Workers’ Educational Association, which
also employs organising tutors and works closely with the university extra¬
mural departments. In 1963,342,000 students in Britain attended such courses.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of
information and research for adult education, as well as a channel for
co-operation and consultation for the many organisations in England and
Wales which are interested in this subject. It is assisted by a grant from the
Department of Education and Science. The Scottish Institute of Adult
Education is the corresponding body in Scotland.
TEACHING AIDS Text books and other traditional teaching aids are being used in conjunction
with radio, television and other audio-visual aids at all levels of the educational
system.
Sound broadcasts to schools are well established. The School Broad¬
casting Department of the BBC sends out 58 different series of sound
broadcasts, many of which are repeated each week; they are used by about
80 per cent (31,000) of schools in Britain. Television reaches about 17 per cent
(nearly 7,000 schools); 15 weekly programmes, all repeated the same week,
are broadcast by the BBC and 18 weekly programmes, many of which are
repeated, are produced by four of the independent companies (Rediffusion
172
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
OVERSEAS
STUDENTS IN
BRITAIN
Limited, Granada, Associated Television and Scottish Television) and
broadcast by the Independent Television Authority.
Sound and television broadcasts for technical students were introduced
by the BBC in 1962. Educational television for adults is also a recent develop¬
ment; programmes were started by the BBC and two of the independent
companies in 1963. Southern Television was the first company to broadcast
adult education programmes at peak (popular viewing) times. The BBC’s
coverage was extended in 1964 with the start of BBC 2 (see p. 481) which uses
2J hours of peak time each Tuesday for adult education. The BBC has pro¬
vided adult education radio programmes on sound for many years.
Television is also being used for special projects. Two independent
companies joined with universities to broadcast lectures for one or two weeks
in 1963, and in 1964 the Advisory Centre for Education, a voluntary body at
Cambridge, joined with the independent company, Anglia, to provide a short
series of television lectures to complement the facilities provided by the
centre’s correspondence courses. Closed circuit television in education is still
largely experimental, but it is in use at several universities, medical schools,
teacher training colleges and schools.
Audio-visual aids such as films, colour slides, wall charts, maps, models
and recording tape are in common use and different methods of audio-visual
presentation may be co-ordinated. For example, the BBC’s ‘Radio-vision’
programmes for schools on art and language, introduced in 1964, use coloured
film strip with radio. Among aids designed to take over some routine aspects
of teaching are teaching machines and ‘language laboratories’, based on use
of tape recorders, with pupils working in individual sound-proofed cubicles
under the general direction of a teacher.
The National Committee for Audio-Visual Aids is the main promotional
body; it runs a national information and exhibition centre, together with an
experimental development centre.
The bodies mainly concerned in carrying out research into both the theory
and practice of education are the National Foundation for Educational
Research, the Scottish Council for Research in Education, the Northern
Ireland Council for Educational Research, the universities and teaching
associations. Some research is carried out by the central Government
departments through Her Majesty’s Inspectorate and in England and Wales
by the Curriculum Study Group of the Department of Education and Science.
The National Foundation for Educational Research, an independent
organisation, receives an annual grant from the Department of Education
and Science. More than half of its total income is provided by local education
authorities whose requests for guidance on, for example, classroom tests
or methods of allocating children to secondary school courses, give rise to
most of its projects. The Foundation also undertakes research work com¬
missioned by the Department of Education and Science: present projects
include investigations of different methods of teaching arithmetic and the
relative value of day release and other systems of further education.
Financial support is also provided by philanthropic bodies. The Nuffield
Foundation (see p. 210), for example, is supporting a project for teaching
languages in primary schools.
Opportunities for students from overseas to come to Britain to study in
universities or other educational institutions have increased greatly during
the last few years. In 1963-64 there were over 64,000 overseas students in
EDUCATION
173
Britain, of whom about one-quarter were at universities, another quarter
at technical colleges and the remainder training as teachers, doctors and
nurses, for the law, or in industry. About two-thirds of all overseas students
were from the Commonwealth.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers
from other Commonwealth countries. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship
and Fellowship Plan, the Governments of certain Commonwealth countries
have made awards available at their own institutions of higher education to
men and women from other Commonwealth countries. The British Govern¬
ment has allocated nearly £3! million for the five-year period 1960-65 to
enable an average of 500 of these scholarships to be held in Britain at any time;
and for some 400 teachers and others to train in Britain under the Common¬
wealth Bursary Scheme. An example of smaller Government schemes is the
Athlone Fellowship Scheme, under which about 40 fellowships a year are
awarded to Canadian engineering graduates for up to two years’ further
study, training and research in institutions or industries in Britain.
About 500 British Council1 scholarships, tenable usually for one year in
Britain, are offered annually to graduates of overseas universities. Twenty-four
Marshall Scholarships for two years’ study at any university in Britain are
offered annually by the British Government to graduates from the United
States of America and over 60 Rhodes Scholarships are awarded annually to
Commonwealth and United States graduates for two years of study at the
University of Oxford. Other universities and colleges themselves offer many
scholarships for which graduate students of any nationality are eligible.
Fellowships and training awards for study in British institutions are
available under the Central Treaty Organisation, the Special Commonwealth
African Assistance Plan and British technical assistance programmes for several
other countries. Large numbers of awards for study or training in Britain are
made under the United Nations Programmes of Technical Assistance and
the Colombo Plan.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Unit, set up after the Common¬
wealth Education Conference of 1959, supplements normal direct dealings
on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. Further
Commonwealth Education Conferences were held in 1962 and 1964.
Responsibility for overseas students in Britain rests with the institutions of
higher education to which they are attached and with the students’ own
national representatives in Britain (High Commissions or Embassies). The
British Council, by agreement with various Governments, acts as agent for
the overseas departments of the British Government on matters affecting
students’ welfare.
The British Council has overseas students’ centres in London (where a new,
and larger, building was opened in 1963) and in other university cities. The
1 The British Council exists to promote a wider knowledge of the United Kingdom and
the English language overseas and to develop closer cultural relations with other
countries. It was founded in 1934 and was granted a Royal Charter in 1940. Nine of the
30 members of its executive committee are nominated by Government departments;
it is financed mainly from public funds. It is usually designated as the Government’s
principal instrument for the implementation of cultural conventions to which Britain
is a party. The Council maintains staffs who, in some 80 overseas countries, foster
English studies, provide regular information on British life and thought and promote
knowledge of the educational, scientific, literary, artistic and other British developments
and achievements. It arranges study programmes in Britain for scholars, teachers and
other professional visitors from overseas.
Arrangements
for Overseas
Students
J74
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Students
Overseas
State and
Voluntary
Partnership
Council organises a varied programme of lectures, discussions and social and
other activities. Many British people like to invite students to their homes and
the British Council arranges introductions. In the vacations there are courses
in many parts of the country which offer opportunities for getting to know
more about British life in town and country. In term time there are visits to
various places of interest, and theatre and concert parties are arranged. The
British Council assists many students to find accommodation and about 10,000
are met annually on arrival and helped to settle down quickly in their new
environment. In 1961 the Government allocated £2 million for the provision
of about 5,000 hostel places and other amenities for overseas students in
Britain.
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas
students are the East and West Friendship Council, Rotary, Round Table,
the Victoria League, the Royal Over-Seas League, the Royal Commonwealth
Society, the National Union of Students, the English-Speaking Union and
Churches of all denominations. The London Conference on Overseas
Students, for which the British Council provides the secretariat, co-ordinates
their work in the metropolis. In some London boroughs there are committees
which help students to make contact with local residents and organisations.
Similar conferences have come into being in other large cities in Britain.
Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, a number of
scholarships are made available annually to United Kingdom students by the
governments of other Commonwealth countries for study in their universities,
colleges and other institutions of higher learning. At present Commonwealth
Scholarships are being held by United Kingdom students in Australia,
Canada, East Africa, Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Sierra Leone and Southern Rhodesia.
For many years the United States has offered awards for British students,
the best known being the Fulbright travel grants for postgraduate study at
American universities. Students of British nationality are also offered
scholarships (mostly for one academic year) at institutions of higher education
in 20 European countries, and in Brazil, Indonesia, Iran, Israel and Japan.
YOUTH SERVICES
The object of youth services in Britain is to provide for the leisure-time
activities of young people under 21 years of age, and to offer them opportuni¬
ties—complementary to those of home, formal education and work—for
discovering and developing their personal resources, so that they may be
better equipped to be responsible members of the community. Membership
of youth organisations is voluntary and the facilities they offer are sufficiently
varied to appeal to every type of boy and girl.
Responsibility for youth services in Britain is shared by the education
departments, local education authorities, voluntary organisations and the
Churches. There is no attempt to impose uniformity or to create any national
youth organisation. A number of youth organisations have spontaneously
developed over the last century, mainly by voluntary effort. Between the two
world wars, some of the local education authorities tried to help and co-ordinate
voluntary work in their areas through Juvenile Organisations Committees;
in the 1930s the State also began to promote social and physical training and
EDUCATION
175
recreation and in 1939 brought into being what in England and Wales is now
called the Youth Service as a partnership of voluntary organisations, local
education authorities and central Government.
The status of youth service as an essential part of the educational system
of Great Britain was confirmed by the Education Act of 1944 and the
Education (Scotland) Act of 1945 > Northern Ireland, youth welfare work
is promoted under the Physical Training and Recreation Act of 1938, and
the Youth Welfare, Physical Training and Recreation Act of 1962.
The education departments provide grants in aid of the administrative
and training work of national voluntary youth organisations, towards the
expense of training full-time youth leaders and towards the cost of premises
and equipment of youth clubs provided by voluntary bodies.
Local education authorities co-operate with voluntary organisations in
their areas: most give some financial help and lend premises and equipment;
most also employ youth organisers to help in the promotion and encourage¬
ment of youth work. Where voluntary services are considered inadequate,
local authorities themselves organise youth centres and clubs. Most local
authorities have appointed youth committees on which official and voluntary
bodies are represented.
In addition to grants received from the State and local authorities, voluntary
organisations may receive help for special projects from charitable trusts,
notably from the King George’s Jubilee Trust (see p. 177). The greater
part of the funds of the voluntary organisations is, however, raised by their
own efforts.
Since i960 developments in the Youth Service have been greatly influenced
by the recommendations of a committee set up to examine the service, under
the chairmanship of the Countess of Albemarle.1 On the advice of the Youth
Service Development Council, formed as a result of one of the committee’s
recommendations, the Department of Education and Science is making
larger grants towards the headquarters expenses of national voluntary youth
organisations and special grants for voluntary projects, some of which are
experimental; it has authorised a building programme for the period 1960-65
at an estimated cost of j£i6 million and co-operated with a local education
authority in designing an experimental club; and, to supplement existing
facilities, has established a national training college at Leicester for youth
leaders. Local authorities’ contributions to the Youth Service have
also increased; their expenditure for 1964-65 is estimated at £6-3
million.
1 he Albemarle Committee’s inquiry extended only to England and Wales,
youth provision in Scotland having already been the subject of reports by
advisory bodies; but some of its main recommendations applied to Scotland,
while others reflected the existing Scottish position. A Standing Consultative
Council on Youth Service in Scotland, with functions similar to those of the
Youth Service Development Council for England and Wales, was set up by
the Secretary of State for Scotland in December 1959. In 1963 permanent
arrangements for training in youth leadership for full-time youth leaders and
organisers were made. More money is being made available from central
funds to national voluntary organisations in Scotland and, as in England
and Wales, increased expenditure on youth services by Scottish education
authorities (£650,000 in 1963—64) is taken into account in calculating the
Exchequer general grant.
1 For details, see The Youth Service in England and Wales. Cmnd. 929.
176
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Voluntary
Organisations
A White Paper on the development of youth services was presented
to the Northern Ireland Parliament in 1961. This did not propose any change
in the general pattern of youth services but local education authorities
were urged to take a more active part in youth work than they had previously
done. Such changes as required statutory authority were given effect in the
Youth Welfare, Physical Training and Recreation Act (Northern Ireland),
1962. The functions of the Youth Committee, set up in 1944, were taken
over by the Youth and Sports Council and extended to reflect the larger part
to be played in youth welfare by the local education authorities and sports
organisations. Statutory provision was made for larger Ministry grants
towards the training costs and salaries of full-time youth leaders and for
expenditure on playing fields.
The voluntary organisations vary greatly in character since nearly all of them
were formed to serve specific groups of young people, but most of them
provide educational and religious activities as well as social and recreational
pursuits for their members, and all of them seek to inculcate high ideals of
personal conduct and service to the community.
Twenty-seven national voluntary youth organisations with memberships
of at least 10,000 are constituent members of the Standing Conference of
National Voluntary Youth Organisations, a consultative body which takes
action only in the name of its member bodies and with their consent. A
further 23 bodies are associate or observer members, for example, the Church
of England Youth Council, which represents some 200,000 young people who
are members of clubs sponsored by the Church of England. The corresponding
body in Scotland is the Scottish Standing Conference of Voluntary Youth
Organisations, in Northern Ireland the Standing Conference of Youth Organisa¬
tions, and in Wales the Standing Conference for Wales of Voluntary Youth
Organisations.
These major organisations have a total United Kingdom membership of
nearly 3 million young people under 21.
Among the youth organisations with a mainly religious origin and purpose
are the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and Young Women’s
Christian Association (YWCA), with approximately 48,000 and 20,500
members under 21 respectively; the Boys’ Brigade (151,000), the Church
Lads’ Brigade (16,000), the Girls’ Life Brigade (63,000), the Girls’ Friendly
Society (23,000), Girls’ Guildry (29,000), the Methodist Association of
Youth Clubs (182,000), the Salvation Army Youth Organisations (99,000),
the Catholic Young Men’s Society of Great Britain (25,000), the
National Council for Catholic Youth Clubs (30,000), the Young Christian
Workers (17,000), the Grail (13,000), and the Association of Jewish Youth
(15,000).
The Boy Scouts Association and Girl Guides Association have world-wide
affiliations; they are undenominational and non-political, and were founded
by Lord Baden-Powell in 1908 and 1910 to develop character and good
citizenship in boys and girls. They have various sections, based on age
groups, but most of their members are under 16 years. Their total United
Kingdom membership is about 509,000 scouts and 557,000 guides.
The National Association of Boys’ Clubs, with over 2,000 affiliated clubs
and 152,000 members, and the National Association of Youth Clubs, with
over 2,500 affiliated clubs and 200,000 members, are concerned mainly with
the 14 to 20 age-group. Each affiliated club has its own rules, but all aim at
giving young people opportunities to develop into mature members of
EDUCATION
177
society. Representatives from clubs form local committees and these send
representatives to the national members’ councils.
The National Girls’ Corps with about 6,000 members, comprises the
Girls’ Training Corps and the Women’s Junior Air Corps; both wear uni¬
form and formal discipline is encouraged. The pre-Service organisations for
boys (the Combined Cadet Force, Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet Force and
Air Training Corps), combine social, educational and physical development
with training for possible entry into the armed forces; their combined
membership is about 170,000.
The National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs in England and Wales
has over 40,000 members between 10 and 25 years old, the Scottish
Association of Young Farmers’ Clubs has about 7,700 and Northern Ireland
Young Farmer Clubs over 5,500 members: in addition to encouraging
interest in agriculture and appreciation of country life, the clubs provide
training in the arts of citizenship and develop ability to serve the community.
The Welsh League of Youth (Urdd Gobaith Cymru) has a membership
of about 45,000; its aim is the ‘development of Christian citizenship among
the youth of Wales’, and its work takes full account of the Welsh background
of its members.
The Youth Hostels Associations in England and Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland have a network of hostels for walkers and cyclists, particu¬
larly intended for young people of limited means. They seek to promote
knowledge and love of the countryside, and are closely linked with each other
and with similar organisations in other countries.
Adult organisations with youth sections include the British Red Cross
Society, St. John Ambulance Brigade and the political parties.
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Youth Work
King George's Jubilee Trust was established in 1935 by King George V, to
promote the welfare of the younger generation. The trust fund originally
consisted of the nation’s gift of approximately Ji million, subscribed to mark
the King’s silver jubilee; the income has since been augmented by gifts,
legacies and the Trust’s own appeal in 1960-61 (marking 25 years of its
work). The fund, which now stands at £1 -4 million, has disbursed ^1-3 million
to the headquarters of the principal voluntary youth organisations and to
many local projects, particularly those of an experimental nature.
The Duke of Edinburgh's Award is a scheme for young people between the
ages of 14 and 20, which is operated by local authorities, schools, youth organi¬
sations, industrial firms and other bodies, and is designed as a challenge to
boys and girls to reach certain standards of achievement in three progressive
stages in leisure-time activities. The scheme for boys (to be reorganised from
January 1965) covers sections on the community, in the home, at work
and leisure. The scheme for girls is divided into sections on design for
living, interests, and adventure and service. A number of Commonwealth
countries, including Canada, Australia and New Zealand, now operate the
scheme.
The Outward Bound Trust maintains five schools for boys which offer
26-day character-building courses, based on adventure and testing experience.
There is a similar school for girls, with modified courses. About 4,500 boys
and 850 girls take part each year.
The aims of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the Scottish Council
°f Physical Recreation and the National Playing Fields Association bring them
into touch with many youth organisations: their activities are described in
Chapter 19: Sport.
17B
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In addition to organisations on a nation-wide basis, there are a large
number of town, district or village social clubs run by voluntary groups for
general or particular purposes; photographic societies, folk dance, table
tennis or jazz clubs, for instance. In small communities social clubs may not
be specifically for young people but those with the more strenuous activities
(for example, tennis clubs) usually have a high proportion of young people
as members.
7
J79
PLANNING AND
HOUSING
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world and it is
essential to plan land use for a satisfactory national distribution of employment
and population, for agricultural development, to preserve the amenities of the
countryside, and to improve the places where people live and work.
From 1909 successive Acts of Parliament recognised the principle of the
planned use of land, but because the pattern of development over much of
the country had already hardened into large unplanned urban concentrations
the powers granted to planning authorities were inadequate for the task
in hand.
The twenty years between the two world wars were decades of rapid social
and industrial change and of developments in industry, engineering, house¬
building, and motor transport; the population was increasing and becoming
more mobile; there was a widespread demand for improved standards of
accommodation and consequently a greater need for systematic planning than
had hitherto been required. At the beginning of the nineteen-thirties a major
effort was made to strengthen planning law and to extend the planning powers
of central and local authorities. This resulted in the Town and Country
Planning Acts of 1932 which remained the basis of planning law for fifteen
years.
Although inter-war planning legislation improved sanitary and environ¬
mental conditions and did something to preserve amenities, its general effect
was unsatisfactory mainly because it failed to deal adequately with the problems
involved in compensating property owners who stood to lose by the intro¬
duction of positive planning schemes. Local authorities often hesitated to
exercise their powers effectively for fear of being involved in financial liabilities
beyond their means, and as a result there was still much unregulated urban
development and spoliation of the countryside.
Renewed efforts to tackle these problems were made immediately before
and during the second world war. Between 1937 and 1942 three expert com¬
mittees were appointed to study and report upon (1) the unregulated growth
and spread of industry, (2) the hampering of planning by the financial and
administrative difficulties of compensation and betterment and (3) the
encroachment of urban development upon the countryside. After the war
other committees studied the question of new towns and national parks.
Almost all the principal planning recommendations of these committees
have now been incorporated in Acts of Parliament, as follows: the New Towns
Acts, 1946 to 1964; the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947 to 1963; the
Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Acts, 1947 to 1963; the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949; the Town Development
Act, 1952; the Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act, 1957; the
Local Employment Acts, i960 and 1963; and the Caravan Sites and Control of
i8o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development Act, i960. Town and country planning in Northern Ireland is
governed by the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931; the
Planning (Interim Development) Act (Northern Ireland), 1944; and the
Planning Acts Amendment Act (Northern Ireland), 1944.
Planning in The Town and Country Planning Act, 1962 (which consolidated earlier
Great Britain planning legislation in England and Wales), and the Town and Country
Planning (Scotland) Act, 1947, are the principal Acts that govern the pattern
of land use in Great Britain. They provide for the co-ordination of planning
by means of development plans drawn up by local planning authorities and
approved by the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary
of State for Scotland; and they control development by making it subject,
generally, to the permission of a local planning authority or of a central
Government department. They also give extensive powers to public authorities
to acquire and develop land for planning purposes, and deal with certain
questions of amenity, for instance, the preservation of buildings of special
historic or architectural interest, and of trees and woodlands, and the control
of advertisement display.
Compensation for loss of development value through the refusal of planning
permission is paid by the Government according to a formula first laid down
in the 1954 Town and Country Planning Acts. Compensation to owners whose
land is compulsorily purchased is paid by the acquiring authorities, the amount
being based (under the Land Compensation Act, 1961, and, in Scotland,
the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act, 1963) on the price the land
might have fetched if sold in the open market, with safeguards for local
authorities against paying for value brought about by their own activities and
for owners against depreciation which the threat of public acquisition might
cause. In general, expenditure on planning purposes (other than schemes of
major redevelopment) is taken into account in the amount of the general
grant paid to local authorities under the Local Government Act, 1958, and
the Local Government and Miscellaneous Financial Provisions (Scotland)
Act, 1958.
Development Plans Under the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947, local planning authorities
(in England and Wales, the councils of counties and county boroughs and,
in some areas, joint planning boards; and in Scotland, councils of counties
and of large burghs, and the councils of the two small burghs of St. Andrews
and Thurso) were required to prepare and submit development plans covering
the whole of their areas to the Minister of Housing and Local Government
and to the Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Each development
plan includes maps and a written statement describing the major projects
in the plan and is accompanied by a report or survey giving the background
to the plan in terms of existing land use, communications and similar matters.
Plans normally cover a period of about 20 years; they must be reviewed at
least once in every five years, and may be extended and altered at any time
so that they are kept up to date. Development plans for the whole of Great
Britain (except the remoter parts of Scotland) have now been submitted to
the appropriate ministers, and almost all have been approved.
Many local planning authorities have submitted amendments and additions
to their original plans and a number have completed their first five-yearly
reviews. Their proposals for changes in their development plans must be
advertised and the ministers concerned must consider objections and repre¬
sentations from the public. Usually a public local inquiry has to be held before
Green Belts
The Location
of Industry
New Towns
PLANNING AND HOUSING l8l
the proposals are decided. A development plan or its amendment can be
legally challenged only on the ground that it is ultra vires or that statutory
requirements have not been fulfilled, and such a challenge must be made to
the High Court within six weeks of publication of the approval or amendment
of the plan.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of the large built-up areas, to prevent
adjacent towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
special character of a town, the policy has been adopted of establishing ‘green
belts’ around all or part of certain urban areas. In addition to restricting
undesirable growth, these green belts serve to keep the townsman in reach
of the countryside. Within a green belt there is a general proscription against
any new development except for a limited amount of building in existing
villages, development to serve agriculture, and other special uses of land
appropriate to a rural area.
The Town and Country Planning Acts and the Local Employment Acts, i960
and 1963, contain provisions relating to the location of industry. General
problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a number of
Government departments, but the consent of the local planning authority is,
as a rule, required for any new industrial building, any extension of a building
or any change in the use of an existing building. These powers, together with
the more positive powers of the Board of Trade to inhibit the expansion of
industry in some areas and encourage it in others, have had a considerable
effect on the location of industry; during the past decade new smaller and
more widely dispersed centres have grown up, notably in southern England
(see p. 254).
The New Towns Act, 1946, gives the Minister of Housing and Local
Government and the Secretary of State for Scotland, power to make an
order designating any area of land (which may include any existing town
or other centre of population) as the site of a proposed new town. The
appropriate minister must consult the local authorities concerned on the
proposal and must be satisfied that it is in the national interest that the land
should be developed as a new town. Once the site has been designated, the
minister appoints a development corporation (consisting of a chairman, a
deputy chairman and up to seven other members) to be responsible for the
development of the new town. A master plan showing how the town is to be
built is then prepared, and this becomes the basis for development proposals,
each of which covers a part of the town. Each proposal is submitted to the
responsible minister, who must consult the local planning authority and,
together with the Treasury, be satisfied with the proposal on economic
grounds before giving approval.
The development corporations have powers in general (subject to the
consent of the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary
of State for Scotland) to acquire, by agreement or compulsory purchase, any
land or property in the designated areas which is necessary for their purposes,
or, in certain circumstances, land adjacent to or outside those areas, and they
may provide houses, flats, commercial and industrial premises, estate roads
and other buildings or services essential for the development of the towns.
In England and Wales the Minister of Housing and Local Government has
made a special development order to exempt the development corporations
from having to obtain planning permission from the local planning authorities;
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in Scotland the Secretary of State has made a similar order in respect of
Cumbernauld and Livingston new towns.
The capital cost of developing the new towns (many of which are now
making a profit) is advanced to the corporations from public funds and is
repayable over a period out of the income from the property. The corporations
submit annual reports (which include copies of their audited accounts) to
the Minister of Housing and Local Government or to the Secretary of State
for Scotland, who lay them before Parliament.
As each new town in England and Wales is substantially completed the
development corporation is dissolved and, under the terms of the New
Towns Act, 1959, its assets and liabilities are handed over to a central agency
—the Commission for New Towns. The Commission, which came into
being in 1961 and will operate during the whole period of new town con¬
solidation, has assumed responsibility for Crawley and Hemel Hempstead.
It is responsible for maintaining and enhancing the value of the land
entrusted to it; but in discharging its functions it is required to have regard
to the purpose for which the towns were established, and to the convenience
and welfare of the people working and living in them. No new towns central
authority has been proposed for Scotland, where new town development is
at a less advanced stage.
Twenty-one new towns have been, or are being, established in Great Britain:
seventeen in England and Wales and four in Scotland. Eight of the new towns
in England and Wales (Basildon and Harlow in Essex; Hemel Hempstead,
Stevenage, Hatfield, and Welwyn in Hertfordshire; Crawley in Sussex; and
Bracknell in Berkshire) are designed to help in absorbing excess population
from the Greater London area; of the others, Corby in Northamptonshire,
Aycliffe, Peterlee and Washington in Durham, and Cwmbran in Monmouth¬
shire are to serve the special needs of their areas; Skelmersdale in Lancashire
and Runcorn in Cheshire are to meet the overspill needs of Liverpool; and
Dawley in Shropshire and Redditch in Worcestershire will take population
from Birmingham. Proposals have been announced for a new town in the area
east of Warrington to take population from Manchester. The Scottish new
towns (East Kilbride in Lanarkshire, Glenrothes in Fife, Cumbernauld in
Dunbartonshire and Livingston in West Lothian) are helping to house people
from Glasgow. Livingston is also to be a focus for industrial activity in the
central belt of Scotland.
New cities for the Southampton-Portsmouth, Bletchley, and Newbury-
Hungerford areas, to provide alternative centres of development to London,
are proposed in The South East Study (see p. 265). Other new towns are
suggested at Ashford, in Kent, and Stansted, in Essex.
In Northern Ireland plans are being drawn up for the creation of a new
city and the extension of certain existing towns (see p. 186).
The new towns represent a notable achievement in positive land use.
They are generally recognised as one of the most successful post-war experi¬
ments, both socially and industrially, and as a profitable long-term investment.
Many thousands of people have moved into the new towns during the past
decade and to meet their needs an extensive building and civil engineering
programme has provided houses, flats, factories, schools, shops, roads, water
supples and sewerage on a very large scale. Additional gas and electricity
supplies, more police, fire and bus stations, extra postal, telegraph and
telephone services and new health centres have also been provided and most
of the towns are well equipped with parks and playing fields of various
kinds.
PLANNING AND HOUSING
Town
Development
Schemes
National Parks
and Access to
the Countryside
183
All the more important public buildings (the town hall, the central post
office, the public library, the health centre, the college of further education
and the magistrates’ court) are situated in the town centres, where some of
the most recent planning ideas (notably the separation of the pedestrian
from the motorist) are being put into practice. A number of the more
developed towns are becoming regional centres and, as the populations grow
large enough to give the necessary support, full entertainment and recrea¬
tional facilities such as skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, swimming
pools and sports stadiums are gradually being provided.
Under the New Towns Act, 1946, Parliament approved a consolidated
fund of £50 million to provide for advances to the development corporations
for work on the new towns. This fund was increased by subsequent Acts
and, under the 1964 Act, stands at £550 million. A total of about £360 million
had been advanced to the corporations by March 1964.
The Town Development Act, 1952, makes provision for the relief of con¬
gestion in large industrial towns in England and Wales by encouraging the
transfer of population and industry from these areas to places suitable for
expansion. Schemes have been approved for moving more than a quarter of
a million people and, so far, 25,000 families have moved under arrangements
of this kind.
The Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act, 1957, makes
similar provision for Scotland; agreements between Glasgow Corporation and
other authorities provide for the housing of over 15,000 Glasgow families
outside the city.
In addition to the new towns and cities already mentioned, large-scale
expansion of four south-eastern towns and substantial expansion of twelve
others is proposed in The South East Study (see p. 265).
Redevelopment of outworn and obsolete areas is taking place in many
towns: Glasgow, for example, has started a programme of rebuilding 30areas,
housing nearly a third of its population and accommodating much of the
industry and commerce of the city. Detailed proposals for four of these
areas have been approved and the work of clearance and rebuilding is well
advanced.
The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949, provided that
selected areas of beautiful country in England and Wales should become
national parks, where the characteristic landscape would be safeguarded and
facilities for open-air recreation provided or improved.
A National Parks Commission was set up by the Act and its work has
resulted in the establishment of ten national parks: the Peak District, the Lake
District, Snowdonia, Dartmoor, the Pembrokeshire coast, the North York
Moors, the Yorkshire Dales, Exmoor, Northumberland and the Brecon
Beacons. These parks cover a total area of 5,254 square miles, almost one-
eleventh of the area of England and Wales. They have various forms of
administration, based on representation of the local planning authorities of
the areas in which they are situated, plus members nominated by the Minister
of Housing and Local Government. These specially constituted authorities
control development in the parks (which are still in private ownership) and
take steps to preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the landscape and
to promote enjoyment of the area by the public. For instance, trees are
planted to screen blemishes on the landscape, unsightly structures are
removed, new building is made to harmonise with the natural surroundings,
G
184
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Forest Parks
advertisement displays are reduced, and car parks and camping and caravan
sites are provided in suitable localities, together with information centres to
help visitors. Government grants at the rate of 75 per cent are available for
certain measures designed to enhance natural beauty and improve recreational
facilities.
There are no National Parks in Scotland but the National Parks Working
Party, set up to consider the five areas recommended as national parks by
the National Parks Committee, submitted a report on each of them. They
are: Loch Lomond—Trossachs; Glen Affric—Glen Cannich—Strath Farrar;
Ben Nevis—Glen Coe—Black Mount; the Cairngorms; and Loch Torridon—
Loch Maree—Little Loch Broom. Close supervision is being maintained over
development in these areas by means of Scottish National Parks Directions,
which require the local planning authorities concerned to refer proposed
developments to the Secretary of State for Scotland for consideration.
Local planning authorities have recently been asked to re-examine their
areas and to define those of great landscape value in their development
plans.
The National Parks Commission also has power to designate areas in
England and Wales outside the national parks as ‘areas of outstanding natural
beauty’. Seventeen of these areas had been designated by April 1964; others
are under consideration. Government grants are also available for certain
measures designed to enhance the natural beauty of these areas.
Designation of a park or area of outstanding natural beauty does not
mean that the general public has right of access. Local planning authorities
must survey the extent to which land in all parts of England and Wales, as
well as in national parks and areas of outstanding beauty, is already open to
the public, and may increase it by means of agreements with owners or by
access orders. Government grants are available towards the cost of making
such agreements or orders and in the Peak District, particularly, large tracts
of moorland have been opened to the public in this way.
A survey of all footpaths and bridleways in England and Wales is being
made by local authorities as a comprehensive national record of public rights
of way; and in some areas existing footpaths and bridleways are being linked
to form long-distance routes, which will become continuous rights of way.
Responsibility for making proposals for long-distance routes rests with the
National Parks Commission; once the proposals are approved by the Minister
of Housing and Local Government, it falls to the local authorities to give
effect to them. Nine routes—in all, over 1,200 miles—had been approved by
April 1964. Large stretches of these paths are already public rights of way
and progress is being made in negotiating the agreements required to complete
them. The establishment of further routes is under discussion.
The Forestry Commission has formed, and opened to the public, seven
Forest Parks in some of the finest country in Britain: Argyll, Glen Trool,
Glen More, and the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park in Scotland; the Forest
of Dean and the Wye valley woods on the borders of England and Wales;
Snowdonia in Wales; and the Border Forest Park (adjoining the Northumber¬
land National Park to the westward), which includes forests on the borders
of Northumberland and Cumberland in England and of Roxburgh in
Scotland. The total area of the seven parks approaches half a million acres.
Camping facilities are provided in all the parks.
The historic New Forest, in Hampshire, although not a Forest Park, is
also open to the public.
PLANNING AND HOUSING
Nature
Conservation
185
The responsibility for nature conservation rests with the Nature Conservancy,
which derives its powers from its royal charter and the National Parks and
Access to the Countryside Act, 1949. The object of conservation is to influence
soils, water, vegetation and animal life by means of research, experiment and
control. This entails the acquisition and management of a representative
series of reserves, as well as the establishment of laboratories for use in long¬
term research schemes (see p. 218) and the making of grants-in-aid for specified
research.
The Nature Conservancy is responsible for 108 nature reserves in Great
Britain, with a combined area of about 225,000 acres (by June 1964), of
which over 58,800 acres comprise the Cairngorms, the largest reserve in
Britain and one of the largest in Europe. Nine other areas (mostly in the
north) are managed by local authorities, using their powers under the National
Parks Act, in consultation with the Conservancy.
Twelve forest nature reserves have also been set up; of these, eight have
been created by agreement between the Forestry Commission and the
Nature Conservancy and consist of forest land managed under joint super¬
vision ; one is the result of a similar arrangement made with the Crown Estate
Commissioners; two derive from Forest Nature Reserve Agreements made
with the Duchy of Cornwall; and one from an agreement made with the
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
Preservation of
Amenities
Responsibility for the preservation of the historic, scenic and architectural
beauties of Great Britain is vested mainly in the Minister of Housing and
Local Government, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the local planning
authorities. The ministers have the duty of compiling lists of buildings of
special architectural or historic interest and have so far listed more than
100,000 buildings. Local authorities have special powers to prevent the
demolition of such buildings and to control other works that would damage
their character. The Ministry of Public Building and Works is also concerned,
being responsible for the maintenance of royal parks and palaces, for the
protection of ancient monuments (under the Ancient Monuments Acts),
and for making grants (on the recommendation of the appropriate Historic
Buildings Council, see p. 229) for the repair and maintenance of buildings of
outstanding historic or architectural interest or their contents and for the
upkeep of adjoining land. Nearly 700 of the more important protected
monuments in Britain are in the care of the Ministry; and grants totalling
nearly £5 million have been made towards the cost of urgently needed
repairs to over 1,000 historic buildings in England, Scotland and Wales.
Under the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947, local planning
authorities have power {a) to protect trees and woodlands by means of tree
preservation orders (some 5,000 of which are in force throughout Great
Britain); {b) to prevent mineral workings becoming permanent eyesores by
attaching suitable conditions to planning permissions; and (c) to restrict or
regulate the display of advertisements in the interests of amenity or public
safety. Local authorities are also empowered, under the Clean Air Act, 1956,
to declare ‘smoke control areas’, in which the emission of smoke from
chimneys constitutes an offence, and to make grants towards costs incurred
by owners and occupiers of premises in these areas in making the necessary
changes in their appliances.
Voluntary amenity societies, wholly dependent upon the support of their
members, include: the Council for the Preservation of Rural England,
founded in 1926 to organise conceited action to secure the protection of rural
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
186
scenery and of town and country amenities from disfigurement or injury; the
Association for the Preservation of Rural Scotland (founded in 1927) and
the Council for the Preservation of Rural Wales (founded in 1928); the
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the Ramblers’
Association; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Pilgrim
Trust; the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland; and the National Trust for Scotland.
The National Trust for England, Wales and Northern Ireland (which was
founded in 1895 and now has some 132,000 members) is (apart from the Crown)
the largest land-owner in the United Kingdom. It has acquired, mainly
through gifts, over a thousand properties, which it holds for the enjoyment
of the public; it administers more than 300,000 acres of land of great natural
beauty; and it owns many fine gardens. The National Trust for Scotland,
an independent body, founded in 1931 to promote the preservation of places
of historic or architectural interest or of natural beauty in Scotland for the
benefit of the public, now has about 26,000 members and has under its care
over 60 properties, covering in all over 70,000 acres.
The Council for Nature (established in 1958) is a foundation of about 300
natural history societies and voluntary bodies concerned with nature con¬
servation and represents the interests of some 80,000 naturalists at public
inquiries on developments likely to threaten British flora and fauna. The
Council, which undertakes practical tasks of nature reserve management as
well as information work on all aspects of natural history in the British Isles,
receives grants from the Department of Education and Science, the British
Broadcasting Corporation and the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust.
Planning in The Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, which is the main
Northern source from which power to prepare a planning scheme is derived, provides
Ireland for the preparation by local authorities of planning schemes for development
or redevelopment of their areas, with the general object of securing proper
sanitary conditions and amenities in connection with the laying out and use
of land. The Interim Development Act of 1944 enables people wishing to
carry out development to do so without delay, while ensuring that such
development shall conform to the provisions likely to be included in the
planning scheme for the area.
The provisions of the Acts brought all land in Northern Ireland under
planning control and required every local authority to prepare a planning
scheme for its area. Interim control is exercised in accordance with the section
of the 1944 Act which requires that, where application is made to an authority
for permission to develop, the authority may grant the application condition¬
ally or unconditionally or may refuse it altogether. In the event of a refusal
or conditional approval, the applicant has a right to appeal to the Ministry of
Health and Local Government for Northern Ireland (which is the depart¬
ment primarily responsible for the administration of the planning Acts) to have
the matter determined by the Ministry or, if the appellant wishes, by an
independent person appointed by the Ministry.
Local planning authorities in Northern Ireland have made appreciable
progress in the preparation of outline plans which indicate broadly the
proposals for their areas. The Government has accepted proposals put forward
by Sir Robert Matthew in his Belfast Regional Survey and Plan, published
in April 1964, for limiting the growth of the Belfast urban area, for the
expansion of the towns of Lurgan and Portadown into a new city, and for the
planned growth of several other towns. The Government will pay a grant to
Industrial
Development
Northern Ireland
Forest Park
PLANNING AND HOUSING 187
planning authorities to cover all past and future expenditure on planning
compensation. A White Paper, The Administration of Town and Country
Planning in Northern Ireland (Cmd. 465, Belfast, March 1964) contains pro¬
posals for a central planning authority for the whole of Northern Ireland
which would be directly responsible to the Minister of Health and Local
Government. Local development committees would deal with day to day
planning control and an advisory planning council would be concerned with
aesthetic aspects.
The Ministry of Health and Local Government co-operates with the Ministry
of Commerce in the selection of industrial sites in order to secure the best
possible use of the land and to facilitate the efficient provision of housing and
other services in connection with industrial expansion.
Northern Ireland’s first forest park at Tollymore Park, Newcastle, County
Down, was opened to the public in 1955. Situated at the foot of the Mountains
of Mourne, it covers an area of 1,200 acres. It contains an arboretum com¬
prising a wide variety of native and exotic trees, and is rich in mountain,
river and parkland scenery. Caravan facilities and a camping site for youth
organisations are available.
HOUSING
Between 1945 and the end of 1963 over 4^ million new houses and flats were
built. Today, the numbers of dwellings and households are roughly equal.
Despite this achievement much still remains to be done before all the housing
problems facing the country are solved. The major problems are: a shortage
of housing resulting from the increase in population, the even more rapidly
increasing number of households, and rising living standards, the modernisa¬
tion of 4 million structurally sound old houses that lack amenities now
considered essential; and the many slum houses remaining to be cleared in
the large cities, a legacy of the nineteenth century, when a mass of poor
quality houses was put up in industrial areas.
Responsibility for formulating housing policy and supervising the housing
programme is borne by the Minister of Housing and Local Government in
England and Wales, by the Secretary of State in Scotland and the Minister
of Health and Local Government in Northern Ireland. To help in dealing
with long-term problems of land for housing, industry, agriculture and
transport, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government is undertaking
regional surveys of population trends and future needs for land as a basis for
regional plans covering development over a period of twenty years. The plans
will be revised at least every ten years.
The actual provision of housing accommodation in any area is the concern
of the local authority. In England and Wales and Northern Ireland the local
housing authorities are the councils of county boroughs, boroughs, urban
districts and rural districts, the London County Council (to be replaced
by the Greater London Council in 1965, see p. 71) and the Common
Council of the City of London. In Scotland all town and county councils are
housing authorities.
There are over 17 million houses in Britain: over 15 million in England and
Wales, 1,660,000 in Scotland and about 403,400 in Northern Ireland. About
one house in four is owned by public authorities (in Scotland the figure is
almost one in two), more than one in three (over 6| million) are in owner
188
New Building
Local Authority
Housing
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
occupation and most of the remainder (mainly older houses) are rented from
private landlords. Today one family in four lives in a post-war dwelling.
Private enterprise is now responsible for over half the housing being built
in Britain (some 178,000 of a total of 308,000 dwellings built in 1963); the
rest is built by local authorities, new towns development corporations, the
Northern Ireland Housing Trust1 and certain Government departments (for
housing families of the armed forces or other services). Local authority
housing is normally built for letting; privately sponsored dwellings for owner-
occupation. The Government is encouraging the development of housing
associations, which are non-profit-making bodies providing houses for letting
rather than for sale, and the co-ownership of groups of new dwellings by their
occupants (see p. 190).
Most of the new dwellings in Britain are houses (usually of two storeys);
the remainder are flats or maisonettes, mostly in blocks of from 2 to 20
storeys, although a few blocks may be higher. High blocks are generally
built in central urban areas where they replace old, overcrowded dwellings.
In the new towns and on new housing estates they provide focal points and
help planners to achieve high density of population per acre while still
providing open spaces.
Accommodation in a house designed for a family of four or five people
includes one or two living rooms, a kitchen, a store, a bathroom and a water
closet and two or three bedrooms. A typical 3-bedroom house built by a local
authority in England and Wales in 1963 had a superficial area of about 917
square feet and cost ^2,129 to build.
Over 59 per cent of houses and flats built since 1945 have been built by local
authorities (that is, generally, by private builders under contract to the
authorities). Local authorities are responsible for seeing that adequate
standards are maintained in all newly built houses, for slum clearance where
necessary and for ensuring that, as far as possible, housing conditions are
satisfactory in their areas. In their building programmes they are being en¬
couraged to use systems of industrialised housing, with standardised com¬
ponents. These offer the advantages of very rapid construction on the site,
greater independence of weather conditions, and the use of less skilled labour
than traditional building methods require, an important factor in areas where
there is a shortage of skilled building labour. Control of building standards
is the responsibility of the central departments, which issue manuals of
guidance on design and layout for different types of houses and flats provided
by local authorities.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government has set up offices in the
north-east and the north-west of England to advise local authorities on
methods of increasing their rate of house building and slum clearance. As
the slums are dealt with, a policy is being drawn up to renew the decaying
areas in towns and demolish or improve the 4 million old houses remaining,
many of which are obsolescent.
For many years local authorities have provided an increasing number of
smaller dwellings for old people—mainly one-bedroom bungalows or flats.
In 1963 they built nearly 27,000 in England and Wales, over a quarter of
1 The Northern Ireland Housing Trust, a statutory body, was established in 1945 to
erect houses for letting, to supplement building by local authorities. The trust has built
about a quarter of Northern Ireland’s post-war houses.
Research and
Development
Slum Clearance
PLANNING AND HOUSING 189
their total house-building. They have also built flatlets for frail or infirm
old people who can lead independent lives with some help: the flatlets
normally consist of small blocks of centrally heated bed-sitting rooms with
kitchens and lavatories; other rooms such as bathrooms, laundry and large
lounges are shared and the residents relieved of the work of keeping them
clean. A resident warden helps the old people with jobs they cannot manage
single-handed and is on call in emergencies.
In selecting tenants for council dwellings local authorities give preference
to families living in overcrowded or unsatisfactory conditions. Rents are low,
particularly in Scotland, in comparison with privately owned housing, with
the result that many authorities have a deficit on their housing account that
is made good from other income. In order to avoid subsidising council-house
tenants who can afford to pay an economic rent, about two-fifths of the
councils operate rent-rebate schemes, under which the general level of rents
is high enough to cover housing costs, and rebates are given to tenants with
low incomes.
Research into building techniques and into new methods of house construction,
as well as into the needs of families, is carried out by the Development Group
of the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Building Research
Station, the architects’ departments of major local authorities and the research
groups in big constructional firms. All Government building research and
development is co-ordinated by the Directorate of Research and Development
at the Ministry of Public Building and Works. In 1964 the Ministry set up
the National Building Agency to help in speeding up the rate of public and
private building by giving technical advice.
Returns made by local housing authorities in 1955 indicated that there were
about one million slum dwellings in Britain. By the early part of 1964 some
600,000 of these had been cleared, but about 250,000 additional houses had
been found to be unfit, making a total of some 650,000 still to be cleared.
By 1973 the great majority of the 1,701 housing authorities in Great Britain
should have succeeded in getting rid of all their present slums. In certain
areas, however, particularly the older industrial towns, including Birmingham,
Glasgow, Liverpool and Manchester, four of the biggest cities in the
country, the proportion of unfit houses is so high that clearance will take
much longer.
To help in those areas of Britain where the number of slum houses is so
large that it would not be practicable to replace all of them within the next
few years, local authorities can acquire houses unfit for human habitation
and ‘patch’ them in order that they may provide passable accommodation
pending their demolition. The intention is that these houses should be
demolished as soon as possible: the temporary repairs are not intended
as an alternative to slum clearance. Exchequer contributions are available to
meet part of the costs of acquisition and essential repairs.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists,
or can be provided by them, for people displaced from slum clearance areas.
Where an unfit house is demolished by order of the local authority and the
owner retains his land, he normally receives no compensation. If the local
authorities acquire an unfit property in order to demolish it themselves
and to rebuild on the land, the normal basis of compensation is the market
value of the house as it stands or the value of the site after clearance, which¬
ever is the less. In England and Wales, however, owner-occupiers who bought
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
between 1939 and 1955 at present receive full compensation for their loss
regardless of whether the sites of their houses are being acquired by the
authority or not; similar terms apply to business occupiers. In England,
Wales and Scotland the slum clearance code provides for special payments
for condemned houses which have been well maintained although inherently
unfit and business occupiers may receive hardship payments in certain cases.
In Northern Ireland provision is made for payments to owner-occupiers,
business occupiers and for good maintenance of older houses.
Housing
Finance
Housing
Corporation
The initial capital cost of houses built by or for local authorities is met by
raising loans; current expenditure, including loan repayment and interest on
loans, is met from rents supplemented by subsidies from the Exchequer and,
in many cases, from the rates. Local authorities may raise loans for housing
either in the open market or by borrowing from the Public Works Loan
Board (see p. 77). In Northern Ireland local authorities, the Housing
Trust and housing associations may borrow from the Government Loans
Fund.
Loans to enable people to buy their houses by a system of instalment
purchase are available from various sources, including building societies,
insurance companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities.
Building societies, of which there are about 730, are the most important
of these agencies. They do not build houses themselves but provide long-term
loans on the security of property bought for owner-occupation. Most societies
are now prepared to make advances of up to 95 per cent of the value of the
houses. Loans are usually repayable over periods of up to 25 or even 30 years,
by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and interest. The societies’
funds are derived mainly from investment of relatively modest sums by the
general public.
Many local authorities operate a scheme whereby, for a house costing up
to £2,500, they guarantee part of the loan made by a building society so that
an advance greater than normal may be made to the purchaser. The Exchequer
undertakes to share any liability local authorities may incur under this scheme.
Local authorities also have power to make loans under the Housing Acts for the
acquisition, conversion, improvement, repair and alteration of houses. Under
the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, they may make loans of up to
100 per cent of the house’s value.
The Housing Act, 1961, authorised Exchequer loans to approved housing
associations for the building of houses to let at unsubsidised rents. This
provision was increased and extended by the Housing Act, 1964, under
which a Housing Corporation was set up; it is hoped that building societies
will co-operate with the Corporation by advancing to a housing society
two-thirds of the cost of each approved housing scheme, the Corporation
providing the remaining third. The housing societies build dwellings either
to let at unsubsidised rents or for co-ownership by a group of occupants.
Co-ownership gives the occupants most of the advantages of house ownership
at a lower cost. The Corporation also has power to buy land for the housing
societies.
Housing Subsidies Housing subsidies, at varying rates and for varying purposes, have been
and Improvement provided in Britain since 1919, when they were first introduced to facilitate
Grants the building of houses for letting at moderate rents.
In recent years various systems of subsidy have been introduced under
successive Housing Acts. The present subsidies in England and Wales
PLANNING AND HOUSING
I9I
provide for a flexible system whereby all local authority dwellings approved
by the Minister of Housing and Local Government receive a subsidy, the
amount of it depending on the financial need of the housing authority.
Authorities with inadequate resources receive a basic subsidy of £24 a year
for 60 years for each house built, which may be increased in stages to £40 for
authorities with particularly low reserves. For other authorities the basic
rate is £8. Additional subsidies exist for high flats and expensive sites. These
provisions enable authorities to build where need exists and help to ensure
that Exchequer assistance is available chiefly for those authorities in most
need of help.
Private owners in England and Wales can obtain Exchequer assistance for
the improvement of houses built before 1945 or conversion of large houses
or other buildings for housing. Cash grants may be made by local authorities,
with Exchequer assistance, to people converting or improving existing
buildings for housing at a cost of over ^100 per dwelling. The grants may
amount to half the cost, with a maximum grant of £400 for each dwelling.
There are certain technical conditions which the dwellings as improved or
converted must fulfil, to ensure that public money is spent only on property
that will provide satisfactory accommodation for a sufficiently long period.
Grants for similar work in houses owned by local authorities may also be
paid by the Minister of Housing and Local Government, but on an annual
basis over 20 years. In either case, the payment of grant is at the discretion
of the local authority or the Minister, as the case may be.
Local authorities are, however, obliged to make grants called ‘standard
grants’, for the provision in houses built before 1945 of a bath, wash basin,
water closet, hot-water supply and food store; these cash grants cover half the
cost of the work, subject, normally, to a maximum grant of ^155, or smaller
sums if some of the five items already exist. Grant for the provision of the
last three facilities may be made where further improvement is not practicable.
Similarly the Minister is obliged to make standard grants to local authorities,
but again on an annual basis over 20 years. The Acts under which these
improvement grants are available are the Housing (Financial Provisions)
Act, 1958, the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, and the Housing Acts,
1961 and 1964. From 1949 to March 1964 nearly 760,000 grants had been
made.
Building subsidies and improvement grants are also provided in Scotland
and Northern Ireland; the amounts of subsidy are generally higher owing to
different circumstances. In Scotland the Housing (Scotland) Act, 1962,
provides for subsidies according to a local authority’s financial needs. The
basic subsidy is ^32 per house, which may be increased by stages up to £56
(depending on their financial position) for authorities with inadequate resources
and j£i2 per house for other authorities. There are higher rates of subsidy for
housing for special purposes (such as overspill, multi-storey development,
agricultural workers). Grants are also available to local authorities and private
owners for the improvement or conversion of existing properties, and to private
owners for the provision of new houses for farm workers. In Northern
Ireland annual subsidies are paid to local authorities, the Northern Ireland
Housing Trust and housing associations. Grants for improvements and
conversions are payable both to public authorities and private persons. In
addition, ‘lump sum’ subsidies are paid to private persons who build houses
for letting or for owner-occupation. Grants are available for the provision of
new houses and for the reconditioning of existing premises to accommodate
farmers and approved workers.
192
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Control of
Rents
The average annual cost of housing subsidies in Britain has been over
£100 million since 1954, some three-quarters of the total being paid by the
Exchequer and about a quarter by local authorities.
Rent control, originally introduced in 1915 and intended as a temporary
war-time measure, was retained by successive Acts until 1957. During this
period nearly all privately owned houses let unfurnished were subject to a
system of rent control which gave the tenant a fixed rent and security of tenure.
In 1954 the Government began the progressive abolition of rent control
on the grounds that it was leading to deterioration and to wasteful use of the
nation’s stock of housing. Control of lettings by local authorities, New Town
Development Corporations and certain housing associations and trusts ceased
in that year. The Rent Act, 1957, released from rent control all dwellings with
a rateable value over ^40 in the London Metropolitan Police District and in
Scotland and over £30 elsewhere; it freed from control all new lettings after
6th July, 1957, whatever the rateable value of the property. For those houses
remaining within control, it laid down a maximum rent which was more in
keeping with the current value of money and the costs of maintenance.
Security of tenure for controlled tenants is retained under the Act.
Where houses or parts of houses within the rateable value limits for rent
control are let with furniture or services provided by the landlord, a different
system of control operates. If the tenant feels he is being overcharged, he
can apply to a rent tribunal to review his rent. These tribunals are appointed
and maintained by the Government (the Minister of Housing and Local
Government and the Secretary of State for Scotland) but are independent
quasi-judicial bodies, from whose decisions there is no appeal, except on a
point of law. The tribunal decides in each case what is a fair rent to fix for
the accommodation and services provided. The rent so fixed is registered
with the local authority for the district, or, in Scotland, with the tribunal,
and any subsequent overcharging by the landlord is a punishable offence.
Somewhat similar measures of control and de-control apply in Northern
Ireland. In 1951 legislation was passed which permitted prescribed increases
in the rent of controlled houses, provided that they were maintained in good
repair; and the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) and Rent Restriction
Law (Amendment) Act (Northern Ireland), 1956, permitted an increase of
one-third in the rent levels fixed by the 1951 Act where the landlord had
recently incurred expenditure of a certain amount on repairs. The 1956 Act
also released from control houses with a net annual value of over £50 (with
certain safeguards) and houses with a net annual value of over £26 of which
the landlord was in actual possession when the Act came into force, or of
which he subsequently obtained possession.
8
*93
The Church of
England
THE CHURCHES
Every person living in Britain possesses the right of religious freedom as
described in Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: he
may change his religion at will, and may manifest his faith in teaching,
worship and observance without interference from the community or the State.
Churches and religious societies of all kinds may own property, conduct
schools, and propagate their beliefs in speech and in writing.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters was achieved gradually from
the seventeenth century onwards; in many cases relaxation in the adminis¬
tration of laws discriminating against minority religious groups preceded the
repeal of the legislation concerned. Heresy ceased to be a civil offence with
the passing of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act, 1677, and the Toleration
Act of 1688 granted freedom of worship to Protestant dissenters. In 1828
the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts freed nonconformists from
political disabilities and made it possible for them to be appointed to public
offices; Roman Catholics gained political emancipation under the Roman
Catholic Relief Act, 1829 5 the Jewish Relief Act, 1858, enabled Jews to become
members of Parliament; while religious tests that had been imposed on
prospective students and members of the academic staff of the universities
of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham were successively abolished by Acts of
1854, 1856 and 1871. Nowadays, there is no religious or denominational bar
to the holding of public office, except that the Lord Chancellor may not be
a Roman Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the
national hospitals and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of
England or the Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and
are paid a salary by the State for this part of their work. Priests of the Roman
Catholic Church and ministers of other denominations may also be appointed
or specially called in as required. Voluntary schools (see p. 158) provided by
churches of any religious denomination may be wholly or partly maintained
from public funds.
1 here is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number
of adherents to the various churches in the United Kingdom, since no inquiries
are made about religious beliefs in population censuses or other official
returns, and each church adopts different criteria in counting its members.
The membership figures given in the following sections should therefore be
taken as approximate.
The Church of England is the Established Church, and claims to be the
ancient catholic church of the land. At the Reformation in the sixteenth
century, it repudiated the supremacy of the Pope, but retained the historic
episcopate, and the creeds and sacraments upon which its doctrines are based;
therefore it claims to be both ‘catholic’ and ‘reformed’. Its form of worship
is embodied in the Book of Common Prayer, which was first compiled in 1549.
The Church is uniquely related to the Crown in that the Sovereign, who
must be a member of the Church of England, is called ‘Defender of the
:94
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Church
Organisation and
Government
Faith’ (a statutory title as protector of the Church) and promises on his or
her accession to uphold it. The coronation of the Sovereign is performed by
the Archbishop of Canterbury; prayers for the Sovereign and other members
of the royal family are said in all the statutory services of the Church; Church
of England archbishops, bishops and other senior ecclesiastical dignitaries,
as well as incumbents of Crown livings, are appointed by the Sovereign on
the advice of the Prime Minister1; and all clergymen take the oath of
allegiance to the Crown.
The Church is also linked with the State through the House of Lords,
in which the two archbishops of Canterbury and York and the twenty-four
senior diocesan bishops have seats. This makes it possible for the views of
the Church leaders to be expressed freely on any moral issue raised in
connection with the corporate conduct of the State as well as on specifically
ecclesiastical issues—a matter of particular significance in view of the fact
that the clergy of the Church of England (together with those of the Church
of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are
legally disqualified from sitting in the House of Commons.
The Church is not free to change its form of worship, as laid down in the
Book of Common Prayer, without the consent of Parliament2; canons (Church
rules) cannot be made or amended without the consent of the Queen; and
the measures of the Church Assembly (as distinct from its regulations) also
require the Royal Assent.
The Church of England is organised by geographical areas into two provinces
and 43 dioceses. The Province of Canterbury contains 29 dioceses and that
of York 14. Each diocese is subdivided into ecclesiastical parishes, of
which there are about 14,500 in all. The Archbishop of Canterbury is
Primate of All England and bishop of his own diocese of Canterbury; the
Archbishop of York is styled Primate of England and is bishop of his
owm diocese of York. The baptised membership of the Church is about
27 million, i.e. two-thirds of the population born and resident in the two
provinces.
Spiritual authority in the Church rests with the bishops. The authoritative
bodies in matters of doctrine, belief and practice are the Convocations of
Canterbury and York, each presided over by its archbishop, and consisting
of an upper house of bishops, and a lower house of representatives of each
cathedral chapter, archdeacons and elected clergy. The Convocations meet
not oftener than three times a year.
The legislative and central administrative body of the Church is the
National Assembly of the Church of England, which is commonly called the
Church Assembly. It was set up in 1919 at the request of the two Convocations,
and was given power to legislate by measure by the Church of England
Assembly (Powers) Act of 1919. It can discuss any matter connected with
the Church of England, but may not make any doctinal statements, nor
infringe upon the rights of the Convocations. It consists of three houses:
bishops, clergy and laity. The first two houses are composed of the members
of the Convocations; the house of laity consists of men and women elected
every five years by the lay members of diocesan conferences, and the con¬
stitution allows for ten co-opted members.
IThe Archbishops of Canterbury and York have appointed a commission to consider
the method of Crown appointments to ecclesiastical offices.
2 A measure to permit revision of the prayer book and changes in the form of public
worship by experimental stages is to be brought before Parliament during the course
of 1964.
THE CHURCHES
Church Finance
r95
The Church Assembly usually meets three times a year. Measures, after
passing through various stages in the assembly, are presented to an ecclesias¬
tical committee of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of 30 members,
of whom 15 are appointed by the Lord Chancellor and 15 by the Speaker
of the House of Commons. This committee lays the measures, together with
a report upon them, before both Houses. If both Houses so resolve, the
measure is sent to the Sovereign for Royal Assent, after which it has the
same force and effect as an Act of Parliament. Parliament, though it may
reject a measure, has no power to amend it.
The Church Assembly is the centre of an administrative system consisting
of boards and councils dealing with various aspects of the Church’s work,
such as education, recruitment and training for the ministry,1 and Church work
at home and overseas. The Church Assembly, through the Schools Council
of its Board of Education, is responsible for some 8,000 Church of England
schools of all types, for approximately half of which the Church bears a
quarter of the cost of improvements, alterations and repairs.
Parochial church councils were set up in 1921 to associate the laity with
the government of the Church in the parish. The members of these councils
are appointed by the parochial electors, i.e. persons who are baptised, are
not members of any other church, are 17 years of age and over, and have
applied for membership of the electoral roll of the parish where they habitually
reside or worship. The estimated number on the parish electoral rolls is just
under three million.
The Church of England has its own ecclesiastical courts. Their jurisdiction
today consists largely of faculty cases, with very occasional cases of discipline
against clergy, either for moral or ecclesiastical offences. A faculty is necessary
for any specific alteration or addition to the fabric or ornaments of a church
or to a churchyard.
There are 24 Church of England training colleges for teachers and 26
theological colleges. All these establishments are run by independent bodies
of trustees. The Church Assembly has approved a programme of expansion
of the Church training colleges which should increase the number of students
from under 5>000 to 9,000, and will include the building of two new colleges.
The Church Assembly has also embarked upon a programme of modernisation
and improvement of theological colleges and establishments for the training
of women in the pastoral work of the Church and in providing grants for the
greater part of the cost.
Each parish is responsible for its own finances, and also contributes an
annual apportioned quota to diocesan funds, and each diocese similarly
contributes to the Church Assembly. In the diocese, the financial authority
is the diocesan board of finance, which administers the money contributed
by the parishes, and acts as trustee on behalf of the parochial church councils,
which have only limited powers of holding property. The Central Board of
Finance administers the Church Assembly Fund, supported by diocesan
contributions, and devoted to the maintenance of central services, including
capital expenditure on training colleges and theological colleges and the
grants for training candidates for ordination.2
1 A report on the payment and deployment of the clergy (containing 62 recommenda¬
tions for organisational reforms) has been received by the Church Assembly and is
being studied by the Central Advisory Council for the Ministry.
2 A small standing body has been set up by the Archbishops to bring the needs and
resources of the Church of England under continuous review.
196
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The State makes no payment direct to the Church as such, though it
pays for the services of chaplains in the armed forces and in prisons and
hospitals, and contributes substantially to the maintenance of Church schools
and training colleges.
The endowment income of the Church is mainly administered by the
Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the payment of
clergy stipends and the provision of finance for pensions, new churches,
parsonage houses and, to a small extent, church schools. Income from the
Commissioners’ investments (some £16 million) has greatly increased during
the past ten years; in broad terms, this has meant a rise in the stipends of the
poorer clergy and that the Commissioners have been able to embark on
schemes of assistance for providing better parsonage houses, for church
buildings in new areas of population, and for better pensions for clergy and
their widows.
The Anglican Communion comprises 17 autonomous churches in the United
Kingdom and overseas, with a total membership of over 40 million.
In the British Isles, in addition to the established Church of England,
there are unestablished Anglican Churches in Ireland, Scotland and Wales:
the Church of Ireland has 6 dioceses wholly or partly in Northern Ireland,
with 345,000 members in that country; the Episcopal Church in Scotland,
7 dioceses and some 98,000 members; and the Church in Wales, 6 dioceses
and some 200,000 Easter communicants.
The Lambeth Conference for unofficial consultation between all Anglican
bishops meets every ten years; it is presided over by the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The conference has no executive authority, but enjoys great
moral prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other
communions, and on the attitude of the Anglican churches to political and
social questions are widely studied.
An executive officer of the Anglican Communion is the secretary of the
Anglican Advisory Council on Missionary Strategy, and exercises general
supervision on behalf of the consultative body of the Lambeth Conference
over all matters affecting the welfare of the Anglican Communion which
call for attention between the meetings of the conference.
The established church in Scotland is the presbyterian Church of Scotland.
It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church which is established
and yet is free’. Its position, defined in the Treaty of Union, 1707, was
further safeguarded by the Church of Scotland Act, 1921, under which it
has complete internal self-government within the terms of the schedule to
the Act, ‘Articles Declaratory of the Faith of the Church of Scotland’.
Whereas in episcopacy church government is a hierarchy of persons, in
presbyterianism there is a hierarchy of courts. All ministers are of equal
status, and each of the 2,199 churches is governed locally by the Kirk Session,
consisting of the minister and elected elders (of whom there are over
47,000 in all); above this is the Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of
the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, which meets annually and
consists of elected ministers and elders presided over by an elected Moderator
who serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly
by the Lord High Commissioner. The Church of Scotland has complete
freedom in all spiritual matters and the right to appoint its own officers and
to decide all matters of doctrine and discipline. Its decisions are not subject
to parliamentary debate or modification.
THE CHURCHES
The Free
Churches
The Methodist
Churches
The Congregational
and Baptist
Churches
The Unestablished
Presbyterian
Churches
!97
The training for the ministry, which lasts at least six years, has given the
church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the standard
of education in Scotland. The membership of the Church of Scotland is
estimated at about 1,270,000.
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is now commonly used to describe those churches
in England which were more generally known in the past as ‘nonconformist’
churches; and protestant churches in Scotland (except the established
Church of Scotland), Wales and Northern Ireland. The main Free Churches
are the Methodist, Baptist and Congregational Churches, and the unestablished
presbyterian churches throughout Britain. In addition, there are a number
of other protestant denominations in the United Kingdom as well as such
religious associations as the Society of Friends and the Salvation Army,
which have certain links with the main Free Churches.
The word ‘nonconformist’ signifies dissent from certain of the formularies
and practices of the established church. In general, the Free Churches base
their reason for existence on their distinctive convictions regarding organisation
and worship.
The largest of the Free Churches, the Methodist Church, which originated
in the eighteenth century following the evangelical revival by John Wesley,
took its present form in 1932, with the union of the majority of separate
Methodist Churches. It has over 710,800 adult full members. The supreme
authority is the annual conference and the system of government is in many
ways presbyterian, the leaders’ meeting corresponding to the kirk sessions,
with circuit meetings and district synods resembling presbytery and synod.
One of the characteristics of Methodism is its strong emphasis on lay leadership.
There are some 21,600 trained lay preachers sharing the work of 4,200 ministers
and preaching in many local churches.
Methodist Churches which did not join the union in 1932 include: the
Independent Methodists, in which ministerial service is on a purely voluntary
basis and women (many of whom are ministers) have full equality with men;
and the Wesleyan Reform Union (with some 5,600 members) which, while
retaining the essential Methodist doctrine, gives autonomy to each of its
160 individual churches.
The Congregationalists are the oldest community of dissenters in Britain.
In 1831 most of their churches were formed into the Congregational Union.
Local churches have formed county and national unions, whose secretariat
and assemblies have much influence, but no compulsive authority over them,
since great importance is attached to the autonomy of local church meetings.
Adult membership is approximately 202,300.
Like the Congregationalists, the Baptists are for the most part grouped
in associations of churches and the majority of these belong to the Baptist
Union formed in 1813. Baptists differ from Congregationalists in that they
practise the baptism of believers only; they do not baptise infants. The
Baptist churches have about 300,400 members.
The Presbyterian Church in Ireland has a community strength in Northern
Ireland of about 380,000. The Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist)
Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist movement led by Howell
Harris in 1735, numbers some 127,000. The Presbyterian Church of England
has nearly 69,900 members; its highest court is its general assembly; women
are admitted to the eldership and ministry.
198
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Denominations
The Roman
Catholic Church
Other presbyterian churches in Britain include: the Free Church of Scotland;
the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland;
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian
Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Among other Protestant denominations in the United Kingdom are: the
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches; the Churches of Christ (known also
in the United States of America as Disciples of Christ) which have been an
organised community in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the
British Province of the Moravian Church, which is an international missionary
church; the Free Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which
was formed in 1844 as a direct result of the Oxford Movement; the Society
of Friends; and the Salvation Army.
The Society of Friends, or Quakers, came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. A distinctive feature
is the way of worship: outward sacraments are not observed and there is no
separate ministry. Friends place great emphasis on work for peace, and their
influence in many parts of the world, especially in social reform and in the
relief of suffering, is very wide in relation to their numbers. There are 437
Quaker Meetings in Britain and over 21,000 members; and the Society has
nine schools (the pupils and staff of which are not exclusively Quaker).
The Salvation Army, founded in 1878 by a Methodist, William Booth, is a
religious movement, composed of men and women who seek the spiritual
and social betterment of their fellows, primarily by preaching the gospel to
those hitherto untouched by religious effort. The movement, in which
military rather than ecclesiastical terminology is used, has branches all over
the world, and its social work (particularly that connected with the welfare of
members of the British armed forces serving overseas) is well supported.
The Christian Scientists, who are in no way connected with any other
church, have about 330 branch churches and societies in Britain.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became
temporarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the
Scottish hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was
restored in 1878, while the Irish hierarchy never became completely extinct.
The normal government of the Roman Catholic Church, namely by territorial
archbishops and bishops, is once again the rule in the whole of the United
Kingdom.
The central territorial unit of the Roman Catholic hierarchical organisation
is the province or archdiocese under the metropolitan, who is always an
archbishop. The chairman of the bench of bishops in England and Wales is
the Archbishop of Westminster. A province normally comprises several
dioceses, each under a bishop aided by a chapter of canons and others, and
by priests in charge of the parishes into which the diocese is subdivided. In
England and Wales there are four provinces and archdioceses (Westminster,
Liverpool, Birmingham and Cardiff), 14 dioceses, and nearly 2,300 parishes;
in Scotland there are two provinces and archdioceses (St. Andrews and
Edinburgh, and Glasgow), six dioceses, and about 400 parishes; in Northern
Ireland there are six dioceses (several of which have territory partly in the
Irish Republic and partly in Northern Ireland since there is one hierarchy
for the whole of Ireland) and about 170 parishes. In the whole of the United
Kingdom there are some five million adherents (including children) to the
Roman Catholic faith.
THE CHURCHES
199
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education
of its children in their own faith, and requires that the children of marriages
between its own members and members of any other denomination should be
brought up as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children
in the United Kingdom are stalled by members of the religious orders for
men and women, who also undertake other social work such as nursing,
child care, and the conduct of homes for the aged.
Jewry Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were
expelled at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The
present Anglo-Jewish community dates from 1656, the earliest arrivals being
the Sephardi (from Spain and Portugal). At the end of the seventeenth
century an Ashkenazi community (from Germany and East Europe) was
established, which increased rapidly and spread to the principal provincial
cities. As a result of the virtual destruction of whole Jewish communities on
the Continent during the second world war, the present Anglo-Jewish com¬
munity of some 450,000 is the largest group of Jews in Europe.
The Anglo-Jewish community is divided into two schools of thought,
each of which has its own form of worship and its own services: the Orthodox
(the original groups) and the Reform. The Reform Movement, which attaches
less religious importance to some of the ancient rituals and practices of the
Jewish faith, began in 1840. It was followed in 1901 by the establishment of
the Liberal Jewish Movement which, in addition, lays emphasis on the re¬
interpretation of traditional Judaism in the light of modern thought and
custom. Of the Jews in Great Britain who belong to any kind of synagogue,
about 80 per cent are Orthodox. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest
group (Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the
Sephardi group.
Synagogues in Britain number approximately 450. There has been an
increase in the number of Jewish denominational schools, which are now
attended by about one in seven Jewish children; other Jewish children attend
the ordinary State or independent schools and receive extra-curricular
instruction in the Jewish faith.
Other Religious Many immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth countries and
Communities foreign countries have established centres for worship for their own commun¬
ities in the United Kingdom, and especially in London. The Christian
communities include the Greek, Russian, Polish and Serb Orthodox, with
some Estonian and Latvian Orthodox, and also the Armenian Church. There
are also churches belonging to the Lutheran Churches of Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Norway and Sweden, and centres where Estonian, Latvian and
Polish Lutherans worship according to their creed. In addition, the French,
Dutch, Swiss, Hungarian and Polish Reformed Churches are represented in
Britain, the first three having their own places of worship.
There are also a number of other religious sects of British or foreign origin;
figures of membership in Britain of most of them are not available.
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews, are
the Moslems and the Buddhists. The Moslems are the more widely represented;
it is estimated that the Islamic population of Britain may now number about
200,000 of whom some 2,000 are in the Muslim Society of Great Britain.
Their principal mosque is the Shah Jehan Mosque at Woking, and there
are also mosques in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Cardiff and
Glasgow.
200
BRITAIN.- AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Co-operation
between the
Churches
The Buddhist temple is in South Kensington, London. There is also a
meeting place and discussion centre for the several thousand adherents of
Buddhism in Britain.
An outstanding feature of recent years has been the growth of co-operation
between the Churches. The British Council of Churches, founded in 1942,
includes official representatives from almost all the churches of the British
Isles, with the exception of the Roman Catholic Church. The Council
facilitates common action between the churches and seeks to further the cause
of Christian unity. The Archbishop of Canterbury is president. In addition,
most, though not all, of the Free Churches in England and Wales are members
of the Free Church Federal Council (formed in 1940 by the amalgamation
of the Federal Council of Evangelical Free Churches with the National Free
Church Council), the aims of which are to promote unity and joint action
between the Free Churches, and to provide a channel through which the
Free Churches can communicate and negotiate with central and local govern¬
ment authorities as a united body. The report of the conversations held
during the past six years between representatives of the Church of England
and the Methodist Church visualised union between the churches in two
stages: the first to be a period of full communion during which the twro
churches remain distinct, and the second to be the achievement of organic
union. Discussions on changes in organisation to allow of closer relations have
also been taking place between the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church of England.
The Archbishop of Canterbury is advised on these matters, both at home
and abroad, by the Church of England Council on Foreign Relations.
The Anglican, Presbyterian and Free Churches in the British Isles also
participate in the World Council of Churches, which was constituted at
Amsterdam, Netherlands, in 1948. The council links together 171 churches in
over 50 countries for co-operation in action and the study of common problems.
Co-operation of other Churches with the Roman Catholic Church takes
place on some specific issues through the Churches’ Main Committee. The
Council of Christians and Jews works for better understanding between
members of the two religions and deals with problems arising in the social field.
THE PATTERN
EXPENDITURE
THE GOVERN-
MENT AND
SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
201
9
PROMOTION OF THE
SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
THE PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
Scientific research is carried out, as it always has been, by individual scientists.
In former times the agencies promoting and financing it in Britain were
mainly wealthy men, privately endowed universities and learned societies.
But in recent times a growing awareness of the importance of scientific research
and development as a basis not only of military, but also of economic, social
and cultural, strength, has led to large-scale Government support and the
budget for science has assumed a prominent position in total Government
expenditure. The Government is now the main patron and source of funds,
though considerable sums are provided by private industry, public corpora¬
tions, independent trusts and foundations and learned societies.
Furthermore, it has become an acknowledged responsibility of the Govern¬
ment not only to undertake research directly but also to keep under review
facilities for the training of scientists, to encourage fundamental research, to
finance certain research projects, and to ensure that adequate research is
directed to matters of national interest. As a result, a system of collaboration
which leaves the greatest possible measure of freedom to individual scientists
has developed between the universities, industry and the Government. The
learned societies, members of which work in all three, play an important part
in the discussion and publication of the results of research. Important work
is also undertaken by independent organisations.
OF Total expenditure, Government and private, on research and development in
Britain is estimated in the most recent survey undertaken for the Advisory
Council on Scientific Policy to have increased from £300 million in 1955-56
to £634 million in 1961-62. This represented 2-7 per cent of the gross national
product compared with 1-7 per cent in 1955-56. Of this, the Government
provided £385 million, including £139-3 million for civil research and
development, compared with £6-58 million in 1945-46. By 1963-64 the latter
figure had increased to £171-9 million, as shown in detail in Table 9 and
represented roughly 2-5 per cent of total Government expenditure.
The cost of research and sources of funds is shown in Table 8. From this
it is apparent that Government departments provided over 60 per cent of the
funds and carried out 28 per cent of the research, whereas private industry
provided 33 -6 per cent of the funds and carried out 58 per cent of the research,
some of it with Government funds. Proportions of research falling in various
sectors of private industry are given 01. p. 211.
Organised scientific research dates back at least to the founding of the Royal
Society in 1660 (see p. 207), but active participation by the Government is
largely a twentieth century development, stimulated by two world wars.
Government financing of science before 1900 was confined to the Royal
Greenwich Observatory (see p. 218), founded in 1675 and the first of Britain’s
202
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 8
Cost of Research
and Sources of
Finance 1961-62
Government:
Defence departments
Civil departments
Research councils . .
Universities and technical
colleges
Research associations
Public corporations . .
Private industry
Other organisations . .
Funds provided
£ million %
245-7
110-1
29-2
1-3
22-7
213-0
12-0
634-0
38-7
17-4
4-6
60-7
0-2
3-6
33-6
1-9
100-0
Cost of research
carried out
£ million
93-2
61-9
23-0
32-4
8-1
21-4
367-7
26-3
634-0
14-7
9-8
3-6
28-1
5-1
1-3
3- 4
58-0
4- 1
100-0
Source: Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
TABLE 9
Estimated
Government
Expenditure on
Civil Research
and Development
1963-64
Universities (and Learned Societies)* . .
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research6
Medical Research Council
Agricultural Research Council
Nature Conservancy
Development Fund
Ministry of Aviation6 . .
Agriculture Departments
Other Civil Departments'1
Admiralty—Observatories and Oceanography
Air Ministry—Meteorology and Aviation Medicine
Atomic Energy Authority—(Civil Research and
Development). .
National Institute for Research in Nuclear Science . .
Space Research^. .
Total ..
Source: based on Cmnd. 2171.
a Details of total university research expenditure are not separately maintained. The
figures are based on the estimates prepared for 1961-62 for special inquiry into research
and development expenditure and excludes grants from Research Councils, which are
included under the subsequent Research Council headings.
b Excluding space research, as defined in d below.
c Post Office research is excluded since it is no longer directly financed by the Exchequer.
d Includes: expenditure by DSIR on space research, both in its own establishments and
in the form of research grants; the United Kingdom contribution to ESRO (see p. 217);
and the Ministry of Aviation expenditure on sounding rockets and satellites. It excludes
the British contribution to ELDO (see p. 217).
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
203
state-supported scientific institutions; the Geological Survey (1835)—the
first national institution of its kind in the world; a chemical laboratory, now
the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (1842: see p. 211); and the
Meteorological Office (1854: see p. 205). From 1900-1914 Government
support for science grew steadily with the establishment in 1900 of the
National Physical Laboratory, in 1909 of the Post Office Research Section,
and also of the Development Commission, to promote research into agriculture
and rural industries; and in 1913 of the Medical Research Committee. During
the first world war Government recognition of the importance of scientific
research and its application was hastened and led to the establishment of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR). The Medical
Research Council (MRC) superseded the Medical Research Committee in
1920, and the Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established in 1931.
Since the second world war Government support of science has been extended
to include several new organisations. The Nature Conservancy was set up in
1949, the Atomic Energy Authority in 1954 and the Department of Technical
Co-operation in 1961.
Ministerial
Responsibility
for Civil Science
Until 1959 the Lord President of the Council had been responsible for
Government participation in civil science, but in that year a Minister for
Science was appointed in conjunction with one of the ancient offices of state
traditionally within the Cabinet—at first that of Lord Privy Seal but later
that of Lord President of the Council. He was responsible to Parliament
for the Research Councils, exercised ministerial functions under the
Atomic Energy Acts and general supervision over the programme of space
research. Pie had an administrative staff known as the Office of the Minister
for Science, composed of a general science division and an atomic energy
division.
Following publication in 1963 of reports of the Robbins Committee on
higher education (see p. 164) and of the Trend Committee on the organisation
of civil science,1 a Secretary of State for Education and Science was appointed
from 1st April 1964, and responsibility for education, including civil science,
w as transferred to him. A new Department of Education and Science was set
up and organised in two administrative units—one for civil science and through
the University Grants Committee for universities throughout Great Britain;
and the other for schools and other forms of education in England and Wales.
The responsibilities of the Secretary of State for Scotland in education were
substantially unchanged.
Government plans for the reorganisation of civil science, announced in
detail in July 1964, include the replacement of the Advisory Council on
Scientific Policy (see p. 204) by a Council for Scientific Policy; the replace¬
ment of DSIR by two new bodies—a Science Research Council and an
Industrial Research and Development Authority; and the formation of a
Natural Environment Research Council to take over, among other things, the
work of the Nature Conservancy (see p. 218). These bodies, together with the
existing MRC and ARC, would be the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Education and Science. The scope of the National Research and
Development Corporation (see p. 220) would be increased but it would
remain under the Board of Trade.
1 The Committee of Enquiry into the Organisation of Civil Science, set up by the Prime
Minister in March 1962 under the chairmanship of Sir Burke Trend (see Bibliography).
204
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Formulation of
Scientific Policy
The Research
Councils
Other
Government-
sponsored
Research
Fuel and Power
Transport and
Aviation
The proposed changes require legislation and the following paragraphs refer
to the organisation in being at the end of August 1964.
The two main bodies advising the Government on general scientific policy
are, for civil science, the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy (ACSP)
and, for defence, the Defence Research Policy Committee (DRPC), both
established in 1947.
The terms of reference of the ACSP are to advise the Secretary of State for
Education and Science in the exercise of his responsibilities for the formulation
and execution of Government scientific policy. Membership consists mainly
of scientists drawn from the universities, industry and government service; it
includes the chairman of the DRPC, the Secretaries of the four executive
research councils (see below), the chairman of the University Grants
Committee (see p. 166), the deputy chairman of the Atomic Energy Authority
(see p. 215) and a representative of the Treasury, together with about the
same number of distinguished scientists from the universities and industry
appointed by the Secretary of State. The Council has both standing and
ad hoc committees. These generally include distinguished scientists and
industrialists who are not members of the Council. The present standing
committees are those for scientific manpower, overseas scientific relations,
and statistics. The Council considers not only questions on which its advice
is sought by the Secretary of State, but also matters which the Council
itself considers important and timely.
There are also other bodies concerned in an advisory or co-ordinating
capacity with particular aspects of civil research policy, such as the Steering
Group on Space Research, the Natural Resources (Technical) Committee
and the Overseas Research Council.
The DRPC is an inter-departmental body with executive responsibilities,
the members being government officials responsible for the operational and
scientific aspects of research and their development for defence purposes.
Its terms of reference are: (a) to advise the Minister of Defence and the
Chiefs of Staff on all scientific and technical matters which may affect the
formulation and direction of defence policy, and (b) to keep under review
the defence research and development programme so as to ensure that it is
appropriate to current defence policy, having regard to available resources
There are four research councils for which the Secretary of State for Education
and Science is responsible: the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research, the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural Research Council
and the Nature Conservancy.
While all Government departments may call on any of the research councils
for advice or research, several have set up research establishments of their own.
The principal departments and non-departmental Government organisations
having civil research responsibilities are mentioned below.
The Minister of Power is responsible for research on safety in mines. The
coal, electricity and gas industries are required to submit their research plans
for his concurrence.
The Ministry of Transport is concerned with research into road construction
(see p. 367) and also into aspects of marine navigation and marine propulsion,
most of the basic work being carried out for the Ministry by the DSIR and the
Ministry of Defence. Research on radio aids for marine navigation is undertaken
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Meteorology
Land Use and
Planning
Communications
Human and Social
Sciences
205
by the Ministry of Defence, which is also responsible for inter-Service
electronic valve research, and for the administration of the Royal Greenwich
Observatory, at Herstmonceux, and the National Institute of Oceanography.
The Government’s programme of research on marine nuclear propulsion is
undertaken by the Atomic Energy Authority.
The Ministry of Aviation, which carries out most of the research needed
to meet the technical requirements of air defence, is also responsible for some
civil research, for instance, at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the
National Gas Turbine Establishment at Farnborough, and at the Royal
Radar Establishment, Malvern. Some fundamental research is carried out for
the Ministry by universities and industrial organisations. The Minister of
Aviation is also responsible for research into airport operations and air
traffic control. He is advised by an Aeronautical Research Council.
The Ministry of Defence finances the Meteorological Office, which is
responsible for research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly directed to non¬
military ends. The headquarters of the Office and most of its research sections
are at Bracknell, Berkshire. The Forecasting Research Section has been equipped
with a large-capacity electronic computer. Balloon and aircraft soundings and
radar techniques are used to investigate the movement and composition of
the atmosphere, and instruments are being designed which will be used in
rockets and an earth-satellite. The Ministry of Defence also makes grants for
fundamental meteorological research carried out under the auspices of the
Royal Society or in university departments.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government deals with geographical,
geological, economic and sociological research relating to the use and develop¬
ment of land in England and Wales. Similar arrangements are made in
Scotland by the Scottish Home and Health Department, and in Northern
Ireland by the Ministry of Health and Local Government.
The Post Office undertakes scientific research and development on a wide
range of subjects, ranging from the mechanisation of mail handling to line
and radio systems for telecommunications. When the work reaches the
development stage it is usual to co-operate closely with industry so that the
final product will be jointly engineered. The new electronic telephone
exchange now in service at Highgate Wood is an example (see p. 389).
Under two inter-related international agreements reached in July 1964, in
Washington, Britain is taking part in a world-wide satellite communications
system together with the United States, European and other countries.
The past ten years have seen appreciable expansion of research in the human
sciences, including anthropology, sociology, psychology and demography.
Government participation in this has been mainly through the Medical
Research Council, in its socio-medical studies, and the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, in some applied researches at its establishments.
The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, advised by its Human
Sciences Committee, awards fellowships and postgraduate studentships at
universities and colleges of advanced technology for research in human
sciences in relation to the needs of industry. Its Warren Spring Laboratory
maintains a register of British research which lists projects in hand in colleges,
Government departments, industrial associations and firms.
Other Government departments active in this field include the Home Office,
which has its own research unit, and the Central Office of Information, with
its Social Survey Division which conducts sample survey inquiries at the
request of all Government departments and from time to time also carries
206
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Botany
The
Parliamentary
and Scientific
Committee
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
out studies in collaboration with universities and other independent research
organisations. The Government set up in June 1963 an independent Com¬
mittee of Inquiry to review research in social studies in Government depart¬
ments, universities and other institutions, and to advise whether changes
are needed in arrangements for supporting and co-ordinating research.
There are a number of scientific institutions administered by Government
departments which undertake research work in addition to their other scientific
activities. These include the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, founded in 1759
and now administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
which has the largest collection of living plants in the world. Its three research
departments are: the Herbarium, concerned primarily with the classification
and accurate determination of plants; the Jodrell Laboratory, for the study
of plant anatomy and plant physiology, cytology and genetics; and the
Museum of Economic Botany, dealing with the economic exploitation of
plants. The library, attached to the herbarium, was founded in 1853; it
consists of more than 55,000 botanical books, about 80,000 reprints and
separately issued items and a collection of over 150,000 drawings and paintings
of plants. In 1964 the 400-acre estate known as Wakehurst Place, Ardingly,
Sussex, was taken over by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. The Royal
Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, founded about 1660, is administered by the
Ministry of Public Building and Works.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee was founded at the end of 1939
by members of the House of Commons and replaced the former Parliamentary
Science Committee. It is one of a number of unofficial, all-party parliamentary
groups which have grown up spontaneously and have varying degrees of
influence. Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in
both Houses, and also to nominated representatives of such non-profit-
making scientific and technological organisations in Britain as may be affiliated
under its constitution. The committee provides, as far as possible, for a
regular exchange of information between members of Parliament and scientists.
The learned societies have had a profound and lasting influence upon the
development and organisation of science in Britain. They have provided the
background for continuity of research from the seventeenth century onwards,
a forum for scientists to exchange ideas and a reliable source from which
new ideas for the enrichment of knowledge can flow. Although today most
research is conducted under other auspices, the learned societies have retained
their traditional function of facilitating the spread of scientific knowledge.
At present there are over 200 learned scientific societies in Britain with
approximately 400 scientific publications. There are also numerous technical
institutions and professional associations, many of which are playing a dis¬
tinguished part in promoting their own branches of science or are interested
in the education and professional well-being of their members. Prominent
examples of these are the British Medical Association, the Institutions of
Civil Engineers, Mechanical Engineers, Electrical Engineers, Chemical
Engineers, Metallurgists; the Royal Institute of Chemistry, the Institute of
Physics and the Physical Society and the Institute of Biology.
The most eminent of the learned societies concerned with science in its
broadest aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised interests
and activities) are the Royal Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal Institution
and British Association.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Royal Society
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
207
The Royal Society, or more fully, the Royal Society of London for the
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique
place in the country’s scientific affairs and corresponds to national academies
of science in other countries. Election to it is regarded by scientists as
a high honour. The Queen is Patron. There are today three main cate¬
gories of Fellowship: Royal Fellows, comprising the Queen Mother and three
Royal Dukes; Foreign Members, of whom there are about 65; and the main
body of Fellows, numbering about 625. Election to the Fellowship, which is
for life, is restricted to 25 persons a year and to foreign membership to four a
year. The Society is governed by a council of 21 members.
Its present activities include the holding of scientific meetings; publication
of research work, mainly in the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings;
the presentation of medals; the giving of endowed lectures; and the award of
research appointments and grants. The highest medal awarded is the Copley
Medal, for which scientists from all countries are eligible; there are also two
Royal Medals, and the Rumford, Darwin, Buchanan, Sylvester and Hughes
Medals. There are five lectureships: the Croonian (biology); the Bakerian
(physical sciences); the Ferrier (nervous system); the Wilkins (history of
science); and the Leeuwenhoek (microbiology). Events to mark the ter¬
centenary of the Society in i960 included the foundation of the Wolfson
Research Professorship of the Royal Society and the Leverhulme Tercentenary
Medal for the most important contribution to pure or applied chemistry or
engineering. In 1962 the Henry Dale Research Professorship was instituted
by an endowment from the Wellcome Trustees.
Although an independent private corporation, the Society has always had
a special relationship with the Government, which provides its accommodation
and makes grants for research activities administered by it. The President of
the Society is consulted on some appointments to Government research
councils and Fellows serve on most governmental advisory councils and
committees concerned with research.
The Society represents the United Kingdom in the international unions
comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and
appoints national committees for each of them. It also plays a leading part
in international scientific programmes such as the International Geophysical
Year (IGY) (1957-58) and the International Years of the Quiet Sun (IQSY)
(1964-65).
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encourage¬
ment of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific,
artistic, technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754,
however, one of the Society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress
and application to the useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils
this purpose chiefly by disseminating new scientific knowledge. The Society
regularly holds meetings for the delivery of lectures, and publishes a monthly
Journal, thus providing effective media for the exposition and assessment by
leading authorities of developments which have a public as well as a specialist
interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating
the introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving
arts and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’.
208
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British
Association
THE UNIVER¬
SITIES AND
INSTITUTIONS
OF UNIVERSITY
STATUS
Its character, however, was largely determined by the work of Sir Humphry
Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of research. Today,
the Royal Institution has extensive research laboratories, and lectures are
given on recent developments in science and other branches of knowledge.
Its library of some 60,000 books includes many early scientific works and
manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831
to promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well
as by eminent scientists. In addition the Association plans special lectures,
exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publica¬
tion of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the appointment of study
groups and liaison with the press and with sound and television broadcasting
services. The Association has area committees and three lectureships for young
scientists—the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lectureships, dealing
respectively with the physical, biological and sociological sciences—to
encourage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The
British Association has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific
bodies and learned societies. It has also played an important part in the
development of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles
to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
The distinguishing features of most scientific research carried out in the
universities and other similar institutions are that it involves the pursuit of
knowledge without any necessary reference to practical application or
utility, and that it is closely linked with the function of the universities as
centres of education. About half of the combined teaching and research
time of the academic staff in the scientific departments at the universities
and about half of the expenditure of these departments is devoted to
research.
In 1962-63 the total estimated university expenditure on scientific research
was about ^35 million. The most important Government contribution,
accounting for nearly £24 million, was through the University Grants Com¬
mittee (UGC), which provides about 70 per cent of the income and about
95 per cent of the capital needs of the universities. This Committee advises
the Secretary of State for Education and Science on the recurrent grants
needed by the universities on a quinquennial basis, assessing their require¬
ments on the basis of plans and proposals put forward by the universities
themselves, bearing in mind such factors as national needs, available resources
of academic manpower, potential student numbers in various fields and exist¬
ing gaps in teaching or research. Moreover, since the total cost of all the
universities’ desirable projects is likely to exceed any financial provision that
any government would be able to make, it is the Committee’s responsibility
to achieve some balance in the total expenditure on new developments between
universities and between fields of development. From the funds provided by
the Government the Committee allocates block grants to each university for
each of the five years. The Committee exercises no close supervision over the
subsequent expenditure of these grants, although it indicates to the universities
the direction in which new developments during the next quinquennium
would most appropriately take place; and it would normally expect to be
invited to agree to any major deviation from the programmes put forward in
the universities’ quinquennial submissions.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Statistics of
Qualified
Scientists
209
Scientific research in the universities is also supported from the Exchequer
through the Research Councils. This support takes two forms. First, about
half the postgraduate students in science and technology in the universities
receive maintenance awards from the Research Councils, through post¬
graduate scholarships, studentships or fellowships. These awards are in some
cases for periods of up to three years for training in research work and in
others for shorter periods for advanced studies. The cost of these studentships
is currently of the order of £2 million a year. Second, grants are given to the
universities by the Research Councils for specific projects, particularly in new
or developing fields of research. In recent years the Research Councils, in
addition to making grants of this kind, have made funds available for expensive
items of university equipment required for specific programmes of research.
The Research Councils’ support for research in the universities, excluding
expenditure by the Medical Research Council and the Agricultural Research
Council on their own research units within the universities (which remain
under the control of, and are wholly financed by, the Councils themselves),
amounted in 1962-63 to about £4 million or one-ninth of the expenditure on
research in the universities.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various Government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations, which provide funds amounting in the aggregate
to about £5 million. The contributions from sources other than the University
Grants Committee amount to nearly a third of the total university expenditure
on research.
In addition to the universities, Colleges of Advanced Technology in England
and Wales and Central Institutions in Scotland are playing an increasing part
in scientific and technological research and development. These Colleges and
Institutions are financed by the Education Departments but are now making a
growing demand on the support for research provided by the Research Councils.
Statistics, based on replies to questions put to a 10 per cent sample of the
population at the 1961 census, showed that in 1961 there were 287,610 people
in Great Britain with scientific and technological qualifications (136,520
scientists and 151,090 engineers and technologists). On the basis of a survey
made in 1956 the Committee on Scientific Manpower of the Advisory Council
on Scientific Policy estimated that the number of scientists and engineers
qualifying annually would need to be raised from 10,000 in 1956 to 20,000
between 1966 and I971' The Government accepted this figure as a reasonable
goal and supported measures to ensure that the universities and technical
colleges together would be able to produce at least this number. In 1962
the Committee on Scientific Manpower of the ACSP forecast an annual
growth rate in these figures of 4-8 per cent in the period 1962-65. It also
forecast a shortage of mathematicians, electrical and mechanical engineers
and physicists.
The emigration of scientists, though a matter of concern to a country such
as Britain, whose economy relies increasingly on science-based industries, is
no new phenomenon and is common to all advanced countries. It is in the
interests of science that interchanges should take place and almost as many
scientists come to work in Britain from the Commonwealth, Europe and the
United States as leave Britain to work elsewhere.
Local Studies
Universities in industrial centres have long been renowned for studies relating
to their local industries, such as metallurgy at Birmingham, Sheffield,
210
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Go-operation
for Aid to
Research
Swansea and other centres of the metals and metal-using industries, and
naval architecture and marine engineering at Glasgow, Liverpool and
Newcastle upon Tyne. In the textile areas, Manchester offers courses in
textile chemistry and engineering and Leeds has specialised in courses and
research in connection with the wool textile industry, including colour
chemistry and dyeing. Leeds is the only university in Britain that has a
department devoted to the study of leather manufacture, and Manchester
offers courses in paper and machine tool technology. Sheffield is unique for
its department of glass technology—the pioneer among such departments in
the world. Aeronautical engineering is a main subject for first degree courses
at Bristol, Cambridge, London, Manchester, Southampton, Glasgow and
Belfast. Birmingham and London offer first degree courses in oil
technology.
All universities and university colleges in the United Kingdom have labora¬
tories or research departments.1 The Government research councils provide
grants for research projects in universities and award a substantial number of
studentships for postgraduate training in science and technology, as well as
post-doctoral research fellowships; the National Research Development
Corporation (see p. 220) awards development contracts to university depart¬
ments ; and leading firms in such industries as chemicals, oil, motor vehicles,
textiles, electrical equipment, food manufacture, and mining provide grants
for specific research projects or endow research fellowships, such as the
Imperial Chemical Industries and Leverhulme Fellowships, or professorships.
Foundations which provide similar benefactions include the Nuffield
Foundation,2 the Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Trust, the Wellcome Trust
and Courtaulds’ Scientific and Educational Trust Fund. Among individuals
whose major contributions to universities have included provision for research
facilities have been Lord Nuffield, with gifts to the Clarendon Laboratory,
Oxford, Lord Austin, who provided new buildings for the Cavendish Labora¬
tory, Cambridge, members of the Wills family, who financed the Physics
Laboratory at Bristol, members of the Boot family at Nottingham and of the
Brotherton family at Leeds.
Co-operation between industry and commerce and the universities and
colleges of advanced technology is common. A notable example is the
Manchester Joint Research Council, set up in 1944 by the Manchester
Chamber of Commerce and the University of Manchester, which have equal
representation on it; this body organises lectures and discussion meetings
and conducts investigations into the use made of research by industry.
Another is the Glass Delegation of the University of Sheffield, which directs
the work of the Department of Glass Technology and is composed of members
appointed by the Council of the University and representatives of firms and
companies who subscribe funds for training and research. An example of
co-operation between a Government department, an independent organisation
and a university is the radio telescope at the Nuffield Radio Astronomy
Observatory, Jodrell Bank, Cheshire (see p. 218), financed jointly by the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Nuffield Foundation,
1 The many topics under investigation in these laboratories and in those of the major
technical colleges, are listed in Scientific Research in British Universities and Colleges
(see Bibliography).
2 The Nuffield Foundation was established by Lord Nuffield in 1943 for a variety of
social, charitable and other purposes. Prominent among the foundation’s many activities
are the promotion of medical, scientific and social research.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
21 I
Industrial
Research
Research
Stations
the late Lord Nuffield personally and Manchester University, the last having
been responsible for its development.
Following a scheme already in operation in Scotland, a technical information
service for industry is being set up by the DSIR and the Department of
Education and Science. This will be based on Colleges of Advanced Tech-
nology and technical colleges and industrial liaison officers will spend part
of their time on teaching and other work in the colleges.
According to the report of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy (see
p. 204) total expenditure on research and development by the different
industrial sectors in 1961-62 (excluding establishments of less than 100
employees) was as follows (in ^ million): aircraft 140-6; electronics 49-9;
chemicals and allied industries 39-7; electrical engineering 36-2; mechanical
and marine engineering and shipbuilding 33-7; metal manufacture io-o;
motor vehicles, locomotives, etc., 9-8; scientific instruments 9-2; textiles,
leather, etc., 8-7; food, drink and tobacco 7-1; mineral oil refining 6-o;
construction 1-5; other manufacturing industries 13-5.
The greater part of industrial research in Britain is undertaken in the
research organisations of the larger firms. Industrial research organisations
vary widely between the largest firms employing over 4,000 qualified staff
and some employing very few; though the emphasis is on commercial develop¬
ment, some fundamental research is done. Other main agencies are
Government laboratories, universities and technical colleges, industrial
research associations, independent institutes for sponsored research and
consultant laboratories.
The DSIR operates many research institutions.
The Forest Products Research Laboratory at Princes Risborough, 36 miles
west of London, studies the mechanical, physical and chemical properties of
home-grown and imported timber. The Geological Survey and Museum has its
headquarters in South Kensington, London. The Hydraulics Research Station
at Wallingford, on the River Thames, studies problems of water flow in open
channels such as rivers, estuaries and harbours, and coastal erosion. The Joint
Fire Research Organisation, controlled jointly with the Fire Offices’ Com¬
mittee, is concerned with the detection, suppression, and inhibition of fires
and the safety of life in fires. The Laboratory of the Government Chemist in
London has a statutory function as official analyst and as an adjudicator in
cases of disputed analyses and also carries out analytical research and advisory
work for Government departments on request. The National Chemical
Laboratory at Teddington, near London, concentrates on basic chemical
research applicable to a wide variety of industries which is not being done
elsewhere. The National Engineering Laboratory at East Kilbride, south of
Glasgow, carries out basic and applied research in mechanical engineering
to provide industry with information required to solve its own particular
problems and has unique facilities for making precision engineering measure¬
ments and testing hydraulic machinery and heat exchange plant. The National
Physical Laboratory at Teddington conducts research in various branches of
non-nuclear physics and maintains British primary standards and physical
units. The Radio Research Station at Slough, west of London, carries out
research on radio wave propagation and radio noise, taking advantage, in
particular, of the new techniques provided by rockets and artificial satellites,
and its space research programme also includes a tracking and prediction
service and the maintenance of one of the World Data Centres for space
212
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
Associations
Public
Corporations
research. The Tarry Research Station at Aberdeen (with a branch laboratory
at Hull) investigates problems arising in the handling, processing, and trans¬
port and storage of fish. The Tropical Products Institute in London aims at
improving the economical viability of the less-developed countries of the
tropics, especially those within the Commonwealth, by research into new' uses
for tropical plant and animal products. The Warren Spring Laboratory near
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, provides facilities for research and development,
including pilot-scale work on subjects of national importance which cannot
be fitted into the programme of other organisations, undertakes sponsored
research and can accommodate teams from industry. The Water Pollution
Research Labroatory at Stevenage is concerned with the safe disposal of sewage
and trade effluents and with the purity of water supplies. The Road Research
Laboratory at Harmondsworth, west of London, does research on road
construction, safety and traffic flow (see p. 370). The Building Research
Station near Watford, Hertfordshire, is concerned with the techniques
of building design and construction, and the organisation, productivity, and
economics of building work.
The scheme by which the Government gives financial help to groups of firms
with similar interests to form organisations known as research associations,
to carry out industrial research co-operatively, was started in 1951 and is
operated by DSIR. At the end of 1963 there were 53 such associations with a
combined income of £9-6 million (compared with £5-1 million in 1955), of
which a little less than a quarter was contributed by the Government, advised
by DSIR’s Industrial Grants Committee. Suitably specialised associations are
now available for over 60 per cent of British industry, varying in size from the
British Iron and Steel Research Association (BISRA) with an annual income of
over £1 million, of which £136,000 is provided by DSIR grant, to the British
Brush Manufacturers Research Association with an income of only £13,600.
The largest are those dealing with the metals and electrical engineering
industries, coal utilisation, cotton and man-made fibres, production
engineering, civil engineering, marine engineering and shipbuilding.
(Particulars of these and other associations are given in the relevant sections of
Chapter 11, Industry.) The amounts of the Government grants are related
to the contributions made by the industries concerned.
The research associations are autonomous bodies governed by their own
councils, the members of which are mostly representatives of industry,
although DSIR is also represented. The councils are advised in preparing
research programmes, for which they have complete responsibility, by
research committees representative of their industrial members, often with the
addition of university or Government scientists. DSIR appoints two Visitors
for each association: normally, one is a scientist and the other an industrialist—
both of some eminence. A growing number of the research associations admit
to membership Commonwealth and foreign manufacturers. The associations
make the results of their work known to member firms by a variety of methods,
among which are bulletins, technical reports, lectures, films, training classes,
exhibitions and mobile demonstration units.
Some of the public corporations which run the nationalised industries have
their own research organisations (see Chapter 11), in particular those con¬
cerned with fuel and power: the National Coal Board, the Central Electricity
Generating Board, the Gas Council. They also give support to organisations
concerned with research on matters of interest to them.
Private
Institutes for
Sponsored
Research
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 213
A number of institutes for sponsored research have been established to
extend the facilities for private research for industrial firms by studying
problems which are not within the scope of the average industrial laboratory.
In these institutes research organised by private firms can be carried out
confidentially, so that the results remain the property of the sponsor.
Among institutes of this type are: Fulmer Research Institute, Stoke
Poges, Buckinghamshire, which concentrates on metallurgy and allied
subjects; Sondes Place Research Institute, Dorking, Surrey, which is con¬
cerned mainly with chemistry, chemical engineering and mechanical
enginering; Arthur D. Little Research Institute, Musselburgh, near Edinburgh,
a British institute working in close collaboration with a well-known American
institute of the same name; the International Research and Development
Company at Heaton, Newcastle upon Tyne; and the United Power Companv
at Heston, near London.
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Medical
Research
Council
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the
research funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act of 1911.
In 1920 the committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council
(MRC), established under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-in-aid
provided by Parliament.
In addition to financing the Medical Research Council, the Government
gives substantial support to medical research particularly in the basic sciences,
through block grants to universities distributed through the University Grants
Committee, and to clinical research through the National Health Service.
Important contributions to the support of research are made in addition
by private charities or fund raising organisations, of which the Nuffield
Foundation and the British Empire Cancer Campaign are the largest, and
by the pharmaceutical industry.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is responsible to the Committee of the
Privy Council for Medical Research, of which the Secretary of State for Educa¬
tion and Science is chairman and the Secretaries of State for the Home
Department, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations and the Colonies and the
Ministers of Health and of Labour are members.
The members of the council, appointed by the Committee of the Privy
Council for Medical Research for a period of four years, are twelve in number.
Nine members, representing different branches of medical knowledge and the
fundamental sciences on which these are based, are appointed after consulta¬
tion with the President of the Royal Society and with the council itself: on
retirement, these scientific members are not eligible for immediate reappoint¬
ment. There are three lay members of the council, one of whom must be a
member of the House of Lords and one a member of the House of
Commons.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote research into all aspects of health
and disease. In planning and carrying out its research programme, the council
is assisted by special committees appointed to advise on particular subjects.
Its arrangements for the support of research fall under four main headings:
(1) investigations by members of the council’s scientific staff, mostly working
in its own research establishments; (2) temporary research grants to indepen¬
dent investigators in universities and elsewhere; (3) long-term research grants
in support of specific research programmes in university medical departments
(‘research groups’); and (4) research fellowships and scholarships for tenure
both at home and abroad.
214
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
Agricultural
Research
Council
The National Institute for Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead,
London, is the council’s main research establishment; in addition, there are
about 80 smaller establishments, generally known as research units, which
are attached in most cases to universities and hospitals in the United Kingdom.
The council also undertakes work overseas and, with additional support
from funds made available through the Department of Technical Co¬
operation, maintains laboratories in the Gambia and units in Uganda and
Jamaica.
Agricultural research in its early days was not centrally organised. The first
research institutes were founded and initially maintained by private indi¬
viduals. Rothamsted Experimental Station, for example, the oldest of them,
was founded in 1843 by Sir John Lawes, who personally financed it until,
in 1889, he endowed it and set up the Lawes Agricultural Trust to administer
the endowment; as research became more costly Government funds were
sought and obtained, though the institute remained independent. The
Development Commission, set up under the Development and Road Improve¬
ment Funds Act, 1909, recommended that financial aid should be made
available from the Development Fund to ‘aid and develop agriculture and
rural industries by promoting scientific research’ and in 1911 this fund was
used to promote a scheme which led to the establishment of many of the
present-day agricultural institutions. In 1931 the Agricultural Research
Council (ARC) was established by Royal Charter to be responsible for the
general organisation and development of agricultural research in Great
Britain. In addition to advising the agricultural departments on the pro¬
grammes of the institutes and, in the early stages, acting as scientific adviser
to the Development Commission, the ARC was given funds to spend at its
own discretion and it gradually took over the Commission’s responsibilities
for agricultural research.
Agricultural research is carried out in universities and colleges, by the
Agricultural Research Council and the Government Agricultural Depart¬
ments, and by private industry.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) is responsible to the Committee
of the Privy Council for Agricultural Research for the organisation and
development of agricultural research and for research on food other than fish.
The Council consists of 15 to 18 members, including the Chief Veterinary
Officer and the Chief Scientific Adviser of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and two officials nominated by the Ministry and the
Scottish Department of Agriculture and Fisheries respectively. Others are
appointed by the Committee of the Privy Council, five for their general experi¬
ence of agriculture and the remaining members, after consultation with the
President of the Royal Society, by reason of their qualifications in one or other
of the sciences relating to agriculture.
The Council co-ordinates and approves the programmes of 31 research
institutes, including three laboratories concerned with the preservation,
storage and protection of foodstuffs; 21 are in England and Wales and ten in
Scotland. It controls the Pirbright Laboratory which is a world reference
laboratory for foot and mouth disease viruses.
The council makes grants to universities and other recognised research
institutions for special investigations, and awards research fellowships and
postgraduate studentships in agricultural and veterinary science, agricultural
and dairy engineering and agricultural statistics.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The
Government
Agricultural
Departments
NUCLEAR
ENERGY
215
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food carries out applied research
in its own veterinary laboratories at Weybridge, Surrey, and at Lasswade,
Midlothian, and also at its plant pathology laboratory at Harpenden, Hertford¬
shire; while at its infestation control laboratory at Tolworth, Surrey (with a
field station at Worplesdon), it co-ordinates work on the control of insect
pests of stored food and conducts research on the control of harmful mammals
and birds. The Central Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge has been
appointed by the World Health Organisation (WHO) as the third international
laboratory for biological students. In Northern Ireland the Ministry of
Agriculture is responsible for the promotion of agricultural research and
research divisions dealing with a variety of aspects have been established.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food maintains four labora¬
tories for marine, shell-fish and salmon and freshwater fisheries research, and
four research vessels. The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for
Scotland maintains a marine research laboratory and four research ships at
Aberdeen, and a freshwater research laboratory at Pitlochry.
With the guidance of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food), the Food Science
and Plant Health Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
is responsible for formulating the Ministry’s general policy on the acquisition
and dissemination of scientific and technical information about food and the
food handling and processing industry; for furnishing scientific advice to the
other divisions of the Ministry; and for sponsoring or carrying out experi¬
mental work. The division has its own experimental laboratories and kitchens
in London. The Food Research Advisory Committee, appointed by the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for
Scotland, advises on food problems requiring investigation or research which
should be undertaken with the aid of public funds.
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to
silvicultural and allied problems (see p. 351)- By means of grants, it also aids
forest research work undertaken by various universities and other institutions,
including the Imperial Forestry Institute, Oxford.
The Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), set up under the Atomic Energy
Authority Act, 1954, is responsible for research and development in nuclear
energy. It is now answerable to the Secretary of State for Education and
Science.
The Minister of Aviation is responsible for the development and production
of nuclear weapons for the Services in accordance with agreed defence policy;
in practice, however, the Atomic Energy Authority produces the explosive
nuclear material and assemblies for nuclear weapons under contract and
carries out weapon research. Prototypes of new types of nuclear power
stations may be built and operated by the AEA, which also designs and
produces all fuel elements. The Minister of Transport and the Secretary of
State for Defence are concerned, in close collaboration with the AEA, in
the development of nuclear power for marine propulsion, and a small working
group, responsible jointly to the Secretary of State for Education and Science
and the Minister of Transport, has been set up to advise on the programme of
research into economic nuclear propulsion for merchant ships. The Authority
collaborates with a number of other Government departments—the Ministries
of Health, Labour, Housing and Local Government, Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, and Transport, the Post Office, the Scottish Office, and the Home
Office—on various aspects of health and safety in relation to atomic energy.
Expert advice on radiation hazards is provided by the Medical and
H
2l6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Atomic
Energy
Authority
Agricultural Research Councils and by the Radioactive Substances Advisory
Committee. This committee advises ministers on the administration of the
Radioactive Substances Acts which deal with the precautions necessary in
the use of radioactive substances and apparatus producing radiation. There
is collaboration between the AEA, the Radiobiological Protection Service and
the Government departments concerned in various aspects of health and
safety in relation to atomic energy.
The Atomic Energy Authority, appointed by the Secretary of State for
Education and Science, at present consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman
and ten other members, six of whom are part-time.
The Authority, like other statutory public corporations, is free from day-
to-day Government control (subject to the power given to the responsible
minister to issue directions to the Authority in matters of overriding national
importance), but differs from them in that most of its revenue is derived from
money voted by Parliament, although income from other sources, such as the
sale of radioisotopes and fuel elements, is increasing.
The organisation has a London office, responsible for central financial and
administrative matters and for procuring raw materials. Its establishments
are divided into five groups.
The Research Group's principal establishment is the Atomic Energy
Research Establishment (AERE) at Harwell. Others are the Radiochemical
Centre at Amersham, responsible for the processing and sale of radio¬
isotopes, the Wantage Research Laboratory, which does research into new
and improved uses of radioisotopes and a controlled thermonuclear research
establishment at Culham. Harwell also runs an isotope school at Wantage,
and a reactor school, which provide training for home and overseas students.
The Weapons Group, centred on Aldermaston, conducts research on and
development of nuclear weapons and other research work with civil, as well
as defence, applications. It has outstations at Foulness and Orfordness in
eastern England, and Woolwich Common, London.
There are three groups with headquarters at Risley, in north-western
England. The Reactor Group works on the design and development of
reactors. It is responsible for the prototype Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor
(AGR) at Windscale, now in operation. The Group includes the Atomic
Energy Establishment at Winfrith, Dorset, which houses among other things
high-temperature gas-cooled reactor experiments such as Zenith and the
Dragon project, the latter a 20 MW reactor financed jointly by a number of
member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), including members of the European Atomic Energy
Community (EURATOM). A prototype steam generating heavy water
reactor is also being built at Winfrith. The Reactor Group also includes
the Dounreay experimental reactor establishment in the north of Scotland,
which houses a materials-testing reactor and a fast-breeder reactor. The
latter has achieved the highest power output of any of its type in the world.
The Group has research laboratories at the main establishments of the
Production Group, which is responsible for the operation of factories pro¬
ducing fissile material at Windscale (Cumberland), Capenhurst (Cheshire) and
Springfields (Lancashire) and the AEA’s nuclear power plants at Calder Hall
(Cumberland) and Chapelcross (Dumfries) and Calder Operations School.
The third group with headquarters at Risley is the Engineering Group, respon¬
sible for the construction of plant, works and buildings, and for the design and
inspection of fuel elements for production purposes.
National
Institute for
Research in
Nuclear Science
SPACE RESEARCH
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 2iy
In 1957 the Government set up a National Institute for Research in Nuclear
Science (NIRNS), which provides, for common use by universities and
others, facilities and equipment which are beyond the scope of individual
universities and institutions carrying out research in nuclear energy. The
Rutherford High Energy Laboratory at Harwell houses the institute’s
proton synchrotron (particle accelerator). This 7,000 million electron volt
(MeV) apparatus, completed in 1963, is one of the largest such machines in
the world. A second laboratory to house a 4,000 MeV synchrotron is to be built
at Danesbury, Cheshire. The NIRNS is also responsible for the manage¬
ment of a high speed ATLAS computer for use by universities, the AEA,
Government departments and the NIRNS itself.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science, in consultation with other
ministers, is responsible for sponsoring and co-ordinating Britain’s space
research programme. He is advised by a Steering Group on Space Research,
representing Government departments and university scientists and they, in
turn, are advised on the programme’s purely scientific aspects by the British
National Committee on Space Research, which is appointed by the Royal
Society. This committee is also the United Kingdom body adhering to non¬
governmental international scientific groups. The execution of the programme,
under the general supervision and management of the Department of Education
and Science, is in the hands of scientists in universities and Government
research establishments. They prepare experiments to be flown in rockets
(mainly British Skylarks fired from Woomera in Australia) and satellites. Of
these, Ariel I and II were built and launched for Britain by the United States
but Ariel III is being built by British industry. The DSIR is responsible for
channelling and administering grants to universities provided from Govern¬
ment funds. Private industry is also developing equipment and materials
needed in space research. Identifiable Government expenditure on the
scientific space research programme is at present some £2 million a year.
Because of the enormous cost involved, only the United States and the
Soviet Union at present possess rockets capable of launching artificial earth
satellites, space probes or manned space vehicles. Two organisations in which
Britain is playing a leading part are, however, being set up to give European
countries the opportunity to participate more fully in space research and
technology—the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO) and the
European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO), the conventions for
which have now entered into force. The first stage of the planned ELDO
satellite launcher will be provided by the British Blue Streak rocket which
had its first live firing in 1964 from the Woomera range (see p. 115). DSIR
makes the 25 per cent contribution due from the United Kingdom to ESRO.
The satellite prediction centre at Slough, attached to DSIR’s Radio
Research Station, also the home of one of the three World Data Centres for
space research, co-ordinates optical and radio tracking activities in Britain.
Optical observation of satellites is carried out regularly by many individual
observers in the British Isles and by the Royal Edinburgh Observatory’s
outstation (see p. 218); radio tracking is undertaken at the Radio Research
Station itself and by the radio telescopes at Cambridge, Jodrell Bank and
the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern.
The Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough is carrying out a
programme of basic satellite technology and has undertaken a design study
for a communications satellite.
The General Post Office undertakes research work connected with
2l8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OPTICAL AND
RADIO
ASTRONOMY
NATURE
CONSERVANCY
OTHER
RESEARCH
experiments in satellite communications. It is co-operating with NASA and
the French telecommunication authorities in a programme for transatlantic
testing of a succession of satellite communication systems. The first, known
as Tehtar, was launched by NASA on 10th July, 1962.
Large optical telescopes were first constructed in Britain by Herschel and
Rosse in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. At present British optical
observatories are being extensively re-equipped. The Isaac Newton 98-inch
telescope, being constructed for the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herst-
monceux, will provide additional facilities for optical astronomers in Britain;
and grants to the Radcliffe Observatory in South Africa, with its existing
74-inch telescope, and the merger of the Royal Observatory, Cape Town,
and the Royal Greenwich Observatory will enable astronomers to have
improved use of large optical telescopes in both hemispheres. The Royal
Edinburgh Observatory has been re-equipped with modern instrumentation
for use in stellar spectroscopy and photometry.
Radio astronomy, developed since 1931, is carried out mainly at Cambridge,
Jodrell Bank and Malvern. Two large radio telescopes at the Mullard Radio
Astronomy Observatory, Cambridge University, were completed in 1957 and
have made important contributions towards the testing of the various
cosmological theories. The DSIR has made a grant of £534,200 for a new
triple paraboloidal radio telescope at Cambridge. At the Nuffield Radio
Astronomy Laboratories of the University of Manchester at Jodrell Bank,
there is a fully steerable paraboloid radio telescope of 250 feet diameter
which has performed outstanding work since it started in 1957. The DSIR
has made a grant of £301,000 for a new fully steerable radio telescope on
this site; and one of £139,000 for a transportable radio telescope to be used
as an interferometer with the 250 ft. telescope. There is also a new radio
telescope interferometer at the Ministry of Aviation’s Royal Radar Establish¬
ment near Malvern.
A Radio Astronomy Planning Committee, set up in December 1961 to advise
on the nature and extent of Britain’s radio astronomy research programme
both nationally and internationally, is now responsible to the Secretary of
State for Education and Science.
The Nature Conservancy was set up in 1949 and is responsible to the Privy
Council Committee for Nature Conservation. Its functions are to provide
scientific advice on the conservation and control of the natural flora and fauna
of Great Britain; to establish, maintain and manage nature reserves in Great
Britain, including the maintenance of physical features of scientific interest;
and to organise and develop the research and scientific service related thereto.
Research stations have been set up at Merlewood, Grange-over-Sands, in
Lancashire; at Furzebrook, Wareham, in Dorset; at Bangor, Wales; and at
Speyside, Inverness. There are field stations at Moor House, Westmorland,
and at Anancaun, Ross, and an experimental station at Monks’ Wood,
Huntingdon; at these long-term ecological research is undertaken into such
problems as the relation of vegetation to soils and climates, peat growth, effects
of grazing and of moor burning, coastal erosion and roadside spraying. Grants
are made for research, and the Nature Conservancy awards annually a number
of postgraduate studentships.
Among other research agencies may be mentioned the zoological societies
and scientific museums.
Zoological
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
APPLICATIONS
OF RESULTS OF
RESEARCH
Libraries
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 2ig
Zoological research is among the activities of the world-famous Zoological
Gardens, extending over 34 acres in Regent’s Park, London, which were
opened by the Zoological Society of London in 1828. A natural zoo of 500 acres
was opened in 1931 at Whipsnade, in Bedfordshire, by the Society. There
are other well-known zoos at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester and Dudley, and a
small, private, natural zoo at Chessington, Surrey.
The British Museum (Natural History) is the principal centre in the
Commonwealth for the general study of natural history; it has extensive
collections of extant and fossil animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and
meteorites. The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and
applied science in all countries, but chiefly in Britain, which has always held
a leading place in engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics,
and in the development of industrial machinery and processes, all of which
are represented in the museum’s collections. The geology of Britain is known
in more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and the
Geological Survey, responsible for this work, has an outstanding collection of
exhibits in its Geological Museum. These three museums are in South
Kensington, London.
Important collections outside London are the Museum of Science and
Industry, in Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of Science, at
Oxford.
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and
to ultimate users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume
of information has grown. The traditional method of scientific publication,
in which results are written up into papers and published in journals, is still the
main means of communication among scientists. The leading learned societies
have for long been important agencies for communicating scientific information.
Both the DSIR and the AEA devote considerable sums to information
services. Besides its own publications and services, DSIR gives financial
support to ASLIB (the Association of Special Libraries and Information
Bureaux), which runs a technical information department and maintains a
panel of translators and a Commonwealth Index of Translations covering
scientific subjects. The National Lending Library for Science and Technology
(NLL), set up by the DSIR at Boston Spa, Yorkshire, has been in full
operation since 1962. It covers all subjects in science and technology, and to
some extent medicine, and is also responsible for increasing the number of
translations of foreign (especially of Russian and Chinese) scientific literature,
in which work it collaborates with the National Science Foundation of the
United States.
Besides information services provided by its various groups, the AEA has
an information centre and an isotope information bureau at its London head¬
quarters.
In agriculture, the Commonwealth Agricultural Institutes and Bureaux
provide abstracts and an information service in various branches of agricultural
science. The ARC publishes an Index of Agricultural Research in Progress,
and gives an account of current developments in its annual reports. The
advisory services of the agricultural departments bring research results directly
to the farmer.
Medical research results are communicated mainly through journals and
periodicals; but the MRC issues special reports and includes special articles
in its annual reports.
220
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Agencies
National Research
Development
Corporation
Technical
Development
Capital Limited
OVERSEAS
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
A national Reference Library for Science and Invention is being formed,
based on the Patent Office Library; it will be part of the British Museum
Library. Work on a new building began early in 1964 and should be finished
by mid-1967.
Several agencies assist in the commercial development and spread the use
of new inventions.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) was set up by
the Board of Trade in 1949 under the Development of Inventions Act, 1948.
Its primary function is to develop and exploit, in the public interest, inventions
resulting from research carried out by Government departments and other
public bodies. It may also develop and exploit an invention from any other
source where, in the Corporation’s view, the public interest requires it.
Under the Development of Inventions Act, 1954, the NRDC may promote or
assist research to meet specific practical requirements, or may assist the
continuation of research which may lead to inventions of practical importance.
It is an independent body, subject only to general direction by the Board of
Trade, with powers to borrow from Government funds to a total of £10
million up to 1968. Projects sponsored by the Corporation include, among
many others, such varied items as electronic digital computers, towed flexible
barges (known as dracones), interferon (an anti-viral agent), selective weed¬
killers, a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell as a transportable source of electricity
and a group of new antibiotics called cephalosporins. The Corporation
has a substantial annual income from the exploitation of inventions. In
the case of Hovercraft the NRDC has participated not only in the early
research but in the subsequent activities of Hovercraft Development Limited.
A private financial institution, Technical Development Capital Limited,
was formed in January 1962 to help to bring technical developments to the
profitable stage. It has a capital of fz million, raised from insurance com¬
panies, merchant banks and other institutions in Britain, Canada and
Australia.
Britain plays a considerable part in overseas scientific collaboration, including
the exchange of scientific information. In areas of non-governmental collabora¬
tion, under the aegis of the International Council of Scientific Unions,
the primary representative of the United Kingdom is the Royal
Society.
The Government is concerned with inter-governmental organisations:
these include specialised agencies of the United Nations (the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), the World
Health Organisation (WHO) and the Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission); the organisa¬
tions concerned with nuclear energy (the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and the European Nuclear Energy Agency); and space research. There are
agreements between the United Kingdom AEA and other atomic energy
authorities, including that of the Soviet Union (and there are permanent
representatives of the United States Atomic Energy Commission in London
and of the United Kingdom AEA in Washington). In addition, there are inter¬
governmental agreements with EURATOM, and bilateral agreements with
other countries.
Britain is also represented on the Committee for Scientific and Technical
Personnel and on the Committee for Scientific Research of the OECD.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
221
British
Commonwealth
Scientific
Committee
The British
Commonwealth
Scientific Offices
Commonwealth
Agricultural
Bureaux
The Standing
Committee on
Overseas
Scientific
Relations
Department of
Technical
Co-operation
The British Commonwealth Scientific Committee (BCSC) consisting of the
heads of the national research organisations of Commonwealth countries,
formed in 1958 from the previous Standing Committee set up in 1946, meets
biennially. Operating under the BCSC are: the British Commonwealth
Scientific Offices and the various specialist committees on fuel research,
mineral resources and geology (including a Commonwealth Geological
Liaison Office), mineral processing and the collection of micro-organisms.
The secretariat for the Committee is provided by the British Commonwealth
Scientific Offices.
A British Commonwealth Scientific Conference held in 1946 recommended
the continuance and extension of the scientific collaboration of the war years
by the creation of the British Commonwealth Scientific Offices (London),
a group consisting of the Scientific Liaison Offices of the various Common¬
wealth countries together with the Overseas Liaison Group of the DSIR.
The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux comprise three Institutes and ten
Bureaux, all of which except one bureau are in Britain and each of which is
concerned with a particular branch of agricultural science. Their purpose is
to act as clearing houses for the interchange of information of value to research
workers in agricultural science throughout the Commonwealth. This they
achieve by scanning and indexing journals of scientific repute in all languages,
by keeping in touch with agricultural research in progress and by the dis¬
semination of this information by the periodic issue of Abstract Journals.
Fifteen Abstract Journals are published periodically and have a combined
annual circulation of about 22,500 copies. A list of research workers in agri¬
culture, animal health and forestry in the Commonwealth is published from
time to time, and this list includes an indication of topics under investigation
by the individual workers concerned. The Bureaux also issue monographs
on their own particular subjects and deal with inquiries received from
research workers in all parts of the Commonwealth. In addition, the Institutes
provide taxonomic and identification services.
The Standing Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations is a committee of
the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy which was set up after the second
world war to consider and advise on Government policy on overseas scientific
relations. It was reconstituted in 1958 as a small committee concerned
primarily with questions of policy and scientific co-operation. The chairman
of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy acts as its chairman, and its
secretariat is provided by the Department of Education and Science.
One of the main aims of the Department of Technical Co-operation (DTC)
is the promotion of scientific research in the interests of developing countries.
The aid given covers specialist advice from Britain, advisory visits, confer¬
ences for exchange of information, training scientists from overseas in
universities and research institutions in Britain, recruiting scientific staff from
Britain, and providing support for existing research services overseas, for
example, in East Africa and the Caribbean. The Department works with the
many specialist bodies concerned, particularly the research councils and DSIR.
It administers and supports the wrork of, for example, the Anti-Locust Research
Centre in London, internationally recognised as a world centre for locust
research since 1931.
222
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
The aims of the British Council in the sciences (including agriculture, medicine
and technology) are to foster co-operation between British scientists and
scientists of other countries, and to promote among overseas specialists a
better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific achievements.
In co-operation between scientists emphasis is placed on the interchange
of scientists between Britain and other countries. Overseas tours and advisory
visits by British specialists are arranged and scientists recruited for overseas
posts. In the other direction the Council invites senior specialists to Britain
for visits and discussions with British experts, and makes awards to post¬
graduate students; it also administers the programmes of a large number of
senior specialists and students who travel to Britain under the auspices of the
UN specialised agencies, or under various bilateral technical assistance
schemes, or as private individuals. A number of high-level scientific short
courses are organised each year for overseas specialists. The Council is also
responsible for administering travel grants awarded under the Foreign and
Commonwealth University Interchange Schemes.
Information on Britain’s scientific achievements is provided either through
the Council’s overseas libraries or direct from the London headquarters
which includes specialist departments (and libraries) for medicine and science.
Material published or compiled by these London departments includes
British Medical Bulletin, British Medical Booklist, the universities section of
Scientific Research in British Universities and Colleges (see Bibliography), and
publications listing certain British training facilities.
THE PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
This section describes the assistance and encouragement given to the arts
by the Government, local authorities, voluntary societies and other
organisations.
There is no equivalent to a Ministry of Fine Arts to formulate and administer
policy in the arts. Government interest is expressed mainly through the
provision of grants to the Arts Council, the British Council (see footnote on
p. 173), the British Film Institute, the Council of Industrial Design and other
organisations, and also to museums and art galleries. Bodies such as the
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries and the Royal Fine Arts
Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland act in an advisory
capacity in their respective spheres.
Government expenditure on the arts is now over £13! million a year. Of
this total, over £6^ million is the cost of upkeep of the national art collections,
over million the amount of the grant to the Arts Council, and about
£2 million is expenditure on preserving historic houses and their contents.
Municipalities also play their part in sustaining the arts. Under the Local
Government Act of 1948 they may use part of their revenue from rates
(see p. 75) for this purpose; they also have powers which permit capital
expenditure on new buildings for the arts, and can make grants to schools
of art, music and drama. As a rule local councils refrain from actual manage¬
ment of orchestras and theatre companies (usually having a representative on
the governing boards or trusts concerned), but they often provide the arenas
for the performance of music or drama.
Unofficial institutions concerned with promotion of the arts include many
charitable trusts and foundations, among them the Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust, the Pilgrim Trust, the United Kingdom branch of the Calouste
Gulbenkian Foundation, and a large number of other organisations concerned
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
223
with separate aspects of the arts; examples are mentioned later in this chapter.
Industrial patronage, including support from television companies, has
increased considerably in recent years.
The Arts Council of Great Britain was established under a Royal Charter
in 1946. It consists of not more than 16 honorary members appointed by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in consultation with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science and the Secretary of State for Scotland. Its main duties
are to develop a greater knowledge and understanding of the fine arts by the
public, to improve the standard of execution and to advise and co-operate with
Government departments, local authorities and other organisations on matters
connected with these aims.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland consists of a president and vice-
president, four members nominated by the Ministry of Education for
Northern Ireland, four by the Senate of Queen’s University and one elected
by the Association of the Council. It receives a grant from the Northern
Ireland Government of ^35,000, plus up to a maximum of £10,500 on a
£ for £ basis on contributions from local authorities.
The Carnegie United Kingdom Trust was founded in 1913 by the late
Andrew Carnegie and incorporated under Royal Charter in 1917. The trust,
initially founded for ‘the improvement of the well-being of the masses of the
people of Great Britain and Ireland’, consists of 23 life trustees, six trustees
nominated by the Corporation of Dunfermline and three trustees nominated
by the Fife County Council. Its cultural policies include the support of adult
amateur activities in music, drama and the visual arts. It also assists non¬
national museums. Grants totalling nearly £22,800 were made for these
purposes during 1963.
The Pilgrim Trust which was founded in 1930 by the late Edward Stephen
Harkness, an American citizen, has an income of about £220,000 a year and
is administered by a body of trustees empowered to make grants towards any
legally charitable object within the United Kingdom. In fact, the greater
part of the trust’s income is at present being used to help to preserve the
nation’s heritage of architecture and history, and for the advancement of
learning and the arts. The grants made for these objects during 1963 amounted
to £192,000.
The Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon was established in 1955
under the will of the late Calouste Gulbenkian. A United Kingdom branch
is concerned with the Foundation’s activities in Britain and other Common¬
wealth countries. During 1963 the Foundation made grants totalling over
£145,500 for the arts in Britain, and continued to implement the policy
proposed in the report, Help for the Arts, prepared for the Foundation in 1959
by a private committee under the chairmanship of Lord Bridges.
The arts benefit most when the patrons—central and local government,
voluntary bodies, industry, the universities and individuals—combine. The
most outstanding example is the Edinburgh Festival Society; other Arts
Festivals which have developed a similar basis of responsibility are those of
Bath, Cheltenham, King’s Lynn, Leeds, Norwich and York. A notable
example in regional co-operation in arts patronage has been set by the
North Eastern Association for the Arts: it combines representatives of local
councils, chambers of commerce, Tyne-Tees Television Ltd., universities,
industrial firms and trade unions.
A Commonwealth Festival of the Arts is to be celebrated simultaneously in
London and certain other centres in 1965.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
224
VISUAL ARTS
A number of modern British painters and sculptors now have a high inter¬
national reputation; they have received international prizes and commissions
for major works in foreign cities. The growth of interest in the visual arts
at home has been stimulated by an increasingly lively attitude towards display
on the part of museums and galleries, and by exhibition programmes and
the varied activities of many institutions, societies and private galleries.
While it would be untrue to say that there is a general appreciation of
contemporary art, interest and curiosity are growing. The art schools are
full and young artists now find it easier to exhibit and sell their work.
Painting and sculpture receive State support by grants to national institu¬
tions and, indirectly, through grants made to the Arts Council, to municipal
art galleries and museums, and to local education authorities for art schools
and other means of promoting education in art.
In the year ending on 31st March, 1964, the Arts Council arranged
67 separate art exhibitions in Great Britain; 353 showings of these exhibitions
were given in 130 different centres. The Arts Council of Northern Ireland
arranged 19 exhibitions in Belfast, of which five toured different centres.
Knowledge of Britain’s fine arts is fostered overseas by the British Council
by means of exhibitions, dissemination of reproductions and photographs,
lectures, and provision of information and advice to inquirers abroad and to
visitors in Britain. In the same year 47 fine art exhibitions organised by the
Council were shown in 47 countries. The Council was also responsible for
British participation in five international exhibitions. Since 1948, 49 inter¬
national awards have been won by British artists.
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
There are nearly 900 museums and art galleries open to the public in Britain,
though many are only small collections.
The national museums and art galleries in London probably contain
between them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic,
archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest ever to exist within
one city. The British Museum has unparalleled collections of archaeological
and ethnographical material in addition to housing the national library of
printed books, manuscripts, newspapers and periodicals; its Department of
Prints and Drawings also possesses collections of the widest extent and
richness. The British Museum (Natural History)1 was given a separate
constitution in 1963. The Victoria and Albert Museum contains works of fine
and applied art of all countries and periods, arranged mainly according to
material, though primary collections have been arranged to bring together,
by style, period or nationality, masterpieces of all the arts. The National
Gallery houses paintings by almost all the greatest European masters. The
Tate Gallery embodies two collections: the British school from the eighteenth
century onwards, with a few earlier works, and modern foreign schools
(since 1850). Both sections include modern sculpture. Frequent loan exhi¬
bitions are held in the Tate Gallery.
Other important collections in London are at the National Portrait Gallery,
the Imperial War Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the Public
Record Office Museum, which contains Domesday Book and other famous
historical documents, the Guildhall Museum and the London Museum (to be
amalgamated into the Museum of London, with one collection illustrating
the history and archaeology of the capital, which will be housed in the
City), and the Wallace Collection (furniture, armour, objets d'art and paintings,
1 For information on the scientific museums, see page 219.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Scotland, Wales
and Northern
Ireland
Standing
Commission
Other Collections
Area Councils
225
mainly French works of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries). In 1962
a small but important art gallery was opened in Buckingham Palace for
exhibitions of pictures from the extensive Royal collections.
The Department of Education and Science is responsible for the administra¬
tion of the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Science Museum. The other
national collections are run by trustee bodies. All are financed from Govern¬
ment funds. Besides meeting the administrative costs, this finance makes
provision for annual purchase grants, which have risen from ^125,000 in
I95^_59 to nearly £800,000 in 1964-65. The Government may also provide
special ad hoc purchase grants. The collections may also receive certain
pre-eminent works of art acquired by the Treasury in lieu of estate duty.
The buildings are maintained by the Ministry of Public Building and
Works.
There are six national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the National Gallery of Scotland,
the Royal Scottish Museum, the National Portrait Gallery of Scotland, the
Scottish United Services Museum, and the Scottish National Gallery of
Modern Art. The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at
St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed. The Ulster Folk
Museum is sited close to Belfast. The Ulster Museum has been transferred to
national control and is administered by a statutory body receiving financial aid
from the Government of Northern Ireland. In addition, a small Belfast gallery
under the control of the Arts Council of Northern Ireland promotes exhibitions
by contemporary painters and craftsmen.
The Government is advised on questions relating to the development of
the national institutions as a whole, and their co-operation with provincial
institutions, by the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries, set up
in 1931. The Standing Commission publishes periodic reports.
Almost every city and large town has a museum devoted to art, archaeology
and natural history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes
by a local learned society or privately by individuals or trustees to whom some
wealthy collector in the past has bequeathed his treasures. Both Oxford and
Cambridge are rich in museums, mostly associated with the universities—the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, is the oldest in the country
and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge has fine art galleries and a notable
collection of engravings, manuscripts and books bequeathed by its founder
on his death in 1861. Other universities have notable collections, primarily
for teaching purposes but also open to the public. There are also important
museums and art galleries in Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester,
Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Southampton, and York and in Armagh
City, Northern Ireland. The Herbert Art Gallery and Museum at Coventry,
the first major art gallery to be built in the provinces since 1939, was opened
in i960. In recent years there has been a notable development of ‘period-house
museums’, for which outstanding private residences of former times have been
taken over by national and municipal authorities, as at Temple Newsam
(Leeds), Aston Hall (Birmingham), and the Royal Pavilion (Brighton).
Private art collections are to be seen in the historic family mansions (including
many in the ownership of the National Trust) which are now open to the
public at certain times.
Ih 1959 the first area museum council in England was inaugurated for the
south-west, and a similar organisation for the Midlands was started in 1961.
There are now area councils which cover the whole country; their aim is
226
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sources of Finance
Museums
Association
Exhibitions
Art Education
to promote closer co-operation between museums and art galleries in the
region, to improve technical facilities, and to provide financial assistance. In
1963, following a recommendation by the Standing Commission, financial
help from the Government was announced.
The Carnegie United Kingdom Trust has done much to encourage the
growth of the museum movement during the past thirty years, and at
present spends an average of £10,000 a year for this purpose. The Victoria
and Albert Museum also administers an annual Government grant of
£50,000 to help local museums and art galleries to buy works of art for their
collections.
The Museums Association is an independent organisation to which
museums and art galleries and their staffs throughout the country belong;
there are also many overseas members. The Association serves as a central
body for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating
to museum administration, and as a training and examining body for pro¬
fessional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions produced by the Arts Council, the Art Exhibitions
Bureau, and the Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum
are a regular feature of many museums.
The various national art exhibiting societies include the Royal Academy,
which holds summer exhibitions of works by members and non-members and
winter exhibitions usually devoted to national schools of painting or the art
of a particular period; the Royal Scottish Academy; the Society of Scottish
Artists; the Royal Society of British Artists; the Royal Society of Painters
in Water Colours; the Royal Society of Portrait Painters; the Artists’ Inter¬
national Association; the Women’s International Art Club; and the London
Group (all the foregoing are associations of professional painters); and the
Institute of Contemporary Arts. Some of these societies, notably the Royal
Academy at Burlington House, have their own galleries in London. In
Northern Ireland there are the Royal Ulster Academy of Arts, the Ulster
Society of Women Artists and the Ulster Arts Club. Among regional societies
are the Newlyn Society of Artists, the Midland Group of Artists (Nottingham),
the Birmingham Society of Artists and the Penwith Society of Arts, while
an increasing number of amateur art societies throughout the United Kingdom
hold local exhibitions and encourage local interest in the fine arts in various
ways. The Contemporary Art Society uses its members’ subscriptions to
buy modern works which it presents to public galleries.
Exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists are held throughout
the year in the galleries of the art dealers of London (largely in the Bond
Street area). The Whitechapel Art Gallery shows a series of important
exhibitions in the East End of London. The London County Council exhibits
modern sculpture in one of its parks every third year and is building an
exhibition gallery, due to be opened in 1966, on the south bank of the Thames.
John Moore’s exhibition, held in Liverpool every two years, is open to all
British painters and sculptors and sets a high professional standard; important
prizes are awarded. There are also exhibitions of children’s art, including the
National Exhibition of Children’s Art sponsored annually by the Sunday
Mirror.
Art Schools are of four main types: publicly supported schools, including
the Royal College of Art, London, for which the Department of Education
and Science is responsible, four Central Institutions administered by the
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Industrial
Design
227
Scottish Education Department, and the regional colleges and local art
schools and classes administered by the local education authorities; university
art schools, which include the Slade School of Fine Arts and Goldsmiths’
College (London), the Ruskin Drawing School (Oxford), Reading School of
Art, King’s College School of Art (Newcastle), and the School of Art of
University College, Aberystwyth; the Royal Academy Schools; and a few
private art schools.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history
of art are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Department
of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and the
Warburg Institute (also a part of London University) which provides facilities
for research on the character and history of the classical tradition.
The structure of publicly supported art education is at present under
review. In England three-year full-time courses leading to a Diploma in Art
and Design were instituted in 1963 and are available to students who have
successfully completed a pre-diploma course. The qualification is intended
to be broadly comparable to a university pass degree, and is administered by
the National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design, an independent
self-governing body set up by the then Ministry of Education in 1961. In
Scotland, each of the four schools of art awards a diploma which is roughly
equivalent to the pass degree of a university.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society
for Education through Art, among other activities, encourages the purchase
by schools of original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for
Schools exhibition. A loan scheme for reproductions of works of art which is
used extensively by schools is operated by the Arts Council.
The Council of Industrial Design (CoID) was set up in 1944 by the President
of the Board of Trade as a grant-aided body with the purpose of promoting
the improvement of design in the products of British industry. The council
has 29 members, a majority being prominent industrialists, and there is a
separate Scottish committee.
The CoID runs a permanent exhibition, The Design Centre, in Haymarket,
London. This is a selective, changing display of well-designed British con¬
sumer goods in current production. Supplementing it, an illustrated record of
good design, known as Design Index, is maintained at the Centre. A maximum
of 20 Design Centre Awards is presented annually to the makers of outstanding
products in the Index. An additional award, the Duke of Edinburgh’s Prize
for Elegant Design, is presented annually to the designer of a single product
chosen from the Index. The Scottish Design Centre opened in Glasgow in
1957. Permanent design exhibitions opened in Bristol in 1958, in Nottingham
in i960 and in Manchester in 1963. The last three function independently,
but all have duplicates of Design Index. The CoID organises conferences,
courses and exhibitions in Britain and overseas, and maintains a record of
designers and a photographic and reference library on industrial design. It
has an education section, a retail section and publishes a monthly magazine,
Design.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society
of Arts (see p. 207), the Society of Industrial Artists, which is the representative
professional body in Great Britain of designers engaged in industry and
commerce, and the Design and Industries Association (DIA), a voluntary
association of industrial companies, designers, and others interested in the
promotion of good design in industry.
228
Architecture
State-sponsored
Organisations
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned with
encouraging the best in new building and preserving the best that has been
inherited from the past.
Several Government departments are concerned with domestic architecture.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Scottish Development
Department, and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Health and Local Govern¬
ment are responsible in their respective countries for approving the layout
and design of local authority housing schemes, and issue reports and
circulars setting standards for local authority housing. The Ministry of
Housing and Local Government has under its chief architect a research and
development group responsible for examining methods of building more
cheaply, and for maintaining a high standard of design. The Ministry of
Public Building and Works is responsible for the design, building and
maintenance work of all Government departments and has a research and
development group under an architect Director-General which co-ordinates
research and development groups throughout the Government service.
The Minister has a duty to preserve and maintain historical and ancient
monuments in Great Britain; in Northern Ireland this responsibility is vested
in the Ministry of Finance. The United Kingdom Treasury has powers to
accept historic houses and their collections of works of art in lieu of death
duties; such properties are normally transferred to the National Trusts
(see p. 229). The Architects and Building Branch at the Department of
Education and Science and the Development Group of the Scottish Education
Department carry out research and development for the school building
programmes; at the 12th Milan Triennale in i960 the former Department
sponsored the British school exhibit which won the highest award for the
best school among exhibiting countries. The Ministry of Health is carrying
out a very large building programme and the Regional Hospital Boards,
through their architectural departments, are responsible for the design and
construction of a large number of hospitals and ancillary buildings.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions
exist to further the interests of architecture and the preservation of buildings
of aesthetic value or historic interest.
Several State-sponsored organisations are concerned with special aspects
of architecture. The Royal Fine Art Commission and the Royal Fine Art
Commission for Scotland advise Government departments, planning
authorities, and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic
importance; many large-scale modern buildings have had the approval of
the commissions. The Royal Commissions on Ancient and Historical
Monuments for England and for Wales and Monmouthshire record in detail
all ancient and historical remains in their countries and publish a series of
surveys. They are responsible for the National Buildings Record, maintaining
and enlarging the library of over half a million photographs of English and
Welsh architecture, and keeping an index of architectural records in public
and private possession. The Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical
Buildings of Scotland has the same responsibilities as the English and Welsh
Commissions, but the National Building Record for Scotland is maintained
by the Ministry of Public Building and Works. The Ancient Monuments
Boards for England, Scotland, and Wales, set up under the Ancient Monuments
Acts, consider which monuments should be listed in accordance with those
Acts and advise the Minister of Public Building and Works on any questions
concerning ancient monuments. In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Finance
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
RIBA
Architectural
Education
Architects'
Associations
Civic Trust
Preservation
Societies
229
administers the Ancient Monuments Acts (Northern Ireland) and is advised
by the Ancient Monuments Advisory Council. The Historic Buildings
Councils for England, Scotland, and Wales, constituted under the Historic
Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act, 1953, advise the Minister of Public
Building and Works on the provision of grants towards the repair and
maintenance of such buildings. The Historic Buildings Council for Scotland
also advises the Secretary of State for Scotland on the exercise of his functions
relating to buildings of architectural or historic interest under the planning
Acts. A Historic Buildings Bureau finds new uses for unoccupied historic
buildings of outstanding interest.
The leading professional architectural institution in the United Kingdom
is the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) to which are allied 49
autonomous architectural societies covering the whole of the United Kingdom
and most of the overseas Commonwealth. The Royal Institute has a member¬
ship of over 21,000, and some 5,000 students. It has one of the largest and
most important architectural libraries in the world, housing over 70,000 books
and periodicals and many thousands of drawings. The RIBA holds an annual
conference and is concerned with a wide range of activities covering profes¬
sional practice, science, technology, statistics, architectural competitions,
professional and public relations. It arranges lectures and discussions on a
variety of subjects, presents exhibitions and through its Board of Archi¬
tectural Education controls the training and examination of architects. The
Royal Gold Medal for Architecture is awarded annually by the Queen on
the recommendation of the RIBA.
Education in architecture in the United Kingdom is given at 29 Schools of
Architecture recognised for exemption from the RIBA Intermediate and Final
examinations and 3 recognised for the Intermediate examination only. In
addition, there are 40 schools of art and technical institutes (eight full-time)
which prepare students for the external examinations of the RIBA.
It is against the law for any person to practise or carry out work under
any name, style or title containing the word ‘architect’ unless he or she is
registered. The statutory body which regulates registration is the Architects’
Registration Council of the United Kingdom. The principal professional
associations of architects are the Incorporated Association of Architects and
Surveyors, the Institute of Registered Architects, the Faculty of Architects
and Surveyors, the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland, and the
Royal Society of Ulster Architects. Other societies include the Architectural
Association, the Architecture Club, and a number of societies interested in
particular aspects of architecture, such as the Modular Society.
The Civic Trust, established in 1957, seeks to promote high standards in
architecture and civic planning and to encourage a wider interest in the
appearance of towns, villages and the countryside. The Trust makes awards
for good architectural design, in two classes; the first for planning develop¬
ments, such as housing estates, the second for smaller projects, for example,
shop fronts. In June 1964 the Government announced the formation of a
Civic Trust for Wales.
Among the preservation societies are the Georgian Group, a society de¬
signed to awaken interest in Georgian architecture and to save Georgian
buildings from destruction; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings;
and the National Trust in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the
National Trust for Scotland, which together own more than a hundred
230
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
LITERATURE
Libraries
houses of historic or architectural interest, many of which contain pictures
and other works of art. Most of these houses, and other ancestral homes, are
open to the public at a small charge and attract large numbers of visitors.
The Historic Churches Preservation Trust was formed in 1952 to raise funds
to supplement the efforts of parishes to put their churches into good repair:
by the end of 1963, it had made available sums totalling £1,014,000 to about
1,500 churches and chapels of various religious denominations.
A knowledge of literature is fostered in Britain by the schools, colleges and
universities of the country, in all of which English literature is taught either
as part of a general course or as a specialist subject. Interest in the subject
is thereafter maintained by the libraries, by the very large number of private
literary societies, by book reviews in the press and on radio and television and
by the numerous periodicals concerned in whole or in part with literature.
A limited measure of State support for literature is given through the Arts
Council and the British Council.
Recognition of outstanding literary merit is given in the form of literary
prizes, a number of which are awarded annually, for instance, the Queen’s
Gold Medal for Poetry, the James Tait Black Memorial prizes for biography
and literature, the John Llewellyn Rhys Memorial prize for young writers of
promise, the Hawthornden prize for imaginative writing, the Library
Association Carnegie Medal for an outstanding book for children, the
Kate Greenaway Medal for the best children’s book illustration and the
Somerset Maugham award for young writers. The Arts Council makes
triennial awards for the best books of poetry published. It also provides
bursaries for poets, encourages poetry readings and subsidises the Poetry
Book Society.
The largest library in Britain is that of the British Museum in London (about
6| million volumes).1 The National Library of Scotland (over 2 million
volumes) is in Edinburgh, and that of Wales in Aberystwyth (nearly 2 million
volumes). Together with the Bodleian Library in Oxford (2% million volumes)
and the Cambridge University Library (2^ million volumes) these comprise
the ‘copyright’ libraries of the country and are entitled to receive a copy of
each new book published in Britain: the British Museum Library must
receive a copy, the other libraries may claim one.
Other great libraries include2 : the University of London Library,3 the
libraries of the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews, and
Queen’s University Library, Belfast; the London Library (the largest
public subscription library) and the John Rylands Library, Manchester;
the National Lending Library for Science and Technology at Boston Spa,
Yorkshire (see p. 219), the Science Museum Library, the Victoria and Albert
Museum Art Library and the British Museum (Natural History) Library;
the India Office Library and the Public Record Office (which contains the
non-current records of the superior courts of law' and of most of the Govern¬
ment departments); the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs,
the Royal Commonwealth Society, the Commonwealth Institute, the
1For the National Science Reference Library see p. 220.
2 This list provides only an arbitrary selection of some of the largest libraries. Unless
otherwise stated these libraries are in London, where there are more than 500 libraries;
and see also pp. 206, 208, 219 and 229.
3 The total holding of all the libraries (college and special) of London University is
about 3J million volumes.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Public Libraries
Library
Co-operation
231
Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Institute of British Architects and
the British Drama League; the Royal College of Music, Royal Academy of
Music and Central Music Libraries; and the National Library for the Blind.
The Arts Council has founded a reference and lending library of modern
English poetry, which is housed with the National Book League. The National
Register of Archives, maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission
in the Public Record Office building, contains particulars of numerous local
and private records.
The public libraries of Britain maintain a service throughout the country,
administered by over 560 public library authorities (county councils, county
borough councils, municipal borough councils, urban district councils and
a few parish councils). Together these authorities, which provide more than
40,000 service points, hold nearly 80 million books. (These figures do not
include the libraries in the publicly maintained schools.) A feature of the
service in rural areas is the travelling van, which is an itinerant library.
Over a quarter of the total population are registered members of public
libraries.
In addition to lending books, music scores and gramophone records,
and providing special facilities for, among others, children, patients in hospitals
and prisoners, public libraries engage in many other activities, such as play
readings, lectures, film shows, music circles and co-operation in university
extension education.
The Public Libraries and Museums Act, 1964, which followed the principal
recommendations of the Roberts report on the structure of the public library
service in England and Wales (1959) has led to further co-ordination of
public and other libraries so as to provide a free national library service.
By the terms of the Act, public authorities have a duty to provide an efficient
library service; the Secretary of State for Education and Science, assisted by
two advisory councils, exercises supervisory powers; non-county boroughs
and urban districts which cannot satisfy the Secretary of State that they
provide an efficient library service, can have their powers withdrawn; the Act
also provides for regional library councils to ensure co-operation between
libraries, thus extending to the whole of England and Wales a system which
already existed in some areas.
Co-operation between libraries is organised administratively through regional
library bureaux (consisting mainly of public libraries in the area) and this
organisation will be consolidated under the regional councils provided for by
the Public Libraries and Museums Act, 1964. The National Central Library
is responsible for organising co-operation at a national level, and can call on
all regional bureaux, university and outlier (mainly special) libraries, thus
giving access to a total stock of some 100 million books and many thousand
sets of periodicals. The Scottish Central Library carries out, in Scotland,
functions similar to those of the National Central Library. Both Central
Libraries are financed in part by Exchequer grants. In Northern Ireland
there is a Central Library but no regional library bureaux; access to the
stocks of the National Central Library, the Scottish Central Library and
the Irish Central Library is available on application to the Belfast public
libraries, Queen’s University Library and the county libraries.
The two principal organisations to which librarians belong are the Library
Association, with the affiliated Scottish Library Association, and the Asso¬
ciation of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux (ASLIB) (see p. 219).
Library
Associations
232
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Libraries
Books
Literary and
Philological
Societies
DRAMA
The Library Association endeavours to unite librarians and governors of
libraries throughout the world and through its meetings, personal service
and publications, including its official journal The Library Association Record,
to provide for their general and specialised professional interests.
In addition to the services provided by public libraries, many firms and
institutions (in particular, institutes of higher education, such as technical
colleges) provide library facilities; some bookshops also maintain lending
libraries for their customers.
New books constitute the large majority of all books published annually in
Britain. In 1963 nearly 1,100 British publishers issued over 26,000 separate
titles, of which over 20,000 were new books and the rest reprints or new
editions. In recent years there has been a great increase in the number of
books of all kinds published with paper covers (‘paper backs’).1
The above figures do not include Government publications by Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office, which is the largest publishing organisation in Britain;
the great majority of books, however, are produced by some 300 of the
principal commercial publishers, including the university presses, notably
the Oxford University Press (including the Clarendon Press) and the
Cambridge University Press.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with
book production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association, the
Booksellers’ Association, and the Society of Authors.
Societies for the promotion of literature include: the National Book League,
which encourages the reading of and an interest in books, and which holds
exhibitions, including annual exhibitions of book design, and arranges
exhibitions of books in overseas countries; the English Association, which
aims at upholding the standard of English writing and speech; and the
Royal Society of Literature, which is concerned with the advancement of
literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical, Philosophical
and Philological Studies is the leading society in Britain dealing with human¬
istic studies. It receives a grant from the Treasury.
Interest in poetry is encouraged by societies which sponsor poetry readings
and recitals; the Poetry Society and Apollo Society are among the best
known. Poetry also plays an important part in various annual festivals,
including the National Eisteddfod—the bardic festival held in Wales—the
Stratford-upon-Avon Festival of Poetry,the Cheltenham Festival of Literature,
and the biennial poetry festival organised by the Poetry Book Society in
London.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors, of which the largest is the Dickens
Fellowship. There are also a number of clubs and societies, such as the
Book Society and the Poetry Book Society, which exist to distribute selected
new books to their members.
State patronage of the drama is expressed through the Arts Councils of Great
Britain and of Northern Ireland, which grant subsidies to certain theatrical
managements operating on a non-profit-distributing basis (that is, using
profits to finance futuie productions), provided that such managements have
For sales and exports of books in 1963, see p. 319.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
233
Professional
Theatre
given evidence of serious aims and of consistently high standards of practical
competence; and through the British Council, which is responsible for making
the British theatre better known abroad by organising and sponsoring
international tours by important companies such as the Royal Shakespeare
Theatre Company, and by sending overseas lecturers on drama and exhibi¬
tions of theatrical design or of books dealing with the British theatre. The
Arts Council also operates a scheme for the promotion of new drama whereby
guarantees may be offered to managements giving the first professional
production of selected new plays; and promising authors may be awarded
bursaries. Similar schemes have been started to encourage stage designers,
producers and those wishing to take up theatre administration. Subsidies are
also given for parties travelling to the theatre from outlying districts.
There are about 200 professional theatres in Britain. The centre of theatrical
activity is in London, where there are some 30 principal theatres in the
‘West End’ and several more in the suburbs. With the exception of six
theatres—Covent Garden, Sadler’s Wells, the Old Vic (see below), the Royal
Court, the Mermaid and the Aldwych, at present the London home of the
Royal Shakespeare Company—these are let to some 25 producing managements
on a commercial basis for each production. The provincial theatres are served
by productions touring either before or after London presentation, by
companies specially formed for touring, and by local repertory companies.
Although many theatres have been closed in recent years, new ones have
been opened both in London and the provinces. The Mermaid Theatre, the
first to be built in London for 25 years, was opened in 1959, as was the
completely reconstructed Queen’s Theatre; the Royalty Theatre opened in
i960 (but has been used as a cinema since 1961); and another new London
theatre, the Prince Charles, was opened in 1962. The first full-scale theatre to
be built by a civic authority since 1939, the Belgrade Theatre, was opened in
Coventry in 1958. Since then civic theatres have been built at Croydon,
Eastbourne and Torquay, and smaller theatres have been opened at
Middlesbrough and Whitehaven (Cumberland). The new Nottingham Play¬
house and the Phoenix Theatre, Leicester, opened in 1963. New theatres
are being built or planned for Birmingham, Bromley, Guildford, Hornchurch
and Manchester. A Festival Theatre opened in 1962 at Chichester, Sussex.
Entertainments centres to include theatres are proposed for Bolton, Blackpool,
Bradford, Exeter and Sheffield. In addition to managements which rent
theatres, there are a number of companies which produce plays in theatres
of their own.
In 1963 a National Theatre Company was formed which will eventually
play in the new National Theatre, to be built on the south bank of the Thames,
London (together with an opera house which will provide a new home for the
Sadler’s Wells Opera Company). The company, which is using the Old Vic
Theatre until its own building is ready, is under the directorship of Sir
Laurence Olivier. Under the terms of the National Theatre Act, 1949, the
Treasury is providing .£1 million towards the capital cost of the scheme.
The London County Council (LCC)1 undertook to meet any additional
expenditure on the two buildings, up to a limit of ^1-3 million, and both the
Treasurjr and the LCC provide annual subventions towards the running
costs of the National Theatre Company. To fulfil its functions as a national
theatre, the company tours other parts of the country.
1 In April 1965 the LCC will be superseded by the Greater London Council (see p. 71)
234
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Theatre Clubs and
Licensing
Professional
Organisations
and Trade Unions
The Royal Shakespeare Company presents plays at the Royal Shakespeare
Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, and at the Aldwych Theatre, London. In 1956
the English Stage Company was established at the Royal Court Theatre in
London, where it presents contemporary plays. Theatre Workshop performs
classical and contemporary plays at the Theatre Royal, Stratford, London.
The Open Air Theatre in Regent’s Park, London, has presented many
summer seasons of repertory, mainly plays of Shakespeare and other poetic
drama.
Provincial theatre companies (many of which are assisted financially and
otherwise by the Arts Councils in Great Britain and in Northern Ireland)
may have the use of their own theatres (as in Bristol, Lincoln, Liverpool,
Nottingham, Salisbury, Perth, Belfast and Birmingham) or may rent them
from a local authority. A few companies also exist especially to tour the smaller
towns and villages, playing from one to several nights in each place. A large
number of organisations present children’s plays in London and the provinces.
The National Youth Theatre, consisting of schoolboys, has its own centre in
London but also presents Shakespearean productions in the provinces and
abroad. Inevitably, the work of provincial theatre companies varies in quality
but, generally speaking, the standard of both production and acting is high:
London managements watch their activities and may sometimes bring their
productions to the West End. Many of the leading dramatists, producers,
designers, actors and actresses in Britain started their careers in such companies.
The Ulster Group Theatre in Belfast specialises in Ulster comedy; and the
Belfast Arts Theatre presents some international drama and lighter theatrical
entertainment. As a stimulus to the presentation of good drama in Northern
Ireland, professional theatres are eligible for grants in respect of specific
productions approved by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. The Lyric
Players Theatre, a non-profit-making organisation, under a board of trustees,
presents Irish and international drama, and plans to build a small theatre
in or near Belfast.
Theatre clubs for regular patrons are run in connection with some of the
company-owned theatres. Where seats are sold only to theatre club members
(for instance, the Arts Theatre, London), the plays are not subject to the
provisions of the Theatres Act, 1843. This Act deals with the licensing of
theatres and plays and requires all new plays to be approved by the Lord
Chamberlain,1 who may forbid the presentation of any play ‘for the preserva¬
tion of good manners, decorum, or of the public peace’. The Lord Chamber-
lain may require amendments to be made to the text of a play, but the number
of plays for which a licence is refused amounts to under one per cent of the
total submitted.
Most managers and artists are members of professional organisations
which exist to maintain the standards of the professional theatre, to regulate
the industry and to promote and safeguard the welfare of those who work
in it. Organisations of this kind include the Theatres’ Advisory Council,
the London Theatre Council, the Provincial Theatre Council, the Society
of West End Managers, the Theatrical Managers’ Association, the Council of
Repertory Theatres, British Actors’ Equity (the actors’ trade union) and
the League of Dramatists. The trade union of theatre staffs is the National
Association of Theatrical and Kine Employees.
1 The Lord Chamberlain, whose office dates from the fourteenth century, is the senior
officer of the Royal Household.
Theatre Study
Amateur
Theatre
Dramatic
Training
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 235
The Society for Theatre Research brings together those interested in the
history and technique of the British theatre. The International Theatre
Institute has a British centre in London. Its headquarters are in Paris and
there are 44 member countries. The main purpose of the institute is to foster
international goodwill and understanding by interchange of students,
theatrical companies, theatre personnel and all theatrical information. The
British centre’s committee is composed of representatives of the Arts Council,
British Council, League of British Dramatists, British Drama League,
Conference of Repertory Theatres and representatives of the theatre.
The amateur dramatic movement is widespread throughout Britain; there
are thousands of amateur dramatic societies, with an active membership of
some half a million. The movement is sponsored and fostered by local
education authorities, by other public bodies, and by four special organisations
—the British Drama League, the Standing Conference of Drama Associations,
the Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster
Drama Festivals. Amateur companies which stage productions in their own
theatres belong to the Little Theatre Guild of Great Britain; for instance,
the Maddermarket Theatre in Norwich and the Questor’s Theatre, Ealing,
which opened in 1964 and is London’s most up-to-date theatre, designed
for completely flexible staging.
The British Drama League, founded in 1919, operates on a basis of
affiliation and individual membership. Its services include the arrangement
of courses, lectures and competitions in dramatic work; the provision of a
library, which has the largest collection in Britain of plays and books on the
theatre, and an information bureau; and advice on such matters as play¬
writing, production, stage management and the organisation of drama
festivals. The Standing Conference co-ordinates the various bodies concerned
in the amateur dramatic movement. Functions similar to those of the league
and the conference in England and Wales are fulfilled in Scotland by the
Scottish Community Drama Association, which receives some financial
assistance from the Scottish Education Department.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have famous dramatic societies,
and there are drama clubs and societies in many other universities and
colleges.
Dramatic training is provided mainly in the dramatic schools and institutions
established throughout Britain. Among the most important are the Royal
Academy of Dramatic Art (which is grant-aided by the Treasury, and which
provides a two-year course in all branches of stage work), the Central School
of Speech and Drama, the Rose Bruford Training College, the London
Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, the Webber-Douglas School, the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama and the Arts Educational Schools,
all of which are in or near London; and the Old Vic School in Bristol. In
Scotland there is the College of Dramatic Art which is an integral part of the
Royal Scottish Academy of Music.
Some form of education in drama is also provided in many schools and
youth clubs in Britain, and an increasing degree of recognition is given to the
subject in the universities. The University of London offers a Diploma in
Dramatic Art; Bristol University has a department of drama offering a course
which an arts student may take as part of a general degree course. Since 1962
Manchester University has offered courses in drama for honours or general
arts degree students, and also a diploma course in Theatrecraft (embracing
236
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FILMS
Documentary
Films
sound and television broadcasting). The Universities of Southampton and Hull
have also recently established Departments of Drama with courses leading to
degrees or diplomas, and an advanced course in Drama in Schools is offered
by the University of Durham. Exeter University and Hull University are
building theatres of their own; Exeter’s theatre, like the recently completed
Nuffield Theatre at Southampton, will be used both by students and the
public. In 1959 Bristol inaugurated the International Festival of University
Theatre now held annually in Britain.
Cinema attendance has been steadily declining in Great Britain since its peak
of 1,635 million in 1946 and by 1963 was down to 375 million. Likewise,
the number of cinemas in Great Britain has declined from 4,703 in 1946
to 2,197 (with a seating capacity of about 2-4 million) at the end of 1963.
About 10 per cent of British first feature films are made, and about 40 per
cent are distributed, by the two large amalgams, the Rank Organisation and the
Associated British Picture Corporation, which have companies for production,
distribution and exhibition. Most producers who are independent of either
group make films in association with other film distributors. There are
numerous companies (many of them small) which produce short films.
Cinematograph films were first shown to the public in Britain in 1896, and
within ten years Britain was in the forefront of film production. This early
ascendancy did not survive the impact of the first world war and since 1914
British films have had to contend with keen competition in the home market
from the United States.
London is one of the most important centres for the making of films for
international markets and export earnings are an important part of total
earnings. British films, actors and creative and technical talent are appreciated
abroad as well as at home and frequently achieve success at international
film events. The British Film Producers Association and the Federation of
British Film Makers are the two trade associations to which many feature
film producers belong.
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain goes back
to 1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive
and imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial
organisations. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since
then, British documentary technicians have continued to produce high
quality factual films which have won numerous international awards. An
interesting development has been the attempt to re-interpret the documentary
tradition in contemporary terms by a group of young technicians—the Free
Cinema movement—and by the television film units of the British Broad¬
casting Corporation and the Independent Television Authority programme
companies. The Federation of Specialised Film Associations, the trade
association of documentary, short, industrial, advertising and cartoon film
makers, has about 100 members.
The Government has continued to sponsor a wide range of information
films and film material. These are produced through the film, television and
newsreel services of the Central Office of Information (COI), which com¬
missions their production by private companies. Documentary films, television
programmes and newsreels are produced to inform audiences overseas about
British life and achievement. These, together with other films acquired from
private industry and public bodies, are distributed throughout the world, in
English and many foreign languages, by British Information Services.
Foreign Films
Film Institutes,
Councils, and
Societies
Society of Film and
Television Arts
Assistance to
British Film
Producers
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 237
The films produced by the CO I for Government departments have
included many specialised films on science, agriculture, health and industry.
Films for industry, produced by the Government, the British Productivity
Council and private firms, have helped to increase productivity; to the same
end, many hundreds of industrial films from other countries have been
evaluated, and the best of them made available to industrial audiences
through the COFs Central Film Library1 and other agencies.
The Films of Scotland Committee, set up in 1936 and revived in 1954
by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry) in consultation with
the Secretary of State for Scotland, promotes the production of Scottish
films covering the industries and cultural traditions of Scotland.
Films from abroad made in languages other than English often draw large
audiences in London and a few other large cities, but are rarely shown through¬
out the country.
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer grant.
The Institute encourages the making and showing of good films and helps
the public to appreciate them. Similar work is undertaken in Scotland by
the Scottish Film Council, which is also financed in part by an Exchequer
grant. The British Film Institute administers the National Film Theatre in
London and the National Film Archive, runs an annual summer school, and
maintains a film library from which films may be hired, a library of books on
the film and an information service. The Institute also makes grants to the
Scientific Film Association, the University Film Council and the Society for
Education in Film and Television.
The National Film Archive contains over 18,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, besides scripts, art designs, posters and
about 500,000 photographic stills, selected to illustrate the history and the
art of the film and as significant social and historical records.
The National Film Theatre, on the south bank of the Thames, in London,
shows films of outstanding historical, artistic or technical interest; it holds
a unique position as a cinema offering regular programmes unrestricted
by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the films
shown.
The Society of Film and Television Arts, formed in 1958 by the amalgama¬
tion of the British Film Academy and the Guild of Television Producers and
Directors, has as its aim to improve the standard of film and television
production and to stimulate public appreciation of the arts.
The art of film production is a costly one which depends upon a commercially
prosperous industry for its development and needs adequate financial
backing combined with freedom for the film-maker to experiment and to
express his own ideas. There is no State-owned film production unit in
Britain, but the National Film Finance Corporation, a statutory body set up
in 1949, lends money for film production. Its members—a chairman, a
managing director and three to five others—are appointed by the Board of
Trade. Its funds (limited by statute to ^8 million) are provided up to
£6 million by advances from the Board of Trade; the remaining £2 million
may be borrowed from non-governmental sources. In recent years the
1 The Central Film Library also makes available on hire to schools, colleges and other
institutions films on many specialised subjects.
238
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cinema
Licensing
and Film
Censorship
Children and
the Cinema
Corporation has been financially concerned with about half the first feature
films made in British studios.
There is a levy on cinema admissions to provide a film production fund.
The money so raised is paid out as a percentage of a film’s takings, so that
the more successful a film is at the box-office, the more it receives from the
fund. Started by the industry in 1950 on a voluntary basis, the scheme
became statutory under the Cinematograph Films Act, 1957, which gave the
President of the Board of Trade powers to make regulations governing the
collection, by the Board of Customs and Excise, of a levy from exhibitors,
and the distribution of the proceeds for the benefit of British film production.
The British Film Fund Agency undertakes the distribution.
To help British films to meet the keen American competition, legislation
passed in 1927 introduced the quota system (continued by subsequent
legislation), under which a certain proportion of British films must be shown
in British cinemas each year. The proportion is fixed by the Board of Trade
annually after consultation with the Cinematograph Films Council, any
change being effected by statutory instrument approved by both Houses of
Parliament. For first feature films it has stood at 30 per cent since 1950.
The State takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but, by virtue
of their power to grant licences, the local licensing authorities act as the final
arbiters of films proposed for showing in their areas. There are over 700
licensing authorities; they are local authorities or, in some areas, magistrates.
In considering the suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the
judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to
which are submitted all films (other than newsreels) intended for public
showing.
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative
of the cinema industry, to ensure that a proper standard was maintained in
the films offered to the public. It consists of a president, a secretary, and
five examiners (including two women). The President, who is usually a man
prominent in public life, is appointed by a trade committee after informal
consultation with the Home Secretary and the principal associations of local
authorities. The Board, which does not use any written code of censorship,
may require cuts to be made before it will grant a certificate to a film; very
rarely, it will refuse a certificate. Films passed by the Board are placed in one
of three categories: ‘U’ (suitable for universal showing); ‘A’ (more suitable for
adults than children) and ‘X’ (suitable only for adults). A child under 16
years of age may be admitted to a cinema showing an ‘A’ film only if accom¬
panied by a responsible adult, and may not be admitted on any condition if
an ‘X’ film is being shown.
The Cinematograph Act, 1952, which came into force in January 1956,
provided for the making of regulations by the Home Secretary to protect
the health and welfare of children attending film shows. Cinemas which give
children’s shows require a special licence from the licensing authority, which
may impose conditions. There are about 900 children’s cinema clubs which
provide special programmes on Saturday mornings; they are organised by
the cinema groups and have become very popular. An important contribution
to these programmes is made by the Children’s Film Foundation, which
produces and distributes entertainment films specially designed for children
and publishes at intervals a list of films particularly suitable for children and
for exhibition at children’s matinees. The Foundation is a non-profit-making
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
MUSIC, OPERA
AND BALLET
Music
Orchestras
Choral Societies
239
body set up by the British film industry in 1951 and, under the Cinematograph
Films Act, 1957, it receives grants from the British Film Fund Agency.
Music in all its forms draws large audiences; and music festivals, orchestral
concerts, choral singing, brass bands, opera and ballet are important features
of British cultural life.
Tours abroad by British orchestras, soloists, and opera and ballet com¬
panies are sometimes assisted financially by the British Council, which
sponsors some recordings of works by British composers, and maintains
127 libraries of British music (scores and records) in 83 countries overseas. At
the Council’s London headquarters a reference library of records, scores, and
books on music is maintained, and musicians from abroad are sometimes
invited to Britain as the Council’s guests, to gain first-hand experience of
British music-making.
The National Music Council, representative of every aspect of British
musical activity, is affiliated to the International Music Council and
UNESCO.
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large
towns and cities of Britain. In London the principal concert halls are the
Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames, used for both orchestral
concerts and recitals; the Royal Albert Hall, Kensington, where mainly
orchestral concerts, including the annual summer season of Promenade
Concerts are given; and the Wigmore Hall, which is the principal recital
centre. An additional small concert hall and a recital room are being built by
the London County Council on the south bank of the Thames.
Among the leading British orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony, the Royal Philharmonic, the New Philharmonia (formed
in 1964 from the Philharmonia), the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle
(Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Sym¬
phony, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle upon Tyne), the Scottish National
and the BBC Symphony, Northern and Scottish orchestras. There are also
the specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the Philomusica of
London, the English Chamber Orchestra and the London Mozart Players,
and a number of new orchestras which have been formed during the past
few years. Many of these receive financial aid from the Arts Council and
local authorities to help with the cost of maintaining ensembles, of presenting
new or unfamiliar works, and of improving standards generally; some of them
also receive assistance from commercial television and other business organisa¬
tions. The City of Belfast Orchestra is financed jointly by the Belfast
Corporation and the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
The principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral, the BBC
Choral, the Huddersfield Choral, the Halle Choir, the Liverpool Philharmonic
Choir, the London Philharmonic Choir, the New Philharmonia Chorus
(formed in 1964 from the Philharmonia), the Bach Choir, the Royal Edinburgh
Choral Union and the Belfast Philharmonic Society. These and many other
choral societies are associated with famous orchestras in major choral works;
most of them, together with hundreds of similar choral and orchestral societies
and music clubs, are affiliated to the National Federation of Music Societies,
through which they are supported with funds provided by the Arts Council.
Membership of the National Federation has risen to over 850 societies. Among
societies which specialise in encouraging the performance of the work of living
240
Music Festivals
Amateur Interest
Professional
Organisations
Education in Music
Public Interest
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
musicians are the Society for the Promotion of New Music, the Music Section
of the Institute of Contemporary Arts and Macnaghten Concerts.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held
annually in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in
existence for over 200 years. The festival idea has developed considerably
in recent years, and festivals of music and other arts are now held annually in
many cities and towns throughout the United Kingdom. The famous Edin¬
burgh International Festival lasts three weeks; other festivals such as at
King’s Lynn, last a week or less. Among the better known are the Royal
National Eisteddfod of Wales; the Llangollen International Eisteddfod; the
National Gaelic Mod, held at a different place in Scotland each year;
the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; the
Aldeburgh Festival; the Bath Festival; the Coventry Festival; the Haslemere
Festival; the biennial York Festival; and the Leeds and Norwich Festivals of
choral music, which are held triennially. An annual international festival of
folk song and dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is increasing. It is encouraged by the
work of County Music Committees,1 which are aided by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music.
The Rural Music Schools Association is concerned with music-making by
amateurs in country districts; it brings together professional musicians,
teachers, administrators and amateurs.
Professional organisations which look after the interests of music and
musicians include the Musicians’ Union, the Incorporated Society of
Musicians, the Composers’ Guild, and the Songwriters’ Guild.
Specialised education in music is given at colleges of music, of which the
most prominent are the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal College of
Music in London, the Royal Manchester College, and the Royal Scottish
Academy of Music in Glasgow, all of which receive grants-in-aid. There are
also the Trinity College of Music and the Guildhall School of Music and
Drama, both in London, and the School of Music in Birmingham. Youth
orchestras are strongly encouraged, and children’s concerts, given by
symphony orchestras directed by prominent conductors, are a regular feature
of the country’s musical activities and have helped to develop among young
people an appreciation of the world’s greatest music. The National Youth
Orchestra of Great Britain and the National Youth Orchestra of Wales, made
up of the most promising members of school orchestras, are noted for their
high standard of performance, and so is the London Schools’ Symphony
Orchestra. A ‘Youth and Music’ organisation, affiliated to the international
‘Jeunesses Musicales’, was established in 1954 to encourage musical education
and performances for young people.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and
over 120,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the exam¬
inations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, the largest
proportion (over 70,000) choosing the piano as their instrument.
The increase in musical appreciation among the general public during recent
years is shown by the size of the audiences for concerts and for broadcast
music. About 85 million gramophone records were sold during 1963. The
National Federation of Gramophone Societies has some 350 affiliated societies.
1 Some of these are voluntary committees and some are local education authority
sub-committees.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
24I
Opera and
Ballet
Opera Groups
Ballet Companies
The City of Westminster houses the Central Music Library in its Bucking¬
ham Palace Road library building, and many other public libraries have
collections of music that can be borrowed; some of them also lend gramophone
records.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London, leased by the Government1 to the Royal Opera
House, Covent Garden, Limited, which was formed in 1944 to make the
famous opera house the home of a national opera and ballet, and which
receives a Government grant through the Arts Council. The Royal Opera
House has its own resident opera company and ballet company which give
performances in London and elsewhere. The opera company, which numbers
about 200 and has a permanent orchestra, makes an annual tour of provincial
centres. The ballet company, incorporated in 1957 with the Sadler’s Wells
Theatre Ballet and the Sadler’s Wells School to form the Royal Ballet, has
a high international reputation gained in many overseas tours.
Seasons of opera are also given at the Sadler’s Wells Theatre in London;
with two permanent opera companies, Sadler’s Wells provides a full London
season, and opera and operetta for 42 weeks in other centres.
At Glyndebourne, in Sussex, an opera season, for which an international
cast is specially assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies
include the English Opera Group, formed in 1947, and noted for its perform¬
ances of operas by Benjamin Britten; the New Opera Company, formed in
I957 by members of the Cambridge Opera Group to produce new operas
in London and give opportunities to promising amateurs and young pro¬
fessionals; the Handel Opera Society; the Intimate Opera Company, which
performs works for very small casts in any hall available; and the Welsh
National Opera Company. The Scottish Opera Society presents annual
seasons in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by
the Grand Opera Society of Northern Ireland and the Studio Opera Group,
both receiving a subsidy from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. The
Arts Council (Great Britain) manages three small operatic groups (Opera for
All) which specialise in introducing opera to audiences in small towns who
hitherto have been unfamiliar with it. There are also a number of amateur
opera clubs in London and the provinces, in Glasgow and Edinburgh, in
Northern Ireland and in universities. In 1963 the London Opera Centre for
Advanced Training and Development was opened; courses are to last two
or three years.
Among the ballet companies are the Ballet Rambert, Britain’s oldest
ballet company, which has discovered many distinguished dancers and
choreographers, London’s Festival Ballet and an important new group,
Western Theatre Ballet, that includes a large proportion of contemporary
works in its repertoire. The work of the Irish Ballet Company in Northern
Ireland, which is sponsored by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland, com¬
bines traditional music, dancing and mime. The Royal Ballet, the Arts
Educational, and the Rambert Ballet Training Schools and the Royal Academy
of Dancing are among the teaching institutions which have played an im¬
portant part in raising British ballet to its present high standard.
1 The Ministry of Public Building and Works acquired a 42-year lease from Covent
Garden Properties Limited in 1949.
242
10
THE NATIONAL
ECONOMY
BACKGROUND
Britain ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world, with
about 0-18 per cent of the world’s land area. In population, approaching
2 per cent of the world’s inhabitants, it ranks tenth. In density of population
it is fourth: of the major countries, only Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands
are more crowded; and there are nine times as many people to the square
mile in the United Kingdom as in the United States. In world trade, it ranks
third, accounting for about one-tenth of the total. It takes about a fifth of the
world’s exports of primary products, and provides about one-sixth of the
world’s exports of manufactured goods.
Britain, from its own soil, provides only about half of the food it needs,
and—apart from coal and low-grade iron ore—it has few natural resources;
thus it is the world’s largest importer of such products as wheat, meat, butter,
fodder grains, citrus fruits, tea, tobacco, wool, and hard timber. In return,
it is one of the world’s largest exporters of aircraft, motor vehicles, electrical
equipment, chemicals, textiles and most types of machinery. No other
country has such a small proportion of the working population engaged in
agriculture (only slightly more than 4 per cent).
The United Kingdom is also the central banker of the sterling area, an
area with a quarter of the world’s population. Many countries outside the
sterling area use sterling in their international transactions, and it is the
currency in which about one-third of the world’s trade is conducted.
The Economy During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world
before 1939 manufacturer, merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and so was able
to support a rapidly increasing population at a rising standard of living.
During the period from 1870 to 1890 British industrial expansion had the
clearest lead over that of other countries. Between 1890 and 1914 growing
industrial competition from Europe and North America began to make
itself felt, but its effects on Britain’s staple export industries, particularly
cotton textiles and coal, were offset by the general rise in world trade, by
the continued demand for British textiles from India and other eastern
countries, and by the continued high level of overseas investment.
The new problems confronting British industry and trade in the twentieth
century became apparent after the first world war. Textiles from India and
Japan, where labour was cheaper, established themselves firmly in the large
eastern markets, to a great extent replacing the more expensive and often
higher quality British products. The extension of the world demand for coal
was slowed down by the increasing use of oil, while coal from the newer
European mines competed keenly with British coal.
In the old-established branches of the vehicles and engineering group of
industries (for instance, locomotives, ships and textile machinery) world
demand fell away after a brief post-war boom, and Britain failed at first to
gain a compensating share of the expanding world trade in the new types of
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
243
Effects of
the Second
World War
Period
since 1945
engineering products (for example, vehicles and electrical goods). Most
countries were tending towards self-sufficiency, and some sought deliberately
to protect nascent and even established industries by tariffs and (later) quotas
and exchange restrictions.
Income from overseas investments and a substantial improvement in the
terms of trade (the price of exports relative to the price of imports) cushioned
the effect of a fall in the volume of exports, and imports remained high.
The loss of export markets led, however, to a contraction of Britain’s staple
industries—coal, cotton, iron and steel, and the older branches of engineering.
The result was heavy unemployment, the general rate of which averaged
14 per cent of the working population in the years 1921-39, reaching a peak
of 22 per cent in 1932, when the slump in world trade was at its worst. In
districts relying mainly on one or other of the staple industries, the rate was
much higher.
After 1932 an improvement in the levels of production and employment
took place, stimulated by an increase in home investment which was aided
by the policy of cheap money, by some revival in world trade and, after 1935,
by the armament programme. The decade saw a strong expansion in the
vehicles, electrical, chemicals and aircraft industries, while the construction
of 3 million houses brought about a large growth in the building and ancillary
industries. By 1937 average real income per head was about 14 per cent
higher than in 1929.
The second world war is estimated to have run down British domestic
capital by about £3,000 million, through shipping losses, bomb damage, and
arrears of industrial maintenance and replacements. It also resulted in con¬
siderable alterations in Britain’s financial and trading position. These included
the sale of £1,000 million worth of overseas investments, nearly half in
North America, and the accumulation of new external debts of £3,000 million.
Exports had fallen by 1944 as a result of the war effort to less than one-third
of their 1938 volume while there had been a sharp adverse movement in the
terms of trade as a result of the world shortage of raw materials and other primary
products. On the credit side, there was the large volume of fixed investment
in the munitions industries, a greatly increased skilled labour force in the
engineering trades, and the creation of a prosperous and well-equipped
agricultural industry.
In the two decades since 1945 Britain has experienced, with few interruptions,
a steady growth in output of goods and services and a high level of employment.
New inventions and technological advances and shifts in world demand have
altered radically the character of British industry. Industries in which new
techniques have predominated, notably electronics, aircraft, motor and
chemicals industries, new branches of machinery construction, and petroleum
are contributing a significantly larger share of the total output and of total
exports and providing wider employment opportunities for an increasingly
skilled labour force. Expenditure on industrial and scientific research has
increased steadily and facilities for technological education have been greatly
enlarged, and these trends are gathering momentum.
At the same time, Britain has had to deal with some persistent economic
problems; in particular, to fulfil its overseas obligations and to maintain its
traditional role in world commerce and finance, it has needed to achieve and
maintain a substantial balance of payments surplus. While exports of both
goods and services have maintained an upward trend, in some years the rate
244
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Output and
Employment
of increase has been insufficient to pay for a rising volume of imports (almost
all restrictions on imports having been removed) and to provide for overseas
investment and economic assistance to developing countries.
The persistent rise in prices, a continuing problem shared with most other
countries, has been a central factor in the framing of economic policies.
During some periods it stemmed from an excessive pressure of demand—
exports, investment at home and abroad, personal consumption, defence and
other public expenditure both at home and overseas—on the nation’s
resources, but more recently the tendency for money incomes to rise faster
than production, thus raising costs, has been a more dominant influence.
The Government is, therefore, increasingly directing its efforts towards
working out policies for relating increases in money incomes to the rate of
economic growth and evolving machinery for longer-term planning of the
economy.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of the national
income and expenditure of Britain in recent years. The source of Tables 10 to
14 is Preliminary Estimates of National Income and Balance of Payments 1963
{Cmnd. 2328).
In 1963 Britain’s gross national product (the measure of total goods and
services produced at home and net income from abroad) is estimated to have
totalled ,£26,358 million. In real terms, that is after allowing for price changes,
the increase over the ten-year period to 1963 has amounted to about 29 per
cent; this is equivalent to an average annual advance of about 2\ per cent.
In terms of national income per head the United Kingdom ranks appreciably
below the United States and Canada and slightly below Australia, New
Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland, and about on a par with France and the
German Federal Republic.
The working population has been rising relatively slowly; in the ten years
to the middle of 1964 it increased by about i| million (or some 6 per cent)
to nearly 25! million, of whom two-thirds are males, while the total population
rose by only 5 per cent. (There has been a higher rate of increase—about
12 per cent—in the number of women in employment.) The expansion of the
national income over the same period has, therefore, been mainly the result
of higher productivity. Unemployment over the past two decades remained
very low, on average less than 2 per cent of the working population being
out of work, compared with 14 per cent between the two world wars. Apart
from the severe winter of 1962-63, when it rose to over 950,000, and for a
brief spell in 1958, the total in the last 15 years has never exceeded 500,000.
A decline in some of the staple industries, notably coalmining and ship¬
building, has given rise in some areas to rates of unemployment considerably
above that for the country as a whole; averaging over 4 per cent in Scotland
and north-east England and in Northern Ireland over 7 per cent. The
Government has taken a number of measures, both fiscal and administrative,
to promote additional employment in those districts where new opportunities
for work are needed (see p. 264).
From 1957 to 1963 there was an annual average increase of about per cent
in the output of goods and services per head of the labour force, the chief
factor in the growth of the gross national product. The evidence points to the
current rate of increase being about 3 per cent per annum, partly because of
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
245
the effect of the high volume of investment in i960 and 1961 and the steady
increase in expenditure on civil research and development which has taken
place since 1957. Further expansion in productive capacity is now in hand
throughout much of the economy, with increasing use of new techniques and
processes, which should ensure a continuing growth in productivity.
Table 10 shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services
since 1950, at 1958 prices, divided into consumers, public authorities,
investment and exports; the diagrams below and on p. 246 show changes in
national expenditure between 1953 and 1963 (at 1958 prices) and production
and national income trends since 1900.
TABLE 10
Distribution of
Total Supplies
of Goods and
Services
Percentages
1950
1960
1962
1963
Consumers’ expenditure
Public authorities’ current expenditure
Gross fixed capital formation . .
Investment in stocks . .
Export of goods and services . .
Total Final Expenditure
58-1
14-5
11-0
-M
17-5
54-7
12-8
13-7
1-9
16-9
55-1
13- 3
14- 3
0-3
17-0
100-0
100-0
100-0
55-1
13- 2
14- 0
0-5
17-2
100-0
CHANGES IN NATIONAL EXPENDITURE 1953 to 1963 1958=100
Consumers' Public Exports of Goods Gross Gross National
Expenditure Authorities' and Services Fixed Capital Product
Current Formation
Expenditure
246
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Index of
National Income
r260
Investment
Manufacturing industry contributes about 35 per cent to the total output
of goods and services, and together with mining and quarrying, construction
and public utilities (gas, electricity and water) makes up just under half of
the total; agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for slightly under 4 per
cent; transport and communications, together with the distributive trades, for
more than 20 per cent. The remainder, just over one-quarter of total output,
includes public administration, education, health and financial services. Over
the past ten years the only marked change has been the decline in the
proportion contributed by agriculture (though agricultural output is still
rising).
Defence expenditure has made heavy calls upon resources at certain periods;
in peak years in the early 1950s it absorbed over 10 per cent of the gross
national product, but more recently the proportion has been about 7^ per cent;
in 1963 it was just over 7 per cent. In real terms, between 1954 and 1963
gross fixed capital formation rose by 51 per cent; exports of goods and services
went up by nearly a third and consumers expenditure by about 28 per cent;
public authorities’ current expenditure was up by just over 7 per cent, the
increase having been concentrated in the period since i960.
Gross fixed investment has risen markedly in the last 15 years. In 1948 fixed
investment in the United Kingdom was about 14 per cent of the gross national
product; it reached 19 per cent in 1961, falling back to just under 19 per cent
in 1962 and about 18 per cent in 1963. In some years, such as 1951 and i960,
and also in the latter part of 1963, the level of economic activity has been
influenced by a high and rising investment in stocks and in work in progress.
Fixed investment in manufacturing reached a peak of £1,239 million (27 per
cent of the total) in 1961, but fell to £1,066 million (22 per cent of the total)
in 1963, partly as a result of the completion of large programmes in the motor
vehicle and steel industries. Chemicals and electronics are other manufacturing
Tanker arriving at British Petroleum’s new refinery at Belfast.
Laying a section of methane pipeline.
The Isaac Newton 98-inch telescope under construction for
the Royal Observatory, Herstmonceux.
The Nimrod proton
accelerator at
the Rutherford
Laboratory of the
National Institute
for Research in
Nuclear Science.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT 1958 AND 1963
£ million at 1958 prices
0 1,000 2,000
(A) BY SECTOR 1
247
Public
Private
(B) BY TYPE
OF ASSET
Vehicles,
ships and
aircraft
Plant
and
machinery
Dwellings
Other
new buildings
and works
Dwellings] Other
Dwellings | Other
1 |1958
^^1963
industries in which investment has been especially high. Housing received a
substantial share of capital resources in the early part of the 1950s, but as a
proportion of total investment tended to decline until 1958; since then it has
risen in real terms by 43 per cent and a further big expansion in house-building
is planned for the second half of the 1960s. Electricity generation and the
distributive trades are other sectors in which investment has been at
particularly high levels.
Except in 1961, more than 40 per cent of total fixed investment over the
years 1951 to 1963 has been carried out by the central Government, the local
authorities and the public corporations, the last accounting for an average of
45 per cent of public investment over the period, and the central Government
for about 15 per cent. Each year the Government considers, in the light of the
overall position of the economy, proposals put forward by the authorities
concerned for capital expenditure in the following financial year. Public
investment in 1963 amounted to about £2,129 million, an increase of £189
million over 1962, reflecting increased expenditure on education, hospitals,
roads, electricity generation and other services. The planned rate of increase
in 1964 is even larger, and the total is expected to exceed £2,500 million.
Table 11 shows the division of gross fixed investment in 1958 and 1963 by
sectors and the diagram above shows the division between public and private
investment and the pattern of investment according to type of asset in the
same years.
An assessment of the value of the stock of fixed capital in the United
Kingdom at the end of 1961, made by Dr. Dean of the Central Statistical
Office, gives a total of £91,000 million at 1938 prices. This is about
50 per cent higher than in 1938, on the same basis of calculation. About 31 per
cent of the £91,000 million was attributable to dwellings and just under a
quarter to assets in manufacturing and construction.
I
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
248
TABLE 11
Gross Fixed
Investment
(At 1958 Prices)
Savings and the
Financing of
Investment
TABLE 12
Savings in the
United Kingdom"
Sector
Dwellings ..
Manufacturing
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distribution and other services"
Other (including roads) . .
Totals
“ Includes road goods transport.
£ million
1958
591
922
382
467
661
463
3,486
1963
(Preliminary)
851
986
606
396
969
700
4,508
Changes in
volume
1958 to 1963
1963
Per cent
+ 44
+ 7
+ 59
-15
+47
+ 51
+ 31
The marked growth of investment since 1954 has been greatly facilitated by
a substantial increase in personal savings (see Table 12). Personal savings in
1963 reached the record total of £1,953 million, having risen by £184 million
in the year. As a proportion of disposable income (9 per cent) it was below the
1961 level of over 10 per cent; the total, however, was nearly double the
average for the years 1958-60.
Persons
Companies . .
Public corporations
Central Government and local
authorities
Additions to dividend and interest
reserves and tax reserves
Totals
1959-61
(Average)
1,469
2,201
279
537
184
4,670
1962
1,769
2,215
432
871
-97
5,190
£ million
1963
(Preliminary^
1,953
2,344
528
491
134
5,450
“ Gross saving, i.e. before providing for depreciation and stock appreciation and for
tax, dividend and interest reserves.
The rise in personal savings has taken various forms. There has been
increased investment by the personal sector itself in new dwellings and fixed
assets. Life assurance premiums and other forms of contractual savings, such
as superannuation funds, have grown almost without interruption for many
years and in 1963 contributed about half the total. National Savings have also
increased since the early 1950s, although the improvement in 1963 to £315
million still fell short of the record peace-time total of £390 million in 1959.
Building societies are attracting considerable sums of personal savings, which
reached a peak of £477 million in 1963, having more than doubled in two
years.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Public
Authorities
249
The largest contribution to savings comes from companies, which up
to 1959 provided about half the total, but there was a fall in company profits
in 1961 and 1962 and only in 1963 did their total savings pass the i960 volume.
The proportion allocated to savings of gross trading profits of companies has
tended to fall since 1959 to under half the total, with an increasing share
being taken by dividends and interest payments.
Public corporations, as part of the policy of financing a larger share of their
investment needs from their own resources, have raised their savings total
considerably since 1959 and the 1963 total was about half as large again
as that of 1961.
Expenditure by the central Government (including the national insurance
funds) and the local authorities on revenue account, i.e. excluding public
investment but including interest paid on debt, has for some years been
about one-third of the gross national product, though after reaching a
relatively low level in the mid-1950s the proportion has been rising again.
It amounted to about 37 per cent in 1963. The main causes of this rise have
been the continuing growth of the social services, and especially education,
and (since i960) the upturn in defence expenditure, which absorbed
19 per cent of the total current expenditure of the public authorities in 1963
(compared with a peak of 27 per cent in 1953). Total expenditure by the
public authorities rose by about 34 per cent between 1958 and 1963.
The expansion of the national income has enabled central Government tax
revenue to increase by about 22 per cent since i960, despite several reductions
in taxation rates. Revenue from taxes on expenditure, and especially from
purchase tax on cars and durable goods, rose slightly faster from i960 to
1962 than that from taxes on income, partly because of tax reductions; but
the growth of personal incomes provided an increase of one-quarter in two years
in the yield from the taxes on incomes. Reductions in taxation led to a slight
drop in yields in 1963. Increases in the rates of contributions for the national
insurance and health schemes have increased revenues between i960 and 1963
by ^397 naillion to ^1,310 million. Revenue from rates imposed by local
authorities rose by nearly one-third from i960 to 1963.
Table 13 shows how the public authorities collected and spent their
revenue, including national insurance and health contributions, in 1958 and
1963-
Personal
Incomes and
Consumer
Expenditure
Incomes from employment in 1963 totalled £17,995 million, having increased
by a third in seven years, and accounted for slightly over 71 per cent of total
personal incomes (against 59I per cent in 1938). The diagram on p. 250 shows
the composition of personal income and expenditure in 1963.
After payment of income tax and surtax, income is fairly evenly distributed.
Of a total of 27-2 million incomes in 1962, there were only about 16,000
incomes of more than £6,000 a year. Fewer than a quarter (6-3 million) of
incomes after tax were in the £250-500 range and somewhat more (6-5
million) in the next range of £501-750. The number of incomes of £1,000
a year and above rose from o-86 million in 1954 to 3-89 million in 1962.
About 65! per cent of the yield from income tax and surtax came from persons
with annual incomes in this latter category, although the total incomes before
tax of this group accounted for only 30 per cent of all personal income.
The ownership of property and personal assets tends to be more concen¬
trated than income after tax. Estimates made by the Board of Inland Revenue
indicate that in 1962, 72 per cent of net personal wealth (including landed
250
TABLE 13
Combined Revenue
Accounts of
Public
Authorities in
1958 and 1963
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Revenue
Taxes on income and
capital
Taxes on expenditure
—alcohol, tobacco,
purchase tax, etc. . .
National insurance
and health contri¬
butions
Rates
Rent, dividends, in¬
terest, etc. . .
Gross trading income
Other
Totals
1958
£
million
2,725
2,393
859
650
543
155
3
1963
l
million
7,328
3,385
3,032
1,310
1,014
1,025
74
9,840
Per
cent
34-4
30-8
13-3
10-3
10-4
0-8
100-0
Expenditure
Central Government
current expenditure
on goods and ser¬
vices :
Military defence. .
Health services . .
Other
Local authorities’
current expenditure
on goods and ser¬
vices
Subsidies
Grants and national
insurance benefits. .
Debt interest
Surplus
Totals
1958
£
million
1,518
621
400
1,157
397
1,558
901
776
1963
£
million
1,891
849
628
1,800
578
2,364
1,239
491
7,328
Per
cent
9,840
19-2
8-6
6-4
18-3
5-9
24-0
12-6
5-0
100-0
property), amounting to about £58,000 million, was owned by 3,670,000
individuals, 7 per cent of the population.
While consumer expenditure rose by 42 per cent between 1956 and 1963 to
reach a total of £19,434 million, in real terms (i.e. after discounting the effect
of price changes) the increase has been 22 per cent. In the five years between
1958 and 1963 it rose by nearly 17 per cent. Of this larger expenditure, the
proportion devoted to food has been falling slightly each year and now
accounts for under 28 per cent (1953, 31 Per cent)l outlay on manufactured
foods and on beverages, however, has risen appreciably. Housing absorbs
about 10 per cent of total expenditure, the proportion showing a rising trend.
Spending on motor cars and other personal transport has shown a steep rise
for several years, particularly in 1963. There has also been a substantial
growth in spending on household electrical equipment, on beer and other
PERSONAL INCOME AND EXPENDITURE 1963
(In £ million at current prices)
INCOME
EXPENDITURE
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
251
alcoholic drinks. Outlays on running costs of vehicles have doubled to over
£600 million annually. In general the pattern of consumer spending reflects
the social changes and other developments outlined in Chapter 1.
TABLE 14
Consumer
Expenditure in
the United
Kingdom
(At 1958 Market
Prices)
Category
Expenditure
1958
£ million
1963
£ million
Increase
1958-63
£ million
Per cent
Food . .
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing, fuel and light
Clothing and footwear
Cars and motor cycles
Other durable goods
Other goods . .
Services
4,549
913
1,031
2,061
1,450
401
747
1,791
2,269
4,919
1,122
1,084
2,407
1,693
710
910
2,281
2,622
370
209
53
346
243
309
163
490
353
Totals
15,212
17,748
2,536
8-1
22-9
5-1
16-8
16-8
77-1
21-8
27-4
15-6
16-7
Incomes and
Prices
Incomes Policy
As noted earlier, the economy has been greatly affected by an almost
uninterrupted upward trend in prices; and the periods of price stability have
been of short duration, such as between 1953 and 1954 and again between
1958 and i960. The main immediate cause has been the tendency for money
incomes to rise faster than the long-term rate of increase of national production
at a time of full employment, and a very high level of utilisation of productive
resources. Since 1953 the annual rate of increase of domestic incomes has
been about 5-5 per cent, while the increase in the gross domestic product per
head of the labour force has been only about 2 per cent; the margin between
the two has tended to narrow since 1957, incomes having advanced by about
5-3 per cent annually and the domestic product per head by 2-3 per cent
annually.
Retail prices rose by 25 per cent between 1955 and 1963; over the same
period average weekly wage rates of manual workers went up by over 45 per
cent while average earnings from both wages and salaries were over 50 per cent
higher. Company profits are subject to large cyclical swings but since 1955,
and especially since i960, they have increased more slowly than incomes
from employment.
Measures taken by the Government to check gradual inflation have included
the prevention of excessive demand by monetary and fiscal measures—bank
rate, bank advances, hire purchase controls, taxation changes—and efforts to
promote voluntary restraint in increases in money incomes of all kinds.
Early in 1964 the Government announced its intention of strengthening
the existing legislation on monopolies and restrictive practices, including a
general prohibition of resale price maintenance (see p. 272) to encourage
competition and thus contribute towards greater stability of costs and
prices.
In recent years it has become increasingly recognised that a generally stable
price level combined with sustained economic growth can only be achieved
within the framework of an incomes policy, designed to keep the rise in money
252
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Longer Term
Policies
Balance of
Payments
incomes broadly in line with the long-term rate of growth in national
production.
The first step in the development of a positive incomes policy in Britain
was the Government’s request in the summer of 1961 for a ‘pause’ in wages,
salaries and other incomes, as one of a series of short-term measures necessary
at that time to relieve the strains on the economy and on the balance of pay¬
ments. The principles which, in the Government’s view, should govern
decisions about the scale of increases in incomes after the ‘pause’ were set out
in a White Paper, Incomes Policy: The Next Step. This recommended that,
since in recent years national production per head had been rising by 2-2^ per
cent a year, the average increase in money incomes should be kept within this
figure. This was subsequently raised to 3—3^ per cent which, according to
estimates made by the National Economic Development Council (NEDC),
was the average increase in national production per head necessary to achieve
an annual average rate of economic growth of 4 per cent.
To meet the need for impartial and authoritative advice on important
or difficult pay questions the Government set up the National Incomes
Commission in November 1962. In addition to considering matters referred
to it by the Government or the parties concerned, the Commission is required
to have regard to the Government’s pledge to restrain any undue growth in
aggregate profits which may result from restraint in earned incomes and to
report from time to time. The Commission has published its findings and
recommendations on several matters referred to it, and it is hoped that its
views will influence strongly the general climate of opinion in which wages
and salaries are determined and decisions affecting prices and profits are taken.
Long-term planning of public expenditure, with regular surveys for periods
of years ahead, has been much developed by the Government in recent
years. In December 1963 the first White Paper giving estimates of total public
expenditure for five years ahead on the basis of existing policies and programmes
was published.
As part of the Government’s plans to secure economic stability and
sustained growth, the National Economic Development Council (NEDC)
was set up in February 1962. The task of the NEDC, of which the Chancellor
of the Exchequer is chairman and which includes members from both sides
of industry, is to examine the economic performance of the nation with
particular concern for plans for the future in both the private and the public
sector, to consider use of national resources and to seek agreement upon ways
of increasing the rate of sound economic growth. The Council has its own
staff, and is assisted in its economic appraisal by detailed inquiries into a
cross-section of industry. The Council has published several reports on factors
affecting the rate of growth of the economy, and has agreed upon an objective
of an overall rate of 4 per cent per annum between 1961 and 1966 (see also
p. 267).
A strong balance of payments is vital to Britain because of its exceptionally
high degree of dependence on international trade, its many overseas com¬
mitments, and its position as banker to the sterling area.
In normal times it is necessary for Britain to earn a substantial surplus on
current account in order to finance a capital outflow in the form of private
investment and Government grants and loans. There are also, however,
important commitments which Britain has to meet within the current account.
The most important of these are the costs of overseas military expenditure,
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
253
which rose from £180 million in 1958 to £247 million in 1963, and grant
assistance to less developed territories, mainly the dependent territories,
which totalled £68 million in 1963; in addition, there is multilateral assistance,
in the form of contributions to international agencies, such as the International
Development Association.
Britain also has to make repayments of capital and interest on post-war
loans from the United States and Canada, the servicing of which requires
about £67 million a year. In addition, there has been a substantial increase
in recent years in Government loans to developing countries. (Total economic
aid from Britain to overseas countries, including gifts as well as loans,
rose from £81 million in 1957-58 to an annual average of about £150 million
from 1961 to 1963.)
On capital account, the largest component is generally private investment
abroad (net of disinvestment) and over the last five years the outflow has
averaged £300 million a year. A considerable proportion of this outflow has
been to the less developed countries and has thus maintained the traditional
role of Britain as a source of finance for overseas development. At the same
time there is a steady flow of private capital to Britain from overseas, mainly
from the United States. In recent years the net capital movement has been
outward; it was estimated to amount to £147 million in 1963.
Britain’s overseas short-term liabilities in the form of net sterling balances
and claims in sterling held by other countries and non-territorial organisations
are substantial, amounting to £3,689 million at the end of 1963. Gold and
foreign currency reserves at the end of August 1964 stood at £923 million. As a
second line of reserves, the United Kingdom has a substantial portfolio of
dollar securities of which the market value has recently averaged $1,000
million. In addition, Britain has drawing rights on the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) which it has exercised on three occasions, in 1947, 1956 and 1961.
The 1962 one-year stand-by arrangement with the Fund, which authorised
drawings up to the equivalent of $1,000 million, was renewed in August 1963
and again in August 1964, each time for a further year. Estimates published
by the Bank of England in 1964 indicate that, taking into account external
assets and liabilities as a whole, the United Kingdom is on balance a net
creditor country.
For a fuller account of the balance of payments, see Chapter 15.
254
11
INDUSTRY
Location
Greater London and
the South-eastern
Region
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised, and today fourteen people work in mining, manufacturing and
building for every one in agriculture. It is the world’s third largest exporter of
manufactured goods and the range of its industrial manufactures reflects its
position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
The factors that have influenced the location of industry in Britain are many
and various. During the rapid industrialisation of the nineteenth century
one of the most important influences was the proximity of coal, the major
source of power, particularly when it was associated with ease of access to
other raw materials such as iron ore in the West Midlands and salt (for
chemicals) in Cheshire, and to the coast, which in turn offered easy access
to imported raw materials and a quick outlet for exports. In the course of
the past hundred years, the pull exercised by coal has been progressively
weakened as improved means of communication and an alternative source of
power in electricity have been developed and have enabled advantage to be
taken of other sites—for example, those near to big consumer markets and
plentiful supplies of labour. The main areas of industrial concentration are
still, with one exception (London), the areas which saw the beginning of
Britain’s industrial greatness and which, with two exceptions (London and
Belfast), are on or near coalfields; but many smaller and more widely dispersed
centres of industry have grown up, notably in southern England.
During the inter-war period there was a tendency for the ‘new’ industries,
such as those manufacturing motor vehicles, electrical goods and rubber
products, to develop rapidly in the south (especially in and around Greater
London) and in the Midlands. On the other hand, this period was one of
acute depression and mass unemployment for the older industrial areas wdiich
specialised in the great staple industries—coalmining, steel, shipbuilding,
marine engineering and cotton manufacture. These conditions prompted
official action aimed at encouraging the development and diversification of
industry in the areas where labour and other unused resources are to be found
and discouraging further industrialisation in congested areas.
A brief description follows of the location of British industry, grouped
according to broad geographical areas.
London, situated at the head of ocean navigation on the Thames estuary,
is Britain’s capital and main communication centre, probably still the world’s
most important financial centre, one of the world’s three largest cities (with
Tokyo and New York) and one of the world’s three largest ports (with New
York and Rotterdam). Greater London (see p. 17), including the urbanised
fringe areas within 40 to 45 miles of Charing Cross, has a working population
of over five million, of whom nearly a half are in manufacturing industry.
London is the main centre in Britain of the clothing and food and drink
industries, of printing, of cinema film production, and of the manufacture
of furniture, materials for the arts, precision instruments and many other
INDUSTRY
255
The South Coast
South-west England
East Anglia and
Lincolnshire
Midlands
specialised products. Small firms predominate in many of these industries
and the average size of manufacturing firms (particularly in the County of
London) is well below the national average. London, especially its outer ring,
is also an important area for light engineering, chemicals and consumer
goods and has some heavy engineering plants and a number of important
research establishments. Towards the periphery of the London conurbation
and in the new urban development outside it, industry, particularly the
electronics and a variety of consumer goods industries, has been expanding
rapidly; some of the largest aircraft plants are in these areas as well as the fac¬
tories, at Dagenham, Luton and Dunstable, of two of the five main motor vehicle
manufacturers. Along the lower Thames and Medway estuaries there are large
oil refineries as well as shipyards and a variety of other engineering works.
The Channel coast has been much developed for tourist traffic and as a place
for retirement. A great part of the coast eastwards from Bournemouth consists
of built-up areas, which from Brighton (population 163,000) eastwards are
partly dormitories for people working in London. Portsmouth (population
225,000) is a naval port and has some shipbuilding and general manufactures.
Southampton (population 207,000) is the largest port in Britain for ocean¬
going liners and its industries include ship repairing, oil refining and synthetic
rubber. Dover, Folkestone and Newhaven are packet ports.
The coasts of Devon and Cornwall have a large tourist trade and there is
considerable tourism through much of the region; there are also some pros¬
perous retirement areas. Bristol, the largest city (pop. 434,000), is a leading
port and commercial centre with aircraft, aero-engines, tobacco, food proces¬
sing, paper, printing and other industries. Gloucester (71,000), originally an
inland port and commercial town, Cheltenham (74,000), originally a resort
town, and the area between and adjacent to them produce a variety of manu¬
factures, including aircraft engines, instruments and accessories and the well-
known West of England cloth. Swindon (96,000) has railway and general
engineering works. Bath (83,000), originally a resort town and the centre of an
agricultural district, has food manufactures and engineering trades, including
cranes and agricultural implements.
Besides being one of the most productive agricultural regions, the eastern
counties possess some sizeable towns. Ipswich (pop. 119,000) and Grantham
(20,000) are notable for agricultural machinery and implements, and
Norwich (119,000) for footwear and food manufacture. Food canning and
freezing, based mainly on locally grown produce, have developed rapidly.
Scunthorpe (69,000) in Lincolnshire, is an important steel-making centre,
and the ports of Grimsby (96,000) and Yarmouth (53,000) have extensive
fish processing plants.
The main industrial area of the Midlands consists of the great conurbation
centred on Birmingham and Wolverhampton (which includes portions of
Staffordshire, Worcestershire and Warwickshire) where there is a wide variety
of industry, including notably the manufacture of metals, electrical and
engineering products of all kinds, and also jewellery, rubber products and
domestic metalware. The smaller conurbation of North Staffordshire,
centred on Stoke-on-Trent, is devoted chiefly to the manufacture of pottery
and china and to coalmining. The largest concentrations of motor vehicle
manufacture in the United Kingdom are situated in the Midlands, at Coventry
(pop. 314,000) and Birmingham (1,116,000) and, farther to the south, at
Cowley, near Oxford (107,000).
256
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lancashire
Yorkshire
Industrial cities and towns lying outside the main industrial area include
Leicester (270,000) noted for clothing (including hosiery and knitwear),
boots and shoes and machinery for making these products; Derby (132,000),
noted for general engineering and aero-engines; Nottingham (315,000),
hosiery, a variety of engineering, lace, pharmaceutical products, tobacco;
Rugby (54,000), electrical engineering; Northampton (105,000), footwear,
engineering; and Kidderminster (43,000), carpets. Corby (41,000) in
Northamptonshire, has a steel industry originally based on local deposits of
iron ore, and at Peterborough (64,000) there are several large engineering
works. The richest coalfield in Britain, with the highest output per man, lies
in the north-west of the area and continues into Yorkshire.
Manchester (655,000) is the commercial hub of the cotton and man-made
fibre textiles industries, a very important financial and commercial centre and
a major port. It is also one of the chief centres for electrical and heavy
engineering and the production of machine tools, petro-chemicals, dyestuffs,
and pharmaceutical goods, while it has a wide range of other manufactures.
Most of the cotton and other yarns are spun in Bolton (160,000), Oldham
(114,000), and Rochdale (86,000), and at Stockport (in Cheshire) (143,000);
farther to the north lie the weaving towns of Burnley (80,000), Nelson
(32,000), Blackburn (105,000), Accrington (39,000) and Darwen (29,000);
Preston (112,000) and Bury (62,000) both have spinning and weaving plants.
Engineering industries, notably the manufacture of printing, paper making,
textile and electrical machinery and commercial vehicles are, however, more
important to the area than cotton, which has been declining for some years.
The Lancashire coalfield also lies in the Manchester-Wigan area.
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of overseas
trade, links Manchester with Merseyside. It passes through the important
industrial towns of Warrington (76,000) with its metal industries (such as
wire-drawing), Widnes (54,000) with its chemicals, and Ellesmere Port
(47,000) with its oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey estuary.
St. Helens (107,000) to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufacture.
Liverpool (740,000) is the second port of Britain, a great commercial and
insurance centre and, after London, the greatest centre for processing imported
foodstuffs and raw materials, being noted especially for flour milling, soap
manufacture, sugar refining and rubber products. Among its older industries
is ship repairing; shipbuilding is a major industry across the river at Birken¬
head (144,000). Many new industries, including electrical engineering, the
manufacture of other heavy industrial equipment and, more recently, motor
vehicle manufacture, have been established in the Liverpool area, particularly
on industrial estates. Barrow (65,000) in the north-west of the county, is a
well-known shipbuilding and marine engineering area.
Most of the county’s industry is located in the West Riding, where about
90 per cent of the United Kingdom’s worsted industry and the greater pro¬
portion of its woollen industry are found. Bradford (297,000) is the commercial
centre of the wool trade and important for worsted; Morley (42,000) and
Leeds (514,000) have specialised in cheaper cloths, and Batley (40,000),
Dewsbury (54,000) and Spenborough (37,000) in heavy cloth, but their
production is becoming more diversified. Huddersfield (132,000) has a
reputation for fine woollens and worsteds and Halifax (96,000) for carpets. In
most of the larger centres of the wool industry a variety of engineering
products are manufactured. Leeds (514,000), the commercial capital of the
area, has a large ready-made clothing industry and important engineering
INDUSTRY
Northern England
Wales
Scotland
257
plants. Farther south is the heavy engineering centre of Sheffield (495,000),
famous for its high quality steels, cutlery and tools. The area’s extensive
coalfields provide about one-fifth of Britain’s coal. York (104,000) noted for
chocolates and confectionery manufacture and with important railway work¬
shops, and Hull (301,000), one of the world’s largest fishing ports and with
many manufacturing industries, including engineering, vegetable oil process¬
ing, paints and sawmilling, are other important industrial towns in Yorkshire.
The greater part of this region (Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Durham and the East Riding of Yorkshire) is an area of mountains, lakes and
moors and is relatively thinly populated. Most of its population of 3-2
million is concentrated in the coastal strip about 20 miles deep and 45 miles
long, from the coalfields north of the Tyne to the south bank of the Tees.
Within this area the main centres are Tyneside (935,000), including Newcastle
upon Tyne (273,000), Gateshead, Tynemouth, South Shields, Wallsend and
Jarrow; and Tees-side (545,000), including Middlesbrough (158,000) and West
Hartlepool. Other large towns are Sunderland (190,000) and Darlington
(84,000).
The whole region is more dependent than other parts of England on tradi¬
tional heavy industries, notably coalmining, iron and steel manufacture,
shipbuilding and repairing and chemicals, which together employ nearly
a third of the male workers. This proportion has been falling steadily as the
result of the establishment of industrial estates and other Government
measures to attract new types of enterprise and promote the diversification
of industry. A new and comprehensive plan for north-east England, to
accelerate industrial growth and diversification and the modernisation of the
whole environment, has been announced by the Government and is now being
implemented (see p. 265). Industries in the area include those making mining
and other machinery, rolling mill plant, earth-moving equipment, machine
tools, ropes, glass, clothing and scientific instruments.
Nearly two-thirds of the population of Wales and Monmouthshire (2-65
million) live in the two counties of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. In this
area are the coal mines which, though long worked and operating at increasing
depths, still produce nearly all Britain’s anthracite and much of its steam and
other specialised coals, and still employ more workers than any branch of
manufacturing industry. Nevertheless, a large and increasing range of capital
and consumer goods production has grown up. The steel industry, with some
of the most modern plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain’s output of
tin plate and a large proportion of its sheet steel. In the past 30 years a number
of new industries have been established, including plastics, synthetic fibres,
clothing, electronics and light engineering. Many of these new factories are
on industrial estates.
The main cities are also the three major ports—Cardiff (261,000), Newport
(109,000) and Swansea (170,000). Milford Haven, a magnificent deep-water
harbour until recently little developed, has two major oil refineries and also
oil and ore handling facilities.
In North Wales a number of light industries are located in the seaside resorts
and other towns, particularly Wrexham (36,000).
About three-quarters of Scotland’s population (5-2 million) is concentrated in
the central Lowlands, a belt some 65 miles wide and 15 to 30 miles deep
between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth. The principal cities in this
area are Glasgow (1 million) and Edinburgh (477,000). Clydeside, which
includes the city of Glasgow, is the United Kingdom’s largest shipbuilding
258
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern Ireland
The Structure
of Industry
Role of Public
Enterprise
and marine engineering centre; it also has a great variety of general engineering
enterprises and other industries. The steel industry, sited mainly in north
Lanarkshire, produces a wide range of products. In Edinburgh there are now
expanding electronic equipment industries in addition to the long established
engineering, printing and brewing industries. The new towns of East Kilbride,
Cumbernauld and Glenrothes have growing concentrations of modern
industry, while an entirely new motor vehicle industry has recently been
established in West Lothian and Renfrewshire. A fourth new town, Livingston,
was designated in 1962.
Outside the central Lowland belt there is considerable industrial concen¬
tration in the vicinity of Dundee (185,000) and in Aberdeen (186,000), and
a number of towns outside these areas have been attracting light industries in
recent years. Dundee’s traditional manufacture is jute, but office machinery,
clocks and watches, refrigerators and washing machines are now also made
there, while in north-east Scotland is the largest concentration of whisky
distilleries.
Most of northern Scotland is mountainous and much of southern Scotland
is hilly and rugged. These regions are sparsely populated, but the Scottish
Highlands possess significant resources of hydro-electric power. There are
high-quality tweed and knitwear industries in the Highlands and Islands and
in the valley towns of the southern uplands of Scotland respectively.
Although the area is relatively small and lacking in minerals, there is sub¬
stantial and growing industrialisation, particularly in and around the capital
city of Belfast (413,000). The largest single shipyard in the United Kingdom is
sited in Belfast and, in addition to other long-established activities, including
the manufacture of marine engines, ropes, twine, tobacco and clothing,
Northern Ireland has long been an important centre for textiles (particularly
linen). It is one of the most important areas in Europe for man-made fibre
production and provides about one-fifth of Britain’s production. There has
also been extensive development in aircraft construction, oil-well equipment,
electronic instruments, telephone switchgear equipment, toys, shoes, carpets
and synthetic rubber.
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal,
corporate, co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different
forms, and all are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary
from the many small workshops to vast organisations such as the National
Coal Board, a public corporation with about 625,000 employees; Imperial
Chemical Industries Ltd., a limited liability company which, with its sub¬
sidiaries, employs over 110,000 persons in the United Kingdom; and the
Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd., a co-operative society with about
54,000 employees.
Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, the growth of the social
services, especially health, education and housing, led to the progressively
greater influence of the public sector of the economy. There was also an
increase in the State’s direct participation in productive and commercial
activities, particularly in the decade 1940-50. State participation is effected
mainly through special statutory bodies set up to deal with a particular activity.
Such bodies, though not part of a Government department, are under a
considerable but varying degree of public control (see p. 259). The most
important of these statutory bodies are the public corporations which operate
major industries and services in the public interest. Altogether over 9 per cent
INDUSTRY
259
of the labour force works for these bodies, while another 14 per cent is almost
equally divided between central and local government.
The public corporation today is, generally speaking, a public body having
a clearly defined and specific task. Its managing board and its staff are chosen
for their experience and competence in a particular field; they are not civil
servants, and although they are accountable to Parliament for their actions
in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring
departments who are responsible for the management of the corporations.
Certain of the corporations are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer grants
to help them in carrying out the duties with which they have been charged.
Before the second world war, a number of public corporations were
established1 in those industries and services where it was considered that the
national interest required co-ordination or control by a public authority.
Their constitutions had no standard pattern and their governing bodies
differed in the method of appointment and in composition.
Immediately after the second world war, the nationalisation Acts set up
public corporations to run certain major industries and services, including
coalmining, inland transport, gas supply, electricity generation and supply,
and civil air transport. These post-war corporations are less varied in the
structure of their governing bodies, which are appointed by the responsible
minister.
The following corporations, the organisation and functions of which are
described in later chapters, are now operating or controlling large-scale
industries or services:
Atomic Energy: The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
Aviation: The British Overseas Airways Corporation, British European
Airways.
Banking: The Bank of England.
Broadcasting: The British Broadcasting Corporation, the Independent
Television Authority.
Coal: The National Coal Board.
Electric Power: The Electricity Council, the Central Electricity Generating
Board, the Area Electricity Boards, the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electric Board, the South of Scotland Electricity Board, the Electricity
Board for Northern Ireland.
Gas: The Gas Council, the Area Gas Boards.
Transport: The British Railways Board, the British Transport Docks
Board, the British Waterways Board, the London Transport Board, the
Transport Holding Company, the Ulster Transport Authority.
1 The principal corporations appointed before the second world war were: (1) the
Central Electricity Board, established by the Electricity Supply Act, 1926, to rationalise
electricity generation and build and operate a main transmission system; (2) the
British Broadcasting Corporation, established in 1927 by Royal Charter to provide a
national broadcasting service; (3) the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland, estab¬
lished by the Electricity (Supply) Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, to develop electricity
supplies in Northern Ireland outside the two county boroughs, Belfast and London¬
derry; (4) the London Passenger Transport Board, established by Act of Parliament
in 1933, to operate the public transport system of the London metropolitan area;
(5) the Northern Ireland Road Transport Board, established by the Road and Rail
Transport Act (Northern Ireland), 1935, to acquire public road transport services in
Northern Ireland outside the county boroughs; (6) the British Overseas Airways
Corporation, established by the British Overseas Airways Act, 1939, to take over the
operation of the two main existing air transport companies—Imperial Airways and
British Airways.
260
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mining and
Quarrying
Manufacturing
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining.
The coalmining industry of Great Britain (see p. 275) is operated as a single
co-ordinated enterprise under the direction of the National Coal Board.
Nearly all other mining and quarrying (iron ore, sand, gravel, chalk,
limestone, salt, tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is undertaken by private
enterprises, usually owned and operated by limited liability companies.
About 67,000 workers are employed in mining and quarrying, excluding
coalmining.
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Exceptions include
fissile materials and radioactive isotopes made by the Atomic Energy
Authority, locomotives and rolling-stock built for the Railways Board in its
own workshops, a considerable quantity of arms and military equipment
made in Royal Ordnance factories and other factories operated by the War
Office and the Ministry of Aviation, and some fighting ships built in naval
dockyards operated by the Admiralty Board. Staff of the Stationery Office do
some printing and bookbinding, while the repair, and to a limited extent the
construction, of post office equipment is carried on in factories run by the
Post Office. Certain factories giving employment to the severely disabled
are operated by Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company financed
on the Vote of the Ministry of Labour, which appoints the directors (see
p. 453). The equity of one large iron and steel company, Richard Thomas
and Baldwins, is still held by a Government agency, the Iron and Steel
Holding and Realisation Agency (see p. 296). The Government also holds
51 per cent of the equity of a major oil company, British Petroleum Limited,
and has a controlling interest in a few other companies.
Surveys of the size of all manufacturing establishments employing more
than 10 persons are made periodically by the Ministry of Labour; the results
of the most recent of these surveys, based on returns rendered by employers
in June 1961, show that nearly a third of all employees in such establishments
are in those employing from 100 to 499 persons, while slightly over a third
are in establishments employing 1,000 or more persons. A high proportion
of the biggest establishments are in the heavy industries, while the average
size of establishments in industries making consumer goods is smaller than
in manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results obtained
in earlier surveys on similar lines suggest that there is a slow but significant
trend towards an increase in the average size of manufacturing establishments:
in 1961, establishments with 1,000 or more employees were found to employ
2,821,000 persons, over 25 per cent more than in 1953 and more than times
as many as in 1935. In addition, there are a very large number of manufacturing
establishments with fewer than 11 employees and in these a total of about
750,000 workers are estimated to be employed.
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of
manufacturing enterprises, as a single enterprise may own several establish¬
ments, not all of them necessarily engaged in the same or similar activities.
The most recent analysis of manufacturing enterprises by size (employment)
is provided by the Report of the Census of Production for 1958. An enter¬
prise, as defined in the Census, normally consists of either a single firm or a
holding company together with its subsidiaries. Just over half of all employ¬
ment in British manufacturing industries in 1958 was accounted for by about
950 large private enterprises employing 1,000 or more people, the largest
70 or so accounting roughly for a quarter. A further indication of the size
of companies is the value of net assets. Those of the largest, Imperial
INDUSTRY
Building and
Civil Engineering
Industrial
Association
261
Chemical Industries, total nearly fyoo million, while there are about twenty
companies registered in Britain with assets of over ^100 million.
In some industries a small number of big companies and their subsidiaries
are responsible for most of the total production. Examples are oil refining,
steel making, the manufacture of motor vehicles and components, aircraft
and aero-engines, heavy electrical equipment, bicycles, tobacco, cement, and
basic chemicals. Shares in these companies are usually distributed among a
great number of holders and it is rare for a few large holders to have a con¬
trolling interest. For example, five of the largest public companies each have
more than 100,000 shareholders. In recent years there has been a relatively
large number of mergers, creating larger units of control; and in some
industries, notably brewing, pharmaceuticals, aircraft, electrical products and
newspaper and magazine publishing, there have been increases in concentra¬
tion. There has also been a growth of large industrial holding companies,
controlling a wide range of subsidiary companies with a diversity of industrial
interests.
The way in which the work of production is divided within and between
different firms varies from industry to industry and is determined by the
most economic methods of production and distribution. In the cotton
industry, for example, it is usual for different firms to undertake the various
main processes of production (spinning, weaving, finishing), while in the
woollen section of the wool textile industry all these processes are commonly
undertaken within the same firm. Some of the leading establishments in the
vehicles group of industries are primarily engaged on the assembly of parts,
many of which have been manufactured for them under contract by specialist
firms.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on
pp. 294-321.
In building and civil engineering, large-scale work is usually carried out by
private contractors, although the Ministry of Public Building and Works is
the largest single employer of building labour while nearly 45 per cent of
the industry’s output is for public authorities.
Building firms may be divided into those undertaking general building and
civil engineering work and those concerned with highly specialised work,
many of which operate outside as well as inside the building industry.
Building is an industry of small firms; more than three-quarters of the firms
employ fewer than 20 employees. For a fuller account of the building and
civil engineering industries see p. 291.
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings
have increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different
purposes. Some of the more important of these purposes may be classified
as follows:
1. The provision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison
with the Government, and representation of their members’ point of view.
2. The regulation of trading practices, sometimes including the regulation
of prices (see p. 272).
3. Negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of work.
Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with varying
completeness, most of British industry, but there are wide sectors of industry
where there are no collective agreements to regulate trading practices.
Associations which deal with labour matters usually consist of firms engaged
262
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Relations with
Government
in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. Organisations
mainly concerned with representations to the Government, provision of
common services or the regulation of trading practices are built up round a
product or an allied group of products. In an industrial sector concerned
wholly with an allied group of products, a single association may undertake
all the required functions.
There are about 80 national federations and probably altogether about
1,500 employers’ organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or
branches of the national federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages
and conditions of work. Most of the national federations are in turn affiliated
to the British Employers’ Confederation (EEC), the national body representing
employers on labour questions affecting industry generally (see p. 465).
The number of manufacturers’ associations concerned with providing
common services is not known precisely, but according to a survey carried
out by Political and Economic Planning (an independent research organisa¬
tion) between 1953 and 1956, some 1,300 were in existence, varying greatly
in importance, structure and activities. Membership of the Federation of
British Industries (FBI), the national body recognised as a principal spokesman
for British industry on economic, commercial and production (as distinct from
labour) matters, consists of some 8,500 individual firms and about 280
national trade organisations, with a total affiliated membership of over
40,000 firms. The FBI has offices in the main industrial centres in the United
Kingdom and is widely represented abroad.
A number of the organisations affiliated to the FBI also deal with labour
matters and are affiliated to the British Employers’ Confederation. The two
organisations work closely together on matters of common interest.
Other important national associations of employers are the National
Association of British Manufacturers (NABM) and the Association of British
Chambers of Commerce. The NABM is the largest organisation of individual
manufacturing firms (over 5,000, mainly small or medium sized), with the
requirements of which its ten regional branches are particularly concerned.
Some sixty trade associations are affiliated to it. The Association of British
Chambers of Commerce, founded in i860, is the central organisation to which
98 local chambers of commerce (together with 15 British Chambers of
Commerce operating in foreign countries) are affiliated. In Scotland there is
also a central organisation, the Council of Scottish Chambers of Commerce.
These bodies are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist to
promote the interests of local industry and commerce. The FBI, the NABM
and the Chambers of Commerce often act jointly in matters of common
concern.
It was announced in July 1963 that the governing councils of the BEC
and the FBI and the regional chairmen of the NABM were to take steps to
define the shape of a single new National Industrial Organisation to take the
place of these three existing organisations. In April 1964 a report prepared by
two commissioners on behalf of the organisations was published and in July
the governing councils of the three bodies each separately agreed that the
formation of a single National Industrial Organisation was desirable, subject
to certain specific problems being overcome.
The Government can influence industrial development in a number of ways
through fiscal and monetary policy, through the level of public expenditure,
through the policies of publicly owned enterprises, by physical controls, by
inducements, by exhortation and by the provision of services, information and
INDUSTRY
263
advice. There are relatively few physical controls over industry: the chief
ones, apart from labour legislation and certain export and import controls
over a small range of products, derive from power to stop new building or
changes in the use of land and from certain powers to investigate and forbid
monopolies and restrictive practices.
A system has grown up whereby a particular Government department acts
as the main point of contact, or ‘production department’, for each major
industry.
The department through which the Government’s relations with trade and
industry are chiefly conducted is the Board of Trade (which has regional
offices in the principal industrial centres) and its responsibilities cover a
wide range of industries and materials. Certain industries and services,
however, are the responsibility of other departments, as production depart¬
ments :
Ministry of Aviation .. . . Aircraft, aero-engines and electronics
industries and civil aviation.
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
Ministry of Power
Ministry of Transport ..
Ministry of Public Building and
Works
Ministry of Housing and Local
Government
Farming, horticulture, and fisheries
in England and Wales; food pro¬
cessing in Great Britain.
Coal, oil, gas, electricity (including
nuclear power), iron and steel.
Transport services (excluding air
transport), shipbuilding and ship
repairing, roadmaking, and certain
sections of the quarrying industry.
Building, civil engineering and
building materials.
Housebuilding in England and
Wales.
Ministry of Health
Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland
Scottish Development Department
Medical and surgical goods.
Agriculture and horticulture in
Scotland; Scottish fisheries.
Scottish economic development
generally (including industry,
electricity, roads, housing) in con¬
junction with the Board of Trade
and other departments covering the
whole of Great Britain.
The Treasury is responsible for economic policy, and specifically for fiscal
and monetary policy, through which it is able to influence the level of
economic activity and the utilisation of the nation’s resources. The Ministry
of Labour is the channel through which manpower policy is conducted.
The Department of Education and Science is responsible for the promotion
of education, undertakes research with broad industrial applications in its
own establishments, and assists industrial research in general and encourages
the widest possible dissemination of results (see p. 219).
There are separate departments of the Northern Ireland Government for
matters within the competence of the Northern Ireland Parliament. The
Ministry of Commerce deals with industry, including the encouragement of
industrial development.
264
Distribution of
Industry and
Regional
Development
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
While the Government has no power to direct an individual firm to set up a new
factory or plant in any particular area or site, it has sought, on both economic
and social grounds, to control the expansion of industry in some areas and
to encourage it in others.
One object has been to try to limit the expansion of industry in congested
areas, such as Greater London or Birmingham; and the other to induce
movement of expanding industry to areas of high unemployment or, second¬
arily, to new or expanded towns taking population from congested areas.
The negative powers required derive from the Town and Country Planning
Acts, under which the consent of the local planning authority is, in general,
necessary for any new building, any extension of a building or any change in
the use of an existing building. Where industrial floor space of more than
5,000 square feet is to be created, such consent cannot be sought without a
certificate from the Board of Trade that the development is consistent with
the proper distribution of industry.
Assistance for areas of high unemployment began to be given in 1934 (when
the inter-war depression was at its worst) and has been given ever since under
successive Acts. The main legislative basis of the Government’s present
positive powers is provided by the Local Employment Acts, i960 and 1963.
Under the i960 Act, the Government’s powers of assistance were centred in
one department, the Board of Trade, which can name as ‘development
districts’ places where high and persistent unemployment exists or is expected,
and can offer a number of inducements to industrialists to settle or expand
there. Specifically, the Board can build factories for leasing at favourable rents
or sale on deferred terms; make a capital grant towards the cost of an industria¬
list’s own factory or for unusual initial expenses arising solely from the choice
of a development district; and make loans towards working capital or for
acquiring premises or equipment. The appropriate Government departments
can also make grants to local authorities for clearing derelict or neglected sites
and for improving basic services.
Under the Act, the Government-controlled industrial estate companies,
which under the Distribution of Industry Acts had run the industrial estates
in the development areas, were replaced by three Industrial Estate Manage¬
ment Corporations, one each for England, Wales and Scotland. These
corporations are controlled and financed by the Board of Trade.
The rise in unemployment during the winter of 1962-63 (see p. 446) was
particularly marked in Scotland, north-east England and Merseyside. The
Government accordingly increased public expenditure particularly in these
areas, strengthened its powers under the Local Employment Acts and took
certain other measures. To stimulate industrial expansion generally, investment
allowances were increased in November 1962. Under the Finance Act, 1963, a
new business in a development district was allowed to write off its investment
in plant and machinery at any rate which it chose (thus postponing tax
liability). The Local Employment Act, 1963, enhanced the Board of Trade’s
powers by enabling it to offer standard grants of 25 per cent of building costs
and 10 per cent of plant and machinery costs to businesses setting up or
expanding in development districts.
The President of the Board of Trade assumed special responsibility for
co-ordinating regional development policies on his appointment as Secretary
of State for Industry, Trade and Regional Development in October 1963.
These policies have three main aims: (1) to bring about a more even spread
of economic activity throughout the country; (2) to maintain the individual
character of the regions, their diversity and versatility; and (3) to modernise
Northern Ireland
Rural Industries
INDUSTRY 265
and improve the environment and thus the conditions of life wherever there
is a legacy of industrial and urban decay.
Detailed studies of the regions have therefore been put in hand in
preparation, within the national framework, of long-term programmes for
the growth of different parts of the country.
The regional development programmes published for central Scotland and
north-east England seek to stimulate industrial diversification and growth by
the modernisation of the regions. A central feature of both programmes is the
identification of ‘growth places’ in each region, i.e. places where the factors for
rapid and substantial economic growth are most favourable. Extra public
service investment on housing, roads and other services is being concentrated
on these focal points in order to start a process of self-generating growth that
will spread widely through each region.
A study of south-east England, which concentrated on housing and land use
problems, was published in March 1964. In order to deal with the expected
population increase there of 3J million over the next 20 years, it suggested
extensive additions to land allocations in development plans, the creation of
three new cities and a number of new towns and major expansions of existing
towns. The Government has accepted the broad strategy proposed.
The Local Employment Acts do not apply to Northern Ireland. The matters
with which the Acts deal are the concern of the Northern Ireland Parliament
but the provision of the Finance Act, 1963, which gives an industrial under¬
taking freedom to write off for tax purposes the cost of new fixed plant and
machinery at any rate it chooses (‘free depreciation’) applies to Northern
Ireland as well as to the Development Districts of Great Britain. Under the
Industries Development Acts (Northern Ireland), 1945 to 1953, a comprehen¬
sive and flexible scheme of assistance (which can include the tenancy or
purchase on favourable terms of a Government-built factory, together with
a grant towards the cost of plant and machinery and the cost of transferring
equipment from a factory outside Northern Ireland) can be offered to projects
which appear likely to make a desirable contribution to the economy of
Northern Ireland. Grants and loans can also be offered to the appropriate
authorities for the improvement of basic services if these should be considered
inadequate for a given development. Firms which are assisted under the
Industries Development legislation are expected to undertake a specific
development which will employ an agreed number of persons within a given
period. Under the Capital Grants to Industry Acts (Northern Ireland),
1954 to 1962, manufacturing enterprises in Northern Ireland are entitled to
claim outright grants of 33^ per cent of their annual expenditure on plant
and machinery and industrial building, subject, in the case of firms new to
Northern Ireland, to a maximum grant of £200,000 in any one year. This
assistance, which is largely unconditional, is intended primarily to encourage
modernisation and capital investment.
Since 1945, 177 new firms have been established in Northern Ireland and
139 schemes of expansion carried out with Government assistance, develop¬
ments which at present are employing some 50,000 persons. The Ministry
of Commerce is the Northern Ireland Government department concerned
with the administration of the Industries Development and Capital Grants
legislation.
Encouragement is given to the development of rural industries. In England
and Wales there is the Rural Industries Bureau, which, on the recommenda¬
tion of Rural Community Councils, provides technical advice and instruction
266
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Organisations
Statistical
Services
to craftsmen and small rural businesses; it also provides loans from the Rural
Industries Loan Fund, started in 1940, for the acquisition of equipment and
the purchase or improvement of workshops. In Wales the Development
Commission1 has financed small factories to stimulate rural industries and
prevent rural depopulation. In Scotland the Scottish Country Industries
Development Trust, founded in 1935, exercises local and national respon¬
sibilities for the development of rural industries, and in Northern Ireland
the Rural Industries Development Committee is run with Government assist¬
ance under the auspices of the Northern Ireland Council of Social Service.
In Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales there are national organisations
devoted to encouraging the expansion and diversification of industry. The
Northern Ireland Development Council, established in 1955, makes more
widely known in Great Britain and elsewhere the facilities offered by Northern
Ireland to new undertakings; and advises the Northern Ireland Government
on matters connected with industrial development. The chairman of the
council is appointed by the Prime Minister of Northern Ireland and the other
members are appointed by the Prime Minister in consultation with the
chairman. The Scottish Council (Development and Industry), with a wide
membership including local authorities, trade associations, trade unions,
chambers of commerce, co-operative societies and banks, is concerned with
the economic development of Scotland. It assists the expansion of existing
industry, fosters the growth of new industries, especially in areas requiring
development, encourages exports, organises exhibitions and publicises
Scottish trade and industry. There are several voluntary associations concerned
with the needs of Welsh industry as a whole, but the most similar in aims
and constitution to the Scottish Council is the Development Corporation for
Wales, founded in 1959.
In England certain regions and cities have established industrial develop¬
ment associations which are concerned with studying local industrial needs
and with trying to attract suitable industry. These associations are sponsored
mainly by local authorities and trade associations, but may also include
firms, financial and commercial interests, and individuals in their membership.
The Central Statistical Office, which is attached to the Cabinet Office, was
established in 1940 to provide a comprehensive statistical service to assist the
authorities in framing economic and financial policy. Although departments
themselves compile statistics relating to their particular responsibilities, and
may publish them in their own standard publications, the comprehensive
statistical publications are prepared by the Central Statistical Office, which
collects the main departmental statistics and compiles its own series from
departmental and other information. Statistics relating to economic affairs may
be found in its regular publications: the Monthly Digest of Statistics, Economic
Trends (which provides a quarterly summary of the balance of payments),
Financial Statistics (monthly), the Annual Abstract of Statistics, the Preliminary
Estimates of National Income and Balance of Payments (published annually
before the Budget) and the fuller National Income and Expenditure Blue Book
issued later in the year. Statistics on Incomes, Prices, Employment and Production,
compiled by the Ministry of Labour to provide factual information for those
engaged in wage negotiations, is published quarterly. The Digest of Scottish
1 The Development Commission approves and administers advances by grants or loans
from the Development Fund, established by the Development and Roads Improvements
Fund Acts, 1909 and 1910. At the present time the Fund may be used to help and
expand agriculture and rural industries and also to promote the development and
improvement of fisheries.
INDUSTRY
Economic
Planning and
Consultation
Government
and the
Nationalised
Industries
267
Statistics is published half-yearly by the Scottish Statistical Office, a Digest of
Northern Ireland Statistics at half-yearly intervals by the Ministry of Finance
of the Northern Ireland Government, and an annual Digest of Welsh Statistics
by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government.
In the last five years there have been considerable improvements in the
scope and presentation of official statistics. A much wider range of information
is collected and, additionally, the data are often shown at constant prices
and in the case of important short-term statistics are seasonally adjusted.
To ensure that industry is aware of Government policy and that policy is
framed with a knowledge of industry’s needs and difficulties, a number of
consultative bodies have been set up representing Government, employers’
associations and trade unions. Among these are the National Production
Advisory Council on Industry (NPACI) and the National Joint Advisory
Council (NJAC). The NPACI, which covers the wider problems of industrial
production, is under the chairmanship of the Chancellor of the Exchequer
and includes representatives of the Regional Boards for Industry (see below)
and of certain Government departments as wTell as of employers and workers.
Northern Ireland sends two representatives to meetings of the NPACI as
observers. The NJAC consists of representatives of private employers, the
nationalised industries and trade unions, under the chairmanship of the
Minister of Labour, and is concerned with matters affecting the relations
between employers and workers.
These consultative bodies approach the study of problems from a broad
national point of view. There are, in addition, bodies concerned with the
special problems of Scotland and Wales and of the English regions. The most
important of these are the nine Regional Boards for Industry and the corre¬
sponding Scottish and Welsh Boards for Industry, whose main functions are
to keep the Government informed on industrial conditions in the English
regions and in Wales and Scotland either by direct reference to Government
departments or through representation on the NPACI, and to provide a
link between central Government and local industry. The regional boards
have set up district advisory committees wherever they considered that the
geographical grouping of industry justified such a step.
A body of somewhat different character and function, the National Economic
Development Council (NEDC), was established in February 1962 to examine
plans for the future in both the private and public sectors of industry, to
consider obstacles to quicker economic growth and to seek agreement upon
ways to increase the rate of sound growth. The Chancellor of the Exchequer
is chairman of the Council and appoints its members, who are industrial
and trade union leaders, the Minister of Labour, the President of the Board
of Trade and well-known economists. The Council, which meets at frequent
intervals, has its own permanent staff (not members of the Civil Service)
under a Director General. By mid-1964 it had published several reports on
major issues affecting the growth of the economy. In a number of industries
Economic Development Committees, consisting of representatives of manage¬
ment, trade unions, Government departments and NEDC and of other
members with special knowledge, have been formed to co-operate with NEDC.
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working
of the boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies
from industry to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them.
First, the minister appoints (and may dismiss) the chairman and members
268
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of each board, and secondly, he has power to give general directions as to
how the industry should be run, but does not interfere in day-to-day manage¬
ment. It is usually also laid down that the board shall give to the minister
any information, statistics and financial accounts which he may require. In
practice, as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and major policy
decisions are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom occasion
for him to issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual
statutory requirement is that the board is required to conduct its business so
that receipts at least balance outgoings taking one year with another. The
responsible minister is usually empowered (subject to Treasury approval) to
say what shall be done with any surplus revenues which may accrue. As
regards finance of capital expenditure, the present system is that such finance
as cannot be met from internal sources is mainly provided, in the form of
interest-earning loans, by the minister from the Exchequer, bank advances
being used only for normal requirements of short-term capital.
The minister responsible for each nationalised industry must take steps to
see that the interests of the industry’s customers are protected. This is usually
done by the establishment of representative consumers’ councils to consider
complaints and suggestions made to them, and to advise the board or the
minister on the changes they think desirable.
Government policy towards these industries is subject to the approval of
Parliament. Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are afforded by
debates, including debates on their annual reports and accounts, and by
answers to parliamentary questions, which, in principle, are admissible only
if concerned with policy rather than details of administration.
In a White Paper (Cmnd. 1337) issued in April 1961 the Government out¬
lined certain general principles which it believed had to be applied for the
administration of the nationalised industries to be efficient. Among them were
a balancing of revenue accounts over a five-year period, a closer definition of
the financial and economic obligations of the industries, and greater freedom
in price policies. In accordance with these principles, financial objectives for
the nationalised fuel and power industries and for BEA, the Post Office and
the London Transport Board have since been announced.
In order to ensure that parliamentary discussion of the nationalised industries
is informed and effective, a House of Commons Select Committee on the
Nationalised Industries was established in 1957 to examine the reports and
accounts of the nationalised industries and to report to Parliament. Reports
issued by the committee have so far dealt specifically with the two Scottish
electricity boards, the National Coal Board, the airways corporations,
British Railways, the gas industry and the electricity supply industry. These
reports have discussed problems of ministerial control, organisation, finance
and general policies. A report published in February 1962 reviewed the action
taken by the corporations and the Government in the light of the committee’s
recommendations.
Production and
Productivity
Production Trends
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction,
and gas, electricity and water) was in the first half of 1964 some 10 per
cent higher than a year previously, about 26 per cent more than in 1958 and
about double the pre-war level. The course of production and the employment
from 1959 to 1963 is shown in Table 15.
Between 1958 and the end of 1963 output in the chemical industry rose by
over 46 per cent; in engineering and electrical goods by 29 per cent; in
INDUSTRY
269
TABLE 15
Production and
Employment in
Industry, 1959-63
(1958 = 100)
Year
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
Industrial Production
All Industries
105
112
114
115
119
Manufacturing
Industries
106
115
115
115
120
Employment in
Industry
100
102
104
103
102
bricks, cement, pottery and glass by 41 per cent; in paper, printing and pub¬
lishing by 35 per cent; and in clothing and footwear by 26 per cent (see
diagram below).
The increases in production since 1958 have been due partly to an increase
in the labour force but mainly to a variety of factors influencing productivity,
including technical advances in products, machinery and processes; the high
and increasing rate of fixed capital formation; more intensive sales promotion
and improvements in the management of particular undertakings.
Gross fixed capital formation at home has continued to increase steadily
even in periods when demand as a whole was slowing down. In 1963 it
amounted to about 19 per cent of the gross domestic product and was estimated
to be over 29 per cent greater than in 1958. Part of this rising investment is
linked with the introduction of new techniques and equipment and in
particular of machines and instruments which lessen the demand for human
skill and supervision though they may require more skill from fewer people.
All of this is part of the process known as automation, which is giving rise to
far-reaching changes in the pattern of industry and in the internal organisation
and labour requirements of business enterprises and has already been
responsible for consequential increases in production and efficiency which, in
INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Average 1958=100)
270
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Productivity
the long run, are likely to be very large. Much investment, however, still
consists of replacements, additions and improvements of a more traditional
kind. In the short run, very large increases in output per man are sometimes
achieved by such investment or simply by changes of policy, organisation
or methods.
Both the long term and the short term growth of productivity thus depend
most directly on the decisions of individual undertakings, and the promotion
of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter for industry though Govern¬
ment departments and educational and research establishments also have their
contribution to make. Government budgeting and financial policies also have
a strong influence on the extent and direction of demand. These, therefore,
are framed to a large degree on a realistic assessment of the possibilities of
sustained economic growth.
Employers’ associations and trade unions are engaged in activities to raise
industrial productivity. The former often provide technical assistance, conduct
market surveys, and support schemes of vocational education and training.
The National Association of British Manufacturers has established an advisory
service (NUMAS) to enable small firms to obtain advice on production prob¬
lems. The trade unions in many industries organise special schemes for training
young people, and also a variety of courses designed to give trade unionists
an understanding of modern management techniques. Private consultants
specialising in management and work study are available to give advice to
firms on measures to increase their productive efficiency; there are also many
specialist institutions, both public and private, concerned with various aspects
of productivity.
The British Productivity Council (BPC) was established by both sides of
industry to stimulate interest in methods of raising productivity. It was set
up in 1952 to continue and develop the work of the Anglo-American Pro¬
ductivity Council. It is an independent body on which are represented the
British Employers’ Confederation, the Federation of British Industries, the
Trades Union Congress, the Association of British Chambers of Commerce,
the National Association of British Manufacturers and the nationalised
industries; its work is financed by contributions from these bodies and by a
Government grant-in-aid. Advisory committees have been set up to promote
productivity in the building trades, in agriculture and in retailing. Much of
the BPC’s work is done through 127 productivity associations throughout
the country. These local organisations arrange meetings, inter-factory visits,
courses, conferences, film shows and exhibitions.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), is a voluntary non-profit-making
body incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards
in respect of, inter alia, quality, performance, dimensions, testing methods
and codes of practice. Voluntary acceptance of such standards by manufac¬
turers, buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies the
specification of requirements, thus promoting industrial efficiency. The BSI
is governed by a council consisting of representatives of the main organisations
of employers and workers, professional institutions and the larger Government
departments.
The Board of Trade is the department responsible for general aspects of
the promotion of productivity and it administers the Government grants to
the BPC, the BSI, and the Council of Industrial Design.
A number of other departments have responsibilities which bear on pro¬
ductivity. The Ministry of Labour has an Industrial Relations Service, which
advises firms on personnel management and industrial relations. The Depart-
INDUSTRY
Management
27!
ment of Scientific and Industrial Research is also concerned directly with
research into such factors as productivity measurement techniques, production
engineering and fatigue among operators; and it provides technical advisory
services. The Department of Education and Science and the Scottish Education
Department are responsible for the technical colleges, at which courses are
available in such subjects as work study and industrial engineering. The
Ministry of Public Building and Works provides a Technical Information
Service for the building industry; and the Ministry of Power and the British
Productivity Council sponsor the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food provides a number of
advisory services which aim at encouraging the efficiency of the farming industry
in England and Wales; similar services are provided by the three Scottish
agricultural colleges.
During the present century and particularly during and since the second
world war, the increasing pace of technical, organisational and social change
has made the successful conduct of enterprises dependent on knowledge of,
and practice in, a complex of managerial techniques for dealing with technical
and human problems. In Britain, as elsewhere, there is a growing awareness
of the importance of management as a subject requiring special skills and
knowledge. This has been reflected both in a change in the general educational
qualifications of recruits to management and in the spread of systematic
education and training for management.
The British Institute of Management (BIM) was founded in 1947, with
Government support, to study and promote improved standards of management
throughout industry, commerce, and public administration. It is now entirely
financed from industrial and professional subscriptions. The main objects
of the BIM are to undertake research into, and provide information on,
management practices and techniques, and to encourage the development of
education and training for management on a national scale.
Management studies and education for management are expanding rapidly
in Britain and have become a recognised feature of higher education and
postgraduate work, mainly, as yet, as part-time day or evening studies. At the
university level (twelve universities at present offer courses in management)
the studies are principally for postgraduates and practising managers, and
include full one-year courses as well as teacher training and research into
methods of widening understanding of management problems. It is planned
to establish two business schools of high quality, one associated with the
London School of Economics and Imperial College of the University of
London and the other with Manchester University. These schools will each
be part of a university but will enjoy considerable autonomy as a partnership
between the university and business. Both will offer courses for postgraduate
and post-experience students.
By far the largest volume of work is carried on at Colleges of Advanced
Technology and technical colleges. The highest award is the Diploma of
Management Studies, instituted in 1961, for which nearly 2,500 people are
studying. Below this level there are a variety of courses concerned with
business schemes. The national schemes are administered by the BIM in
co-operation with the Department of Education and Science and the Scottish
and Northern Ireland Education Departments.
Training courses for higher management are held at a few universities,
notably Bristol; by some firms of management consultants; and at the
Administrative Staff College at Henley-on-Thames (normally of somewhat
272
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Monopolies
Restrictive
Practices
longer duration) and Ashridge, Berkhamsted. The larger firms, especially
those with wide-ranging responsibilities, often provide general management
courses for the training of senior executives, and systems of informal training
within an organisation are numerous. There are also various bodies concerned
with specialised branches of management, for example, the Institute of
Personnel Management, the Institution of Works Managers, the Institute
of Office Management and, on the sales side, the Institute of Marketing and
Sales Management.
The growing number of professional personnel working as management
consultants—probably about 2,000 in 1963—and the use of the services of
independent management selection firms in the appointment of senior staff
are indications of the interest in the science of management in Britain.
and Legislation in force in the United Kingdom for dealing with restrictions in
trade and industry, either by agreements (formal or informal) between
suppliers, or by monopolies which dominate the market, is described below.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1956, provides for the registration
and judicial examination of restrictive agreements. It requires the entry in a
public register of the particulars of a wide range of restrictive agreements
(including those relating to common prices, approved lists of dealers and the
limitation of production) which affect the supply or processing of goods for
the United Kingdom market. The Registrar of Restrictive Trading Agree¬
ments is responsible for keeping the register and for bringing the agreements
before the Restrictive Practices Court set up under the Act. The Court, which
includes laymen but is presided over by one of Her Majesty’s judges, is, in
effect, responsible for deciding whether or not an agreement is in the public
interest. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy the Court that any
restriction in their agreement produces one or more of seven beneficial
effects set out in the Act, and that the restriction is not unreasonable, having
regard to the balance between the benefit it confers and any public detriment
likely to result from its operation, that restriction must be found contrary to
the public interest. Agreements are void in respect of restrictions so found.
The Court can make orders preventing the parties from operating their
agreement, or from making new arrangements having the same effect. Agree¬
ments relating exclusively to exports are not subject to this procedure but
have to be notified to the Board of Trade. The first full hearing before the
Court took place in October 1958. By the end of June 1963 the Register con¬
tained particulars of 2,430 agreements. Of these, some 1,610 had been
abandoned, had expired or had had all restrictions removed from them; and
114 agreements had been the subject of decisions of the Court.
Monopolies and kindred arrangements (except those within the scope of
the Restrictive Practices Court) in the circumstances indicated in the Mono¬
polies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act, 1948, may be
referred by the Board of Trade to the Monopolies Commission for investigation
and report. Production departments take appropriate action on the basis of
these reports but no order can be made without the approval of Parliament.
The 1956 Act excluded from the scope of the Commission’s work agreements
which had to be registered under the new legislation. It is now mainly con¬
cerned with the investigation of monopolies. Since 1948 the Commission has
presented some 26 reports.
In a White Paper published in March 1964 the Government announced
proposals for strengthening and extending the legislation on monopolies and
restrictive practices. It proposed: to appoint a Registrar of Monopolies to
INDUSTRY
273
assist the Monopolies Commission in its work and to select monopolies for
inquiry; to enlarge the Commission; to improve the Government’s powers to
act on the Commission’s recommendations; to take powers to ask the Com¬
mission to investigate mergers which would result in or strengthen monopoly
and to investigate restrictions in commercial services; to improve the effective¬
ness of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act and bring more agreements within
its scope.
Under the 1956 Act collective enforcement of resale price maintenance
was prohibited, but individual suppliers remained free to enforce resale
prices in the courts and were, indeed, given additional power to do so. The
Resale Prices Act, 1964, makes all resale price maintenance unlawful, except in
so far as use is made of the provision for seeking exemption. The Act provides
for suppliers to register resale price maintenance arrangements; it is then for
the Restrictive Practices Court to consider, against criteria set out in the Act,
whether exemption should be granted for particular classes of goods.
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy currently used in Britain are coal,
petroleum and, to a small extent, water power, nuclear energy and colliery
methane; secondary sources produced from these are electricity, gas and coke.
Coal, mined within the country, supplies slightly more than two-thirds of
primary energy and it will remain the principal source for many years to come.
For supplies of crude petroleum Britain is virtually dependent on imports.
Water power resources are small. A large-scale programme is in hand for the
construction of nuclear power stations.
The pattern of primary energy consumption has changed appreciably in
recent years, as shown in Table 16. While consumption of coal has tended
to fall, that of oil has risen from under 20 per cent of total inland energy
consumption in 1958 to 27 per cent in 1961 and 30 per cent in 1963. Of the
primary fuels consumed in 1963, 60 per cent of the coal and nearly 15 per cent
of the oil were converted into secondary fuels.
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of petroleum, are under
public ownership. General responsibility for ensuring the effective and co¬
ordinated development of fuel and power resources lies with the Minister
of Power. Fuel research is undertaken by the fuel and fuel-using
industries. The Minister of Power has an Advisory Council on Research and
Development.
TABLE 16
Inland
Consumption of
Fuel and Power
(in Terms of
Primary Sources
of Power)
Million tons coal equivalent
Coal (net)*
Oil
Hydro-power
Nuclear energy
Colliery methane
Total
1958
198-6
47-2
1-5
0-1
0-1
247-5
1959
186-6
56-1
1-5
0-5
0-1
244-8
1960
195-5
65-5
1-7
0-9
0-1
263-7
1961
190-0
71-0
2-1
1-1
0-1
264-3
1962
190-9
78-6
2-1
1-5
0-1
273-2
1963
193-8
85-3
1-8
2-5
0-1
283-5
Source: Ministry of Power.
"Gross consumption adjusted for exports and stock changes of coke and manufactured
fuel.
274
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fuel & Power
in
Great Britain
(September 1964)
Oil refineries of annual capacity over
2 million tons—in operation
under construction
0 Tanker discharge points (over 8o,ooo tons)
• Nuclear power stations—in operation
O under construction
Conventional power stations (over 200 MW output)
S —in operation
□ for construction 1965-70
-a. Pumped storage scheme
Cj Hydro-electric power stations (over 45 MW output)
0 Lurgi gasification plant
© Imported methane storage
E2S2j Coal-bearing areas.
Methane pipeline.
INDUSTRY
COAL
The National
Coal Board
275
In general, fuel and power industries require heavy capital investment in
long-term projects and both internal resources and borrowing are used to
raise the large sums needed. Until 1956 long-term borrowing by the cor¬
porations was mainly through the issue of stock, except in the case of the
coal industry, which borrowed direct from the Exchequer. Under the
Finance Act, 1956, all the corporations were given power to raise money by
means of Exchequer advances from the responsible minister with the approval
of the Treasury. These powers were extended and amended by the Finance
Act, 1958, and by other Acts. Since 1956 all the corporations have obtained
their long-term capital by loans from the Exchequer and issues of stock have
been suspended.
Investment by the nationalised fuel and power industries in 1964-65 is
expected to amount to over £800 million,1 excluding the initial costs of nuclear
fuel. In 1963, these industries accounted for over one-third of public
investment and over one-eighth of all fixed investment.
The responsible ministers—the Minister of Power in England and Wales
and the Secretary of State in Scotland—are required by statute to set up
consultative councils to ensure the protection of the interests of consumers
of fuel. Councils were established for coal in 1947, for electricity in 1948 and
for gas in 1949. The councils each consist of a chairman and from 20 to 30
unpaid members. These are appointed by the minister from nominations
put forward by interested bodies selected by the minister as representing
consumers. In the electricity and gas supply industries councils and com¬
mittees have been formed on an area and district basis; for coal there are
councils at national level only.
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coal¬
mining industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years
longer than in any other European country. British coal exports dominated
the world market until about 1910. By 1913—the peak production year—the
industry was producing 287 million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons
and employing over a million workers.
The very fact that the British industry was developed so early has meant
that many of the best seams of coal are now worked out; every year coal has
to be mined from deeper and thinner seams and productivity can be main¬
tained only by a high level of re-equipment and constant modernisation.
Attempts to secure economies through amalgamation date from the Sankey
Commission of 1919. In 1930 a Coal Mines Act established commissioners to
bring about the formation of larger and more efficient units. The Coal Act of
1938 transferred ownership of mineral coal royalties to the State. During the
second world war the industry was under Government control.
The Coal Industry Nationalisation Act, 1946, brought the industry under
public ownership; by this Act, all its assets—coal mines, mineral rights and
ancillary undertakings—were vested on 1st January, 1947, in the National
Coal Board (NCB), which became responsible for the industry’s management,
compensation being paid to the former owners. Under the Coal Industry
Act, 1949, the board, which is appointed by the Minister of Power and is
responsible through him to Parliament, consists of a chairman and not fewer
than eight or more than 11 other members.
The National Coal Board has the exclusive monopoly to mine coal in
1 Government Expenditure Below the Line, 1963-64 Cmnd. 2295
276
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production and
Manpower
Consumption
and Overseas
Trade
Great Britain, though it may license privately owned undertakings to work small
mines not employing more than 30 underground workers, and also to work
open-cast sites where the total output is not expected to exceed 25,000 tons.
The NCB is responsible for its own regional organisation. The main collieries,
numbering 576, are grouped into 41 areas which are the basic units for
commercial management; their size varies according to geological, geo¬
graphical and other technical considerations. The areas are grouped into nine
divisions which roughly correspond to the main coal-bearing regions. A
divisional board for each division supervises and co-ordinates the work of
the areas (except in the small south-eastern division, which is administered by
a general manager), formulates divisional policy, and is answerable to the
NCB, which is responsible for questions of national policy, finance and the
co-ordinating of major schemes of development. The day-to-day work of
running the collieries is under the direction of colliery managers. The NCB,
however, has no monopoly of sales or distribution. It makes some direct sales
to large consumers and also retail sales in a few areas. Most retail distribution
is in the hands of private firms.
The NCB has made surpluses in some years and deficits in others. In
certain areas, such as Scotland, Lancashire and South Wales, deficits have
been persistent, and profits from areas of high productivity, for instance the
East Midlands, have not been sufficient to cover the losses. Between 1st January,
1963, and 31st March, 1964, the Board made a surplus of £100,000 which
reduced the cumulative deficit of the preceding years to £91*3 million.
The Board’s aim is to break even, after paying interest and making proper
provision for depreciation.
It has been estimated that Britain’s workable reserves of coal will last for
about 400 to 500 years at current rates of consumption.
The main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and
Nottinghamshire field, which produces about 48 per cent of the total output,
(2) the Durham and Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and
(4) the Scottish field. Other important coal-bearing areas are those of Lanca¬
shire and the West Midlands (Staffordshire and Warwickshire). Prospecting
for coal continues both inland and off the north-east coast of England.
The main trends in coal production and manpower since 1947 are shown
in Table 17.
In addition to exploration for new workings, forward planning lays emphasis
on the need for further mechanisation and the reorganisation of the haulage
system. With machinery rapidly replacing manpower, productivity rose by
more than 30 per cent between 1956 and 1963. At mechanised faces average
output per manshift is 6-4 tons, compared with 3-7 tons at non-mechanical
faces, the average for all mines being about 5 tons. In 1963 output from deep
mines was only slightly higher than in 1962. At NCB mines output per
manshift rose by 5-6 per cent with 27,000 fewer workers.
Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of nearly
4 million tons between 1947 and 1956; inland sales fell sharply between 1956
and 1959 and large stocks of coal accumulated at pit heads; in 1960-61, by
reducing output, these stocks were drawn upon but production again exceeded
consumption in 1962. Growing competition from oil, increasing efficiency
in the use of coal and reduced requirements by the iron and steel industry
largely contributed to the fall in demand for coal. In 1963 both inland con¬
sumption and exports increased and together exceeded output; as a result
INDUSTRY
277
TABLE 17
Coal Industry
Statistics, 1947-63
Capital
Investment and
Development
Total output
of which, open-cast
Inland consumption
Export (inc. bunkers)
Output per manshift":
coal face . .
overall
Workers at coal face
(average)"
Labour force (average)"
Percentage of output" mech¬
anically :
loaded
cleaned . .
Unit
1947
1955
million
tons
tons
persons
per cent
196-6
10-0
184-5
5-3
3-02
1-09
270.500
701.500
2-4
48-3
221-6
11-4
215-2
13-9
3-37
1-24
278,800
698,700
9-9
57-9
1962
197-4
8-1
191-2
4-8
4-55
1-56
204,400
550,900
58-8
61-5
1963
195-8
6-1
194-0
7-6
4-87
1-65
191,900
523,800
66-7
61-2
“N.C.B. mines only.
Source: Ministry of Power.
stocks at collieries and open-cast sites were reduced by 5 - 7 million tons during
the year.
About one-third of total output is consumed by the electricity authorities
and over one-quarter by domestic and industrial users together. Coke ovens
and the gas industry are other large users. Consumption by the electricity
industry has increased by 45 per cent since 1958, whereas the requirements
of all the other main classes of consumer have declined. For domestic users
this fall has been slightly offset by increased purchases of solid smokeless fuels.
Coal exports have fallen heavily in relation to pre-war levels, due, at first,
partly to increased internal consumption and, more recently, to keener
competition. Strenuous efforts have been made to recover overseas markets
and in 1963 exports of coal, coke and briquettes rose by about 53 per cent
to io-o million tons, valued at £47-8 million; the principal markets are
France, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, West Germany and
the Irish Republic.
The National Coal Board raises capital by borrowing direct from the
Exchequer. There is a statutory limit of £750 million at present on such
borrowing and borrowing above £700 million must be authorised by Order
in Council. In addition, the board may, with the permission of the Minister
of Power, borrow temporarily, by way of overdraft or otherwise, up to
£20 million. The greater proportion of investment, however, is financed
from internal resources. Capital expenditure by the industry totalled £462
million from 1947 to 1955, and about £630 million in the seven years 1956 to
1962. A review of its plans by the board in 1959 has led to a reduction in the
rate of investment from the peak levels of 1957-59 and in 1963-64 fixed
investment amounted to £86 million; it is expected to be about £85 million in
1964-65. Present long-term plans provide for about three-quarters of coal
output to come from new and reconstructed collieries by 1966; many will have
a daily output of up to 6,000 tons while a few will be capable of up to 8,000 tons.
Horizon mining methods will be extended, layouts for pit-bottoms, new
designs for loading stations and mechanical handling methods will be intro-
278
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
PETROLEUM
Indigenous
Production
International
Trade
duced. Exploration of coal reserves is being intensified and the first boring
for coal under the sea has been completed in the Firth of Forth and is in
progress off the Durham coast.
The NCB has three research organisations: a Coal Research Establishment,
at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, providing facilities for
fundamental research; a Mining Research Establishment, for the investigation
of underground problems, at Isleworth, Middlesex; and a Central Engineering
Establishment for developing new machines and testing equipment, near
Bretby, Derbyshire. In 1959 the Board set up a new department concerned
primarily with the further development of new processes for making smokeless
fuels.
A number of autonomous research associations receiving grants from the
NCB and DSIR include the British Coal Utilisation Research Association,
the British Coke Research Association and the Coal Tar Research Association.
Much of the work of other bodies, such as the Safety in Mines Research
Establishment (SMRE), is closely related to the Board’s problems; the
SMRE carries out research on explosions and fires, pneumoconiosis, engineer¬
ing and metallurgy. In 1947 the NCB took over, with other assets, the Coal
Survey, a national organisation for surveying coal resources within Britain,
and 70 laboratories (in the various coalfields), which it has since extended
and modernised.
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young,
a Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from
natural mineral oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish
shale deposits, yielding similar products, were first worked in 1858 and ceased
production in 1962.
Sources of crude oil within Britain meet only 1 ton in every 500 of total
United Kingdom requirements, the remainder being imported from overseas.
Annual production of crude oil from indigenous oilfields now totals over
120,000 tons.
Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the establishment of
several small oilfields, notably in Nottinghamshire (Eakring, Egmanton and
Bothamsell), in Leicestershire (Plungar), in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough), in
Lancashire (Formby) and in Dorset (Kimmeridge).
Seismic prospecting in the North Sea has been going on since 1962 and
some twenty concerns have been involved. Under the Continental Shelf Act,
1964, the Minister of Power, by a system of licensing for exploration and
production, controls those activities in the areas over the Shelf appertaining
to the United Kingdom (about half the North Sea).
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the
Middle East, Far East and Caribbean areas.
Today these companies produce about one-third of all oil entering into
international trade, with a tanker fleet (partly owned by them and partly on
charter) amounting to nearly one-third of the world’s tanker tonnage.
(United Kingdom registered tanker tonnage is nearly one-sixth of the
world’s total.)
In 1963 the United Kingdom imported 54-8 million tons of crude oil
valued at £382 million, the largest single item among imported products;
TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION ABROAD
A British veterinary officer
instructs students (Bechuanaland).
The British Council centre at Ibadan, Nigeria.
A physiotherapist at the
Teaching Hospital, Lagos.
INDUSTRY
279
approximately 40 per cent came from Kuwait, the other largest suppliers
being Iraq, Venezuela, Libya and Iran in that order.
Consumption Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption in 1963 totalled
slightly under 52 million tons, having risen by one-third in three years. An
outstanding feature has been the continued rapid advance in use of black
oils. Fuel oil consumption has been rising at the rate of about if million tons
a year over the past three years and totalled 22-7 million tons in 1963. The
introduction of a duty on heavy oils in the 1961 Budget retarded the rate of
growth slightly. Nevertheless the demand for gas and diesel oils (excluding
that used in road vehicles) rose to 5'5 million tons in 1963. Sales of motor
spirit in recent years have been rising by about half a million tons a year and
reached 9-0 million tons in 1963.
A more detailed analysis of deliveries of gas and diesel oils for 1963 shows
that their most important uses were for non-industrial central heating, agri¬
cultural tractors and the railways. Electricity generation accounted for about
23 per cent of total fuel oil consumption, excluding that used in oil refineries;
the steel industry accounted for 15 per cent and non-industrial central
heating for a further 11 per cent. Of the remainder, the largest users were
the cement, paper-making, general chemical, glass, non-electrical engineering
and fishing industries. Demand for most other products increased in 1963
but the use of high octane gasolenes and certain minor products showed a
further fall.
Refineries Before 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum
products was refined overseas, as it was considered more economical to refine
at the source of production. Since the second world war, however, the
industry has come to favour the siting of refineries in the consuming areas.
By mid-1964. rated refinery capacity in the United Kingdom amounted to
about 57^ million tons a year. Of the 18 refineries in operation, five have a
capacity of under 0-2 million tons. The five largest, all of which have been
considerably expanded, are situated at Fawley, near Southampton (11-3
million tons); Isle of Grain (9-5 million tons) and Shellhaven (9 million tons),
both on the dhames Estuary; Milford Haven, in Pembrokeshire (6-3 million
tons); and Stanlow, in Cheshire, whose present capacity of 6 million tons will
increase to 8-5 million tons by about the beginning of 1963. A second refinery
at Milford Haven (4-5 million tons) is to start operating in October 1964.
A smaller refinery at Belfast (1-3 million tons) was opened in May 1964.
These, and other projects in hand or planned, will bring Britain’s total
capacity to about 88 million tons a year by the end of 1967.
Output of refined products (excluding refineries’ own consumption) rose
from 4 million tons in 1948 to the record total of 49 million tons in 1963.
I here is a substantial external trade in refined products which tends to follow
trading and seasonal requirements and the commercial arrangements of the
oil companies. Exports from Britain, mainly in the form of heavier products
to European countries, were valued at £115 million in 1963; imports of
refined products amounted to £179 million.
Ml Pipelines Three major oil pipelines are at present in operation in Britain. Two of these—
one in Scotland (from Finnart on Loch Long to Grangemouth) and one in
South Wales (from Angle Bay, Milford Haven, to Llandarcy)—carry crude
oil from harbours capable of berthing very large tankers to refineries; and one,
from Walton-on-Thames to London Airport, carries aviation fuel. Pipelines
K
280
Research
ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
carry refined products from refineries to major marketing areas, where the
volume transported is sufficient to justify the capital cost; for example, one
between Stanlow, Cheshire, and Urmston, near Manchester, and another,
78 miles long, which takes petroleum feedstock from Fawley refinery to the
^100 million petroleum chemicals project at Severnside, near Bristol; a third
carries refined products from Fawley to west London for London Airport.
Plans are in hand for the construction of a system of pipelines linking the
Midlands with refineries and installations on the Thames and Mersey and
with a connection from the Fawley-west London pipeline. Meanwhile, parts
of the system of pipelines laid during the second world war are being used by
the petroleum distributing companies. The Pipelines Act, 1962, is designed
to secure the orderly development of privately owned industrial pipelines.
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities
on a substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames
(the British Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock,
in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon, in Berkshire (Esso). Research covers the
evolution of new and improved lubricants and the development of new uses
for oil and of new products based on oil, especially chemicals.
A public supply of electricity was first provided in Britain in 1881, at
Godaiming, Surrey. From its earliest days a measure of public control has been
a feature of the industry and the Electric Lighting Act, 1882, authorised the
Board of Trade to grant licences for the establishment of electricity under¬
takings by local authorities or by companies (which the local authorities
might compulsorily purchase after a given period of time) to supply consumers
in given areas. By the turn of the century a variety of independent supply
systems had grown up all over the country. After the first world war steps
were taken to reorganise the industry on a national scale. In 1919 the Electricity
Commissioners were set up as a supervisory body and to promote reorganisa¬
tion through voluntary agreement. In 1926 the Central Electricity Board was
established to co-ordinate more efficiently the generation of electricity.
Organisation Under the Electricity Act of 1947, a central authority, then known as the
under Public British Electricity Authority, and 14 Area Electricity Boards took over in
Ownership April 1948 the assets of former municipal and private electricity supply
undertakings throughout Great Britain, except in the area already served by
the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (see p. 281). Under the Electricity
Reorganisation (Scotland) Act of 1954, the authority’s power stations and
transmission lines in Scotland were taken over in April 1955 by the South of
Scotland Electricity Board (see p. 281). The name of the authority was changed
from British Electricity Authority to Central Electricity Authority.
On 1st January, 1958, under the Electricity Act, 1957, the Central
Electricity Authority was dissolved and replaced by two new bodies, the
Electricity Council and the Central Electricity Generating Board.
The present organisation of the electricity supply industry, in which more
than 235,000 people are employed, is described below.
England and Wales The Electricity Council, the central body of the industry, is composed of a
chairman, two deputy chairmen, not more than three other persons, and the
chairman and two other members of the Central Electricity Generating
Board, and the 12 chairmen of the Area Electricity Boards. The main
functions of the council are to advise the Minister of Power on matters
Scotland
Northern Ireland
INDUSTRY 28l
relating to the electricity supply industry. The council is responsible for a
number of common services, including capital financing and research.
The Central Electricity Generating Board consists of a chairman, deputy
chairman and not fewer than six, nor more than eight, other members. The
board’s primary functions are to generate or acquire supplies of electricity and
to provide bulk supplies to the area boards.
The Area Boards (of which there are at present 12) are responsible for
the distribution and sale of electricity. Each consists of a full-time chairman
and deputy chairman and five to seven members (mostly part-time).
Area Consultative Councils were set up under the Electricity Act, 1947, in
the area of each board to represent the interests of consumers; their chairmen
are ex officio members of their respective Area Boards.
The Minister of Power in England and Wales appoints the chairmen,
deputy chairmen and members of the Electricity Council, the Central
Electricity Generating Board and the Area Boards; approves each Board’s
capital development programmes and the industry’s research programme;
and approves, in consultation with the Treasury, the boards’ borrowing
requirements.
The Central Electricity Authority (and its successors the Electricity Council
and the Central Electricity Generating Board) together with the Area Boards,
have made a surplus on revenue from their operations in each of the years
since they were established. Up to and including the financial year 1963-64,
these balances of revenue amounted in the aggregate to about ^310 million.
Under the 1957 Act, each electricity board, not merely the industry as a whole,
must pay its way, taking one year with another.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB) was set up in 1943
as a public corporation to develop the water-power resources of the Highlands
and Islands and to distribute electricity in the more sparsely populated parts
of Scotland not covered by existing undertakings. The Board consists of a
chairman, and not less than four nor more than eight other members, of
whom one or more may be appointed deputy chairman. Since 1948 the board
has been solely responsible for all generation and distribution in the area,
which covers that part of Scotland north and west of a line running roughly
from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay.
On 1st April, 1955, the South of Scotland Electricity Board, answerable to
the Secretary of State for Scotland, took over the then British Electricity
Authority’s functions in Scotland, and also the functions of the two area
boards in the south of Scotland, which were dissolved. The Board consists
of a chairman, and not less than four nor more than eight other members,
of whom one or more may be deputy chairmen.
A consultative council to represent the interests of consumers has been
appointed for the district of each board by the Secretary of State. The
Secretary of State appoints the chairmen, deputy chairmen and members
of the Scottish Electricity Boards; approves their capital development and
research programmes; and, in consultation with the Treasury, their borrowing
requirements.
In Northern Ireland electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast and
Londonderry and at Ballylumford and Coolkeeragh. Those in Belfast and
Londonderry are owned and operated by the city corporations and the
remainder by the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland. Generation at these
stations is co-ordinated by the Northern Ireland Joint Electricity Committee,
282
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Generation
TABLE 18
Electricity
Generation for
Public Supply i
Great Britain,
1963
set up by statute in 1948, which purchases their output and resells it to
distributors—the Belfast Corporation, for Belfast and district, the London¬
derry Corporation for the City of Londonderry, and the Electricity Board
for the rest of Northern Ireland.
Most of Britain’s electricity is produced in coal-fired steam generating
stations. The country has abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail
and water transport for moving it. The development of hydro-electricity on
any scale is comparatively recent, water power resources being relatively small
and in remote areas.
The output capacity of the generating stations of the electricity boards in
Great Britain at the end of 1963 totalled 36,523 megawatts (MW), an increase
of about 25 per cent since i960.
In the years i960 to 1963 an annual average of slightly over 2,000 MW of
generating capacity was installed, but it is expected that capacity of about
24,000 MW in England and Wales will be commissioned in the period
1964-68 inclusive. By the end of the 1960s an annual rate of commissioning
of 6,000 MW will be needed to keep pace with demand. In the north of
Scotland it is planned to increase capacity from 1,220 MW in 1963 to
1,850 MW by 1966. The South of Scotland Electricity Board’s proposals
provide for its total installed capacity of 2,350 MW at the end of 1963 to be
nearly doubled to 4,400 MW by 1971.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where, of the total installed
generating capacity of 738 MW, 180 MW is in oil-fired and the remainder
in coal-fired thermal stations) amounted to 1,900 million kilowatt-hours in
i963-
Generation by the public supply in Great Britain exceeded 153,000 million
kilowatt-hours in 1963: conventional power stations provided 96 per cent
of the total and hydro-electric and nuclear stations each about 2 per cent.
This was the first year in which nuclear power made a sizeable contribution.
The high rate of expansion of output, which has been a feature of the industry
since its earliest years, has been maintained. Total production increased by
56 per cent between 1958 and 1963, and during the severe winter of 1962-63
peak demand reached 35 million kilowatts, so far the heaviest load imposed
on the system.
An analysis of electricity generation in Great Britain is given in Table 18.
Central Electricity Generating Board . .
South of Scotland Electricity Board . .
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
Steam
Oil engines
Hydro plant
Nuclear plant
Total ..
Output capacity
MW
33,118
2,195
1,210
34,227
123
1,597
576
36,523
36,523
Electricity sent out
million kWh
131,893
9,242
2,612
137,555
168
3,059
2,965
143,747
143,747
Source: Ministry of Poiver
INDUSTRY
Conventional
Thermal
Hydro-Electric
Nuclear Power
Stations
283
In the mid-1950s, when a coal shortage seemed likely, programmes for oil¬
firing at conventional thermal stations and for generating from nuclear energy
were introduced. There are thirteen oil-burning power stations, or parts of
stations, operating in Great Britain. They are mainly situated on river
estuaries and thus able to be fed conveniently from oil refineries.
The electricity authorities are the largest consumers of primary fuel in
Britain and, although most of their electricity generation is based on coal,
oil consumption rose from a negligible quantity in 1955 to over 5-5 million
tons in 1962 falling back to 4-8 million tons in 1963. Average thermal efficiency
of conventional steam stations in England and Wales (i.e. the ratio of power
output to the fuel consumed) rose from 20-75 Per cent in I947 t0 27'45 Per
cent in 1963 as new plant was brought into use. The twenty most efficient
stations, containing much of the newest plant, had an average efficiency of
32-91 per cent in that year.
The largest generating sets in operation are the 550 MW set at Thorpe
Marsh, near Doncaster, which came into operation in 1963, and sets of
350 MW capacity at Blyth ‘B’ station in Northumberland and Drakelow ‘C’
at Burton. These large machines will show substantial economies in capital
cost, in fuel consumption and in operating costs. Station capacities are
also increasing: the largest stations under construction include eight with
individual capacities of 2,000 MW (from four 500 MW generating sets) at
West Burton, Ratcliffe and Cottam in Nottinghamshire; Ferrybridge ‘C’ and
Eggborough in Yorkshire; Fawley in Hampshire; Fiddler’s Ferry in Lanca¬
shire ; and Kingsnorth in Kent. These stations will come into service between
1965 and 1968. Ministerial consent is being sought for further stations of
2,000 MW and 3,000 MW capacity. In Scotland, a 1,200 MW station is
nearing completion at Cockenzie, and a 2,400 MW station is under construction
at Longannet.
The setting up of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board in 1943
marked the beginning of an era of intensive water-power development in the
Highlands of Scotland. A development scheme drawn up by the board in 1944,
showing the water-power resources which it proposed to examine, listed 102
hydro-electric projects with an estimated annual output of 6,274 million
units of electricity. In 1963, 2,219 million units were generated by the
North of Scotland Board from water-power, compared with 322 million in
1949. At the end of 1963 there were 53 main hydro-electric stations in operation
in the north of Scotland with a total installed capacity of 1,041 MW and the
largest—the Loch Sloy station—had a capacity of 130 MW; the Cruachan
pumped storage section of the Awe scheme, with an installed capacity of
400 MW, was under construction and a further 1,849 MW, including 1,200
MW of pumped storage, were under consideration. The Board also had
175 MW of coal and diesel-fired capacity. In addition, there are stations
generating electricity by water-power in the south of Scotland (123 MW)
and in Wales (472 MW, including the 360 MW of pumped storage at
Ffestiniog).
As an extension of its experimental work and to produce plutonium, the
Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) has two major stations also producing
electricity, of which the output capacity has been raised to over 200 MW each
—Calder Flail, Cumberland, began operating in May 1956 and Chapelcross,
Dumfriesshire, in February 1959. Altogether, the AEA’s nuclear power
stations are supplying some 3,000 million units of electricity annually for the
national grid.
284
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The commercial stations under the Government’s nuclear power pro¬
gramme are being built for the electricity authorities by groups of engineering
firms specially organised for the construction of nuclear power plants. All
the stations are based on the gas-cooled reactors of the Calder Hall type,
fuelled by natural uranium with graphite as a moderator.
Special factors have to be taken into account in the siting of the nuclear
power stations, notably the need for firm foundations to bear the weight
of the reactors and their supporting structure, a location distant from heavily
built-up areas, and plentiful supplies of water for cooling. Great care is
taken to preserve amenity and landscape beauty.
Five commercial stations are in operation, four more are under con¬
struction and ministerial consent for a tenth has been obtained. The stations
at Bradwell (300 MW output capacity), in Essex, and at Berkeley (275 MW),
in Gloucestershire, begun in January 1957, came into full operation in the
summer of 1962. Hunterston (300 MW), in Ayrshire, Hinkley Point (500 MW),
in Somerset, and Trawsfynydd (500 MW), in North Wales, began producing
power in 1964. Dungeness (550 MW), in Kent, and Sizewell (580 MW), in
Suffolk, are due to be ready in 1965, to be followed in 1966 by Oldbury
(560 MW), in Gloucestershire. Wylfa (1,180 MW), in Anglesey, at present
the most powerful nuclear power station under construction in the world, is
scheduled to be in use by mid-1968.
The present British nuclear power programme provides for a total output
capacity of about 5,000 MW by 1968. In a White Paper, published in April
1964, the Government announced that its aim was an additional 5,000 MW
of nuclear capacity to be built between 1970 and 1975, but the type of reactor
to be used was not yet determined.
Pumped Storage To provide a type of energy storage to even out the variation of demand, the
Generating Board has built a pumped storage scheme which is now in full
operation, and others are contemplated.
In these schemes, electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump
water to higher levels from which it descends at peak periods to operate
turbo-generators. The CEGB’s 360 MW pumped storage station at Blaenau
Ffestiniog, near Trawsfynydd, in North Wales started operating in 1961
and was completed in 1963; suitable sites for other schemes are being investi¬
gated. The first large-scale pumped storage works in Scotland, comprising
a 400 MW combined pumping and generating plant, forms part of the
Loch Awe project and will come into operation in 1965.
Transmission Main electricity transmission lines—the National Grid—supply most of the
and Distribution country. By March 1963 those of the Central Electricity Generating Board
totalled some 8,190 route miles (13,843 circuit miles), of which 1,709 miles
were operated at 275,000 volts, 6,182 miles were operated at 132,000 volts and
the remainder at 66,000 volts and below. In Scotland there were 3,681 circuit
miles of main transmission lines at the end of 1963, of which 529 circuit miles
operated at 275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000 volts. Energy move¬
ments on the grid in England and Wales are controlled through the seven
operational areas, set up for that purpose and distinct from the regions
in which the generating side of the industry is organised; each area has a
separate control, and the operations are co-ordinated by a National Control
in London. The grid in Scotland is operated from the control centres
at Pitlochry (North of Scotland) and at Kirkintilloch (South of Scotland).
Most of the new ‘supergrid’ of main transmission lines now operating at
275,000 volts is to be up-rated to operate at 400,000 volts, starting in 1965.
INDUSTRY
Capital
Investment
Research
285
This is being done to reduce the number of new transmission lines needed to
meet the country’s increasing power demands. The development of the grid
system has made the British system the most closely integrated power network
in the world. A link interchange of energy by direct current by means of twin
cross-Channel cables laid between Dungeness and Boulogne, costing £4^
million, and capable of transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000 volts (direct
current) has been in operation since 1961 and is able to take advantage of the
differences between France and Britain in the timing of peak loads.
In England and Wales the Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers
electricity acquired mainly from the Central Electricity Generating Board,
but in part from other sources, such as collieries and the nuclear power
stations of the AEA. There are 16 J million consumers, an increase of about
7 million on those supplied in December 1939. Industrial concerns are the
biggest users of electricity and their demands are increasing rapidly, as are
those of domestic consumers; the principal domestic uses of electricity are for
lighting, cooking, and for space and water heating, but the demand for
numerous other domestic purposes is rising steadily.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board has also pressed ahead with
the distribution of electricity to consumers in the north of Scotland. At the
end of 1963 it had over 414,000 consumers of electricity, many of them in
remote areas, and over four-fifths of the farms and crofts had a supply of
electricity. At the same date the South of Scotland Electricity Board sup¬
plied 1 -4 million consumers, including over 96 per cent of the farmers in the area.
About 11 per cent of the annual gross fixed capital formation of the United
Kingdom in 1963 was attributable to the electricity supply industry. Although
the industry has based its capital needs for five years ahead on an increase
in consumption averaging about 7 to 8 per cent a year, its present plans allow
for an annual average growth of 10 per cent.
Capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry has been expanding
very rapidly: from £242 million in 1956 it rose to £378 million in 1961 and
£554 million in 1963. About two-fifths of the industry’s capital requirements
have been financed from internal resources but the proportion is likely to be
appreciably higher in the future. The aggregate outstanding borrowing of the
industry in Great Britain is limited to £4,980 million. The industry (other
than the NSHEB) is required to aim at a gross return of 12-2- per cent on its
net assets.
The Electricity Council, in consultation with the Minister of Power, is
responsible for drawing up a general programme of research, comprising:
direct research carried out by the Electricity Boards themselves; sponsored
research undertaken for the supply industry by universities and colleges;
and co-operative research with other organisations, in particular the industrial
research associations, such as the British Electrical and Allied Industries
Research Association, to which the supply industries subscribe. The council
itself is empowered to conduct research. It is advised by the Electricity
Supply Research Council.
The main research establishments of the industry are the Central Electricity
Research Laboratories at Leatherhead, Surrey, the Berkeley laboratories,
which are concerned with nuclear problems, and engineering laboratories at
Marchwood on Southampton Water.
Both Scottish electricity boards are empowered to carry out research and
experimental work either on their own or in co-operation with other electricity
286
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GAS SUPPLY
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
authorities. The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board undertakes a wide
range of research and development work, both independently and in con¬
junction with the British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association,
colleges of science and technology, universities and manufacturers. The South
of Scotland Electricity Board has recently extended its own research activities
and is associated with those of the Electricity Council and Central Electricity
Generating Board in England.
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London,
was first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light
and Coke Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London.
In the early years of the industry gas was used almost exclusively for lighting
and was provided by a growing number of company and municipal under¬
takings.
The gas industry in its present form developed in the main during the
period between the two world wars when increasing competition from
electricity had to be met, and by 1939 the industry had become mainly a
supplier of heating rather than lighting.
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain, in which about
125,000 persons are at present employed, under public ownership and control
on 1 st May, 1949. The assets of 991 undertakings, of which 269 belonged to
local authorities, were vested in 12 Area Gas Boards. The central body is
the Gas Council, appointed by the Minister of Power. It is a co-ordinating
council, not a trading body, consisting of a full-time chairman and deputy
chairman and the 12 chairmen of the area boards. Its general duties are to
advise the Minister on questions affecting the industry and promote the
efficient performance of their duties by the area boards. It has also specific
duties relating to finance, labour relations and research.
The Area Gas Boards, which have a large measure of financial and opera¬
tional responsibility and are similar in most respects to the central bodies
of the other publicly owned corporations, are responsible for manufacturing
gas and distributing it to consumers. Each of the Area Gas Boards, appointed
by the Minister of Power, consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chair¬
man, in some cases one or more full-time members, and usually five or six
part-time members, including the chairman of the Area Consultative Council.
There is no common pattern of organisation; each board is fully independent
and has devised its own subordinate structure. Each is required to pay its
way, taking one year with another. The operations of the area boards have
resulted, in the 14 years up to 31st March, 1963, in an aggregate disposable
surplus of approximately £35 million, before taxation.
When the industry came under public ownership, a link between it and
the consuming public was established by the creation of a Consultative
Council in each board area. These councils consist of not fewer than 20 and
not more than 30 members, of whom between 50 and 75 per cent are chosen
from panels of persons nominated by the local authority associations.
In Northern Ireland the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a
number of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
The chief method of gas production in Britain is by carbonising coal but
oil-based production is expanding and oil was the source from which over
one-fifth of gas supplied in 1963 was derived. The gas industry uses about
22 million tons of coal annually and another 231 million tons are carbonised
Production
INDUSTRY
Consumption
Domestic Use
Industrial and
Commercial Use
Coke and
By-products
Capital
Investment
Lines of
Development
287
in coke ovens other than those of the gas industry. About one-third of the
output of gas from coke ovens is sold to gas undertakings for general distribu¬
tion; the remainder is mainly consumed at the ovens or at steelworks.
There are about 13 million consumers, the total having shown no significant
change since 1955. Manufactured gas and gas acquired from coke ovens and
other sources for distribution exceeds 600,000 million cubic feet annually.
In 1963 the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was about
7,000 million cubic feet, most of it for household use.
Half of all gas is sold by gas boards for household use and the remainder for
industrial and commercial purposes. Total consumption has been rising at an
average rate of over 3 per cent per annum since 1961, after a period when
growth was almost negligible. During the very cold winter of 1962-63 the
rate was even higher. It reached a level of about 3,000 million therms in 1963.
About 70 per cent of the domestic load is used for cooking, the remaining
30 per cent being spread over space heating, water heating and other instal¬
lations. Most homes in Britain are supplied with gas, except in some rural
areas where, owing to difficulties in storage and transmission, gas is not
economic. Bottled gas, derived from petroleum, is used in rural areas.
Gas is used extensively in industries which require the control of temperatures
to a fine degree of accuracy, for example, in the pottery industry and in
certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products. In 1963 sales
of gas to industry totalled 857 million therms.
Production of coke at gas works in 1963 was 9-7 million tons, and at coke
ovens 15-5 million tons, in both cases about the same as in 1962. The gas
industry and coke ovens jointly produce about 3 million tons of crude coal tar
and over too million gallons of crude benzole a year. These latter by-products
yield materials widely employed in the newer branches of the chemical
industry.
Under the Gas Act, 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the Area Gas
Boards was limited to £250 million. In 1954 the industry’s borrowing powers
were increased to £450 million, in i960 to £525 million and in 1963 to £600
million (or up to £650 million if authorised by Order in Council).
The industry in the preceding years had been spending about £50 million a
year on capital investment, but since 1961-62 expenditure has increased
sharply; in 1963-64 it reached £86 million and £79 million has been approved
for 1964-65. Between vesting day (1st May, 1949) and the end of March 1964,
about £760 million had been invested in fixed assets.
Considerable integration, by the linking of undertakings for the transmission
of gas through gas grids and long-distance mains, has enabled production to
be concentrated in the most efficient units.
In order to compete fully with other fuels, the gas industry is seeking ways
of reducing costs of production. Processes for gasifying coal of inferior
quality are being investigated. At Westfield, in Fife, Scotland, a gas plant
using the Lurgi process for gasifying low grade coal has been in service since
1962 and produces 35 million cubic feet of gas a day, about one-fifth of the
total gas requirements of Scotland. Because the gas is made at high pressure,
it is possible to pipe it through a 133-mile grid-main covering industrial
Scotland. Further advantages of this method are low costs and the production
288
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
FUEL
EFFICIENCY
of by-products such as tar, ammonia and benzole. A similar plant at Coleshill,
near Birmingham, started operating in 1963.
Alternative sources of gas are being developed by the Gas Council. Many
oil gasification plants have been built, such as the one, adjacent to the refinery
at the Isle of Grain, constructed by the South Eastern Gas Board; this
converts some 70,000 tons of petroleum products a year and has a daily
output of 45 million cubic feet of gas. Gas manufactured directly from oil now
accounts for over 5 per cent of total supply, while purchases of rich gas
from oil refineries and of liquefied petroleum gases account for about 10 per
cent. Small quantities of methane are purchased from mines or in the form
of sewage gas and in two areas small quantities of natural gas have provided
supplies.
As a result of successful trial shipments of liquid natural gas in 1958 and
1959, the Gas Council in 1961 signed a 15-year contract for the purchase of
natural gas from the Sahara in specially constructed refrigerated tankers.
Deliveries started in 1964 and should rise to about 35,000 million cubic feet
of gas annually, equivalent to some 10 per cent of total consumption. A
pipeline system distributes the gas from the Canvey Island terminal.
The Gas Council expects gas consumption to increase by about 5 per cent
a year up to 1970 and therefore substantial expansion in gas-making capacity
is required. New plant will be based on new processes using light petroleum
fractions, and petroleum will be the source of about one-half of total gas
supplies by 1967. The need to provide additional storage capacity, particularly
underground, and the strengthening of the distribution system will also mean
substantial investment.
The Gas Council has a research committee which advises on the initiation
and implementation of research policy. Research organisations comprise three
stations (two in London and one at Solihull) and a ‘basic’ research group,
in addition to Watson House at Fulham, London, for the design, testing
and development of appliances. Research is also carried out on behalf of
the Gas Council at Leeds University and at other universities and colleges.
Efficiency in the use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, has
been assisted by various bodies representing producers and consumers and
by the technical advisory services of the fuel and power industries.
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National
Coal Board, solid fuel distributors and appliance manufacturers and dis¬
tributors. Originally formed in 1932, it informs and advises domestic users
on the best use of solid fuel, including the choice of installation and the
operation of solid fuel appliances.
A non-profit-making company, the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency
Service, was formed in 1954 and sponsored by the fuel and power industries
to promote fuel saving in industry. It provides advice and services to all non¬
domestic fuel users in a variety of forms, from ‘spot’ inspection to full-scale
heat and power surveys and regular visits on a contract basis.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, in general, sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. The sources of water are often distant from the areas where
supplies are needed, however, and water undertakings are therefore mainly
concerned with abstraction, storage, treatment and distribution. Supplies
INDUSTRY
Organisation of
Water Supply in
England and
Wales
Present
Supplies in
England and
Wales
289
are obtained partly from surface sources such as mountain lakes, streams
impounded in upland gathering grounds and river intakes, and partly from
underground sources by means of wells, adits and boreholes. Unlike other
public services in Great Britain, such as electricity and gas, water supply
remains in the hands of a large number of undertakings of different kinds.
Ministerial responsibility for national water policy rests with the Minister
of Housing and Local Government in England and Wales, with the Secretary
of State for Scotland in Scotland and with the Minister of Health and Local
Government in Northern Ireland.
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies
became a general public service and then only after long and bitter con¬
troversy. It was largely due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick and his
colleagues, who demonstrated the dangers arising from inadequate water
supply and sanitation, that the Public Health Act, 1848, became law in
England and Wales and laid the basis for a long series of statutes dealing with
public health. From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards a number
of water undertakings were set up to provide water to the expanding urban
population, and the water supply system developed rapidly, although in
piecemeal fashion and with some overlapping and waste.
Local authorities have a duty as sanitary authorities to ensure that water
supplies are adequate for the needs of their areas, and they may do this
either by operating water undertakings themselves or by ensuring that other
bodies are providing adequate supplies. The householder receives his
domestic water supply at a comparatively small charge, varying in different
areas, which he usually pays by way of a water rate levied, like other rates,
on the value of his house. Industrial users are charged according to con¬
sumption as recorded by meter.
Under the Water Act, 1945, the Minister of Housing and Local Government
has a duty to promote the conservation and proper use of water supplies in
England and Wales. A statutory Central Advisory Water Committee advises
the Minister on general questions relating to water and organisation of
supplies. Since the passing of the Act, some 790 smaller water authorities
in England and Wales have been absorbed by larger authorities or by the
creation of joint boards in order to improve the efficiency of the water supply
industry. In March 1964 there were in England and Wales 256 local authority
water undertakings, 105 joint water boards (including bulk supply boards)
and 4 joint water committees, 47 statutory water companies, 10 non-statutory
water companies, and one private proprietor with statutory powers. A con¬
siderable number of private proprietors without statutory powers also
provide small supplies.
The Metropolitan Water Board, which is probably the largest single water
undertaking in the world, supplies about 360 million gallons daily to about
6| million people in the London area. It consists of 88 part-time members
who are the elected representatives of the various local authorities within the
board’s area of operations, together with one representative each from the
Thames and Lee Conservancies.
Today, piped water reaches over 95 per cent of the total population of England
and Wales and about 90 per cent of the rural population.
Capital expenditure by water undertakers amounts to between £40 million
and ^50 million a year. Interest, together with running costs, is largely met
from annual income.
290
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Water Supply
in Scotland and
Northern
Ireland
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by
grants under the Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Acts, 1944 to 1961. By
March 1964 schemes costing £90 million had been completed or were in
progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The steady growth of towns in England and Wales has meant increased
demands for water, the needs of industry having grown so much that in
many areas they now exceed domestic demand. The use of water in irrigation
of farm land is also growing; it is estimated that the area of land under
irrigation is increasing by 15 per cent a year. In order that the country’s
water resources should be developed to meet these growing requirements the
Water Resources Act, 1963, has provided for a new administrative structure
consisting of river authorities and a Central Water Resources Board; it is
hoped to bring this into effect in 1965. The river authorities will manage the
water resources of river basins, taking over the functions of the former river
boards (see p. 339) in respect of land drainage, flood control, administration
of fisheries and prevention of pollution. They will be responsible for assessing
water resources and requirements, controlling and developing resources and
allocating water between users by a system of licensing. Special arrangements,
based on existing authorities, are being made for the Greater London area,
which is not considered suitable for administration by a self-contained river
authority. The work of the river authorities is to be co-ordinated by the
Water Resources Board, an expert advisory body accountable to the Ministry
of Housing and Local Government. Its duties will include the review of
national water resources and requirements, the encouragement of the transfer
of water between areas according to need, the co-ordination of proposals of
river authorities for capital investment and the initiation of research. Water
conservation is to be financially self-supporting after an initial period of
about five years, the cost being met from charges made to abstractors and
users of water.
In Scotland public water undertakings are carried on entirely by local
authorities, either separately or in combination with each other; they supply
about 97 per cent of the total population. The water problem in Scotland is
broadly similar to that in England and Wales except that there is not the
same need to allocate water between competing interests and less reliance
needs to be placed on underground sources. The Water (Scotland) Acts,
1946 and 1949, among other provisions, impose a general duty on the
Secretary of State to promote the conservation of water resources in Scotland;
require local authorities to provide supplies of wholesome water everywhere
in their districts, where this can be done at reasonable cost; and provide for
a uniform system of rating for water throughout the country. The Scottish
Water Advisory Committee advises the Secretary of State on general questions
relating to resources and supplies. The Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage
Act, 1944, as amended, makes available to Scottish local authorities grant
assistance up to a maximum of £45 million towards the cost of water supplies
and sewerage schemes in rural areas. By December 1963 the total value of
work done on new and improved water supplies since 1945 amounted to
£71 million, of which £34-4 million represents works aided by grants under
these Acts.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water for both domestic and
industrial consumption. The Water Supplies and Sewerage Act (Northern
Ireland), 1945, made it obligatory for water supply authorities to provide a
supply of wholesome water to houses and schools in their areas where this
INDUSTRY
Measurement
of Water
Resources
Water Pollution
291
could be done at reasonable cost, and also empowered the Ministry of Health
and Local Government to make grants towards the costs of schemes under¬
taken by these authorities. Before 1945 only the more densely populated areas
had a piped supply, but progress has been such that even in the thinly
populated rural districts most households have now been, or soon will be,
connected to a piped supply. By 31st March, 1964, about ^27 million had been
expended, including grants totalling £12-5 million.
In October 1961 the Minister of Health and Local Government appointed
a Water Resources Committee which is making a detailed study of water
supplies in the area.
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation’s surface
water resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain,
published annually by H.M. Stationery Office. This publication contains
particulars of the run-off and related rainfall from a large number of rivers,
streams and reservoired areas. The Surface Water Survey Centre of the
Ministry of Housing and Local Government is responsible for the promotion
of gauging, the collection of hydrological information, and the publication
of the year book. The field work of surface water measurement is carried
out by river boards, water undertakings and other bodies. Detailed studies of
the resources and use of water in specified areas have been published in the
series of Hydrological Surveys which cover approximately half of England
and Wales. General information on rainfall, published annually in British
Rainfall, is the responsibility of the Meteorological Office, while the subject
of ground water is dealt with by the Geological Survey and Museum. In
special cases the Hydraulics Research Station of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research at Teddington, carries out research into problems of
the design and calibration of gauging weirs and flumes for the measurement
of surface water.
Each river authority is responsible for the prevention in each river basin of
pollution into rivers and certain tidal waters. Control of pollution in the tidal
Thames is exercised by the Port of London Authority (see p. 359). In Scotland
nine river purification boards have been set up; north and west of the Cale¬
donian Canal and in parts of the counties of Angus and Kincardine the
county councils and town councils of large burghs are the river purification
authorities. The Secretary of State receives advice from the Scottish River
Purification Advisory Committee on questions affecting the cleanliness of
Scottish rivers, which he has a duty to promote.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research is engaged in investigating problems connected with
the treatment of water for domestic and industrial supply, the treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention
of pollution of surface water and underground water. Research is carried out
with general supervision and advice from the Water Pollution Research
Board of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industries include firms engaged on the construction,
alteration, repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage
and sewerage systems, waterworks, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence
works, electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, open-cast coal
292
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
prospecting and mining, and structural work connected with thermo-electric,
hydro-electric power stations and telecommunications. The industries employ
about if million persons, including all grades. Allowing for new work only,
they provide nearly 10 per cent of the gross domestic product; when repair
work is included, they provide about 13 per cent.
To meet a growing demand for constructional work arising from plans for
large scale expansion and modernisation, it is estimated that the industries
will need to increase output by about 50 per cent over the next decade. This
will have to be achieved, in the main, by improvements in productivity as
any great increase in labour resources to meet these demands is unlikely.
Constructional work is carried out both by private contractors and by
public authorities who employ their own labour. Over four-fifths of the work
is done by private firms, which range from the very large, employing over
20,000 men, to one-man businesses. Although there are nearly 100,000 firms
in the industry, about 16 per cent of the operatives are employed by the 80
largest firms, each employing more than 1,000 persons.
Public authorities as a whole employ nearly 370,000 operatives but a very
large proportion of these are engaged on repair and maintenance work which
local authorities, for example, have to carry out with their own labour.
Of the total labour force, nearly a million are skilled operatives who have
been trained under the apprenticeship scheme, taking four to five years to
qualify. About one-third of these skilled men are employed on repair and
maintenance work.
Some firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake responsi¬
bility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the smallest
projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either by
architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects,
by consulting engineers. The functions of the latter, acting on behalf of a
client, embrace advice on the feasibility of projects, the drawing up of plans
and the supervision of the constructional work by the contractor. There are
over 250 firms of consulting engineers in the United Kingdom.
The Ministry of Public Building and Works (see p. 59) is responsible for
all the construction programmes undertaken directly by the Government
(except for roads), including work for the armed services, both at home and
overseas. It is also responsible for co-ordinating research and development
throughout the Government service and seeks to influence methods and
techniques in the building industry as a whole. In 1963 it set up a Directorate-
General of Research and Development, consisting of four directorates, con¬
cerned respectively with long-term planning, management, research and
development.
The Government set up a National Building Agency in 1964, a limited
company, financed initially from Government funds. The Agency will offer
advice to clients, contractors, materials producers and the building professions
on the most modern ideas and techniques and will bring clients’ demands
together so that industrialised methods can be more widely used.
The value of output of the industry has been rising fairly steadily since 1954,
when building controls ended; by the end of 1963 it was running at an annual
rate about 40 per cent higher than nine years earlier. The value of work done
in 1963, amounted to £3,110 million, of which £473 million represented work
carried out by the men employed directly by public authorities. Private
Output
Housing
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Overseas
Constructional
Work
INDUSTRY 293
contractors carried out the remaining 3^2,637 million (^2,051 million on new
work and ^586 million on repair work).
During the period 1954 to the end of 1963 the number of operatives em¬
ployed increased by about 9 per cent and average output per operative
increased by about 30 per cent. (If new work alone is considered, the increase
was about 40 per cent.)
Some 4^ million houses have been built in Great Britain since 1945; about
3 million on behalf of public authorities, mainly for renting, and about
million for private owners, mainly for sale. About 370,000 houses were started
in 1963 and some ^784 million of housing work was carried out by private
firms, a record for the total volume of housing work. Of this, about 3^461
million, or nearly 59 per cent, was for private owners and the remaining
3^323 million for public authorities.
Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale
modern industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment
to carry out major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent
figures in the early development of civil engineering included John McAdam,
pioneer in road construction; Thomas Telford, builder of roads, docks and
railways; George and Robert Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunei,
pioneers of railway building.
Among important construction projects in hand in the United Kingdom in
1964 were a drainage and sewerage scheme in Glasgow, costing £3-5 million,
and another at Davyhulme, costing 3^6-4 million; the Loch Awe hydro¬
electric and pumped storage scheme in Scotland, costing £7 million; four
major conventional power stations and several nuclear power stations, includ¬
ing one at Wylfa in Anglesey, the largest in the world; the £5 million River
Trent tidal reach improvement scheme; and the River Derwent water-supply
scheme in Yorkshire, costing £8 million. Projects for roads construction,
bridges and tunnels included 88 miles of motorways completed in England
and Wales in the year ending March 1964, with a further 118 miles under
construction (see p. 368), the Forth Road Bridge (opened in September
1964), road bridges over the River Severn and the Firth of Tay, and the
j£i2-6 million tunnel under the River Tyne.
British constructional firms have been as active overseas as in the United
Kingdom. British consulting engineers, in particular, have built up a tradition
of knowledge and integrity which has caused their standards to become
international practice and their services to be in world-wide demand.
Among important construction projects by British contractors in hand in
overseas countries during 1964 were: the Hale hydro-electric project in
Tanganyika, costing ^4-5 million; the 40 MW Malim Nawar power station
in Malaya (^2-5 million); electrification projects on the Indian railways
(3^6 million); and a £2 million ocean terminal at Hong Kong. British consul¬
ting engineers were engaged on a number of projects, where British contrac¬
tors were not commissioned for the construction work. Notable examples were
two airports at Baghdad and Kuwait, costing £12-5 million and £9 million
respectively; a £5-5 million scheme for Benghazi harbour; the second stage
for the Kwai Chung development scheme in Hong Kong (£3-7 million); the
Roseires dam for a hydro-electric scheme in the Sudan (,£821 million); a
similar scheme at Kainji, in Nigeria, in conjunction with Dutch consultants
(£44 million); the ,£150 million Mangla Dam in West Pakistan; two steel
294
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
mills in Canada and an iron and steel works at El Fouladh in Tunisia. On
certain projects both the consulting engineers and the contractors were
British, examples being the second stage in the port of Tema construction in
Ghana (£6 million); the drainage and irrigation scheme at Tapakuma
in British Guiana (£2-5 million); and the 12 mile Accra-Tema motorway in
Ghana (£3-3 million).
It has been estimated that the total value of work carried out during the
year ending in March 1964 by over 58 British contractors, operating in 75
countries, was £123 million, compared with million in the previous
year, and that the value of new contracts obtained was £118 million, com¬
pared with £147 million in the previous year. Consulting engineers had
projects worth £950 million in hand on 1st January, 1964.
The Directorate-General of Research and Development in the Ministry of
Public Building and Works is responsible for co-ordinating research and
information services, to increase efficiency in the building industry.
Several of the research establishments of DSIR (see p. 211) deal with
subjects relating to the construction industries. The Building Research Station
which was set up in 1921, thus making Britain the pioneer of organised build¬
ing research, is concerned with research into all aspects of building. The
Hydraulics Research Station studies such subjects as hydraulic structures for
hydro-electric projects. Research on timber is undertaken at the Forest
Products Research Laboratory and the Road Research Laboratory carries out
research on road construction and traffic problems.
The Heating and Ventilating Research Association, an industrial organisa¬
tion, deals with problems of heating and ventilation of large buildings. Large
manufacturing firms have laboratories, some of the work of which is concerned
with construction, and the major construction firms have research departments
working on plant, materials and methods. Other bodies concerned with
research include the universities and colleges of technology. Most of the
producers of primary building materials have trade associations which main¬
tain research institutions chiefly devoted to seeking new and more efficient uses
for their materials: the Timber Research and Development Association and
the Cement and Concrete Association are examples.
In i960 a Civil Engineering Research Association was set up on the initiative
of associations of civil engineering contractors and consulting and civil
engineers in consultation with representatives of private firms in the industry.
The Association is financed by grants from DSIR and contributions from the
industry; its function is to promote the carrying out of research on appropriate
problems in civil engineering, making use of existing research facilities of all
types.
A working party set up jointly by the Minister of Public Building and Works
and the building industry recommended in 1964 that research on construction
should be organised by a body representative of the industries, the Govern¬
ment and academic experts and should be carried out in future at an annual
rate starting at ^0-5 million in the first year, rising in two or three years to
£5 million and should be financed mainly by a levy on the industries.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Britain’s manufacturing industries provide a wide range of products, many
of which are of major importance in world trade. Output has increased by
over 19 per cent since 1958, and in 1963 was nearly 4 per cent higher than
INDUSTRY
295
the previous year. In 1963 this sector spent £1,066 million on fixed capital
equipment, including £285 million on building work and £710 million on
plant and machinery. The number of employees in manufacturing industry
(including the unemployed and those absent from work through sickness
and other causes, but excluding employers and the self-employed) was nearly
9 million in June 1963, 38 per cent of the total number of employees.
The employment and sales figures listed in Table 19 give an indication
of the relative importance of broad sectors of manufacturing industry.
Expansion has been particularly rapid in electronics, most sections of electrical
engineering, most branches of the chemical industry and man-made fibres.
The diagram on p. 269 shows the changes in production between 1958 and
1963 in the major groups of industry.
In the subsequent sections, statistics relating to firms are those of enter¬
prises given in the Censuses of Production for 1958 and 1962, statistics of
employees refer to numbers at June 1963, and export statistics are taken from
the Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation in the United Kingdom.
TABLE 19
Industry Groups :
Sales and Work
Done,
Production,
Employment and
Capital
Expenditure
Industry Group
Sales and Work
Done in 1962“
£
million
Percentage
of total
Index of
Industrial
Production
1963
Number of
Employees
(thousands)
1958
= 100
June
1963
Fixed
Capital
Expendi¬
ture at
current
prices 1963
£
million
Food, drink and tobacco
Chemicals and allied
industries . .
Metal manufacture
Engineering and electri¬
cal goods
Shipbuildingandmarine
engineering . .
Vehicles
Metal goods (not else¬
where specified)
Textiles, leather and
clothing
Paper, printing and
publishing . .
Other manufacturing
industries . .
Total: all manufac¬
turing industries . .
4,834-3
2,870-6
2,086-3
4,685-3
414-6
2,324-4
1,449-8
3,040-9
1,542-3
2,051-4
19-1
11- 4
8- 3
18-5
1-6
9- 2
5- 7
12- 0
6- 1
8-1
115
138
113
126
77
120
108
112
128
850-8
521-4
603-0
2,177-7
242-1
882-7
559-6
1,488-6
632-4
954-5
25,299-9
100-0
119-8
8,912-8
147-3
170-3
127-0
339-8
91-4
79-1
110-9
1,065-8
“ Including all sales made by business firms covered by the 1962 Census of Production
and any new building work, machinery or other capital items produced within the firm
for its own use.
METAL
MANUFACTURE
The metal manufacturing industries employed 603,000 persons in June 1963.
Of these, 343,000 were in the iron and steel industry, 121,000 in the manu¬
facture of iron castings, 57,000 in the manufacture of light metals, and 82,000
in the copper, brass and other base metal industries. Exports of iron and steel
products and non-ferrous metals in 1963 had an aggregate value of £329 million.
296
Iron and Steel
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the
seventeenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the
discovery of the processes which led to the great expansion of steelmaking
in the second half of the nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world’s
fifth largest steel producing nation. Output of crude steel in 1963 totalled
22-5 million ingot tons, 10 per cent above the 1962 total but still below the
record level of 24-3 million tons in i960. Output in 1964, however, is expected
to be at least 25-5 million tons. Capacity utilisation in 1963 was 79 per cent
(although a much higher rate was achieved towards the end of the year),
compared with 94 per cent in i960. Between i960 and 1963 total capacity
increased by 2-75 million tons or 11 per cent. Pig iron production in 1963
amounted to 14-6 million tons.
Net deliveries of finished steel amounted to 17-3 million tons in 1963 and
the 3 -5 million tons of iron and steel products which were exported had a value
of £204-6 million; the United States (£18-3 million), the Soviet Union (£13-2
million), Sweden (£io-i million), and India were the main overseas buyers.
The main producing districts are: South Wales (26 per cent of total crude
steel output); the north-east of England (17 per cent); Lincolnshire (11 per
cent); Sheffield and district (11 per cent); Lancashire (11 per cent) and
Scotland (9 per cent). Other important areas are Yorkshire, Staffordshire,
Northamptonshire, and the north-west coast of England. South Wales con¬
centrates mainly on the manufacture of flat products, especially sheet steel
and tinplate; the output of the north-east coast and Scotland is predominantly
of heavy steel products (plates, sections and rails); Sheffield is responsible
for two-thirds of Britain’s alloy steel production.
During the period 1946-63 about £1,350 million was spent on capital
development. The industry now has sufficient capacity available to meet all
foreseeable demands, and the emphasis in its development plans is on improv¬
ing efficiency; capital expenditure is therefore expected to be less heavy in
the next few years. Britain has some of the most modern plant in Europe and
it is estimated that by 1965 steel produced in the new converter processes
will have increased from 8 per cent of total output in i960 to about 21 per
cent; electric steel will have increased from 7 per cent to 12 per cent; and the
share of the older open hearth process will have fallen from 85 per cent to
about 67 per cent.
Larger and more efficient blast furnaces have been installed and coke
consumption has been reduced by improvements in the preparation of raw
materials. Extensive experiments are taking place on the use of oxygen-
enriched blast and cold metal steelmaking processes. Fundamental research
is carried out by the British Iron and Steel Research Association.
Many companies have developments to improve the quality and range of
finished products, including continuous mills to roll rods, strip bars and
other items. Outstanding recent projects include a new integrated works
with a wide strip mill at Newport (Monmouthshire), another new wide strip
mill in Scotland, two steelmaking and rolling plants in Sheffield and a third
at Stoke-on-Trent which is based entirely on continuous casting for supplies
of semi-finished steel.
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public
supervision since 1932. In February 1951 the greater part of the industry
came under public ownership, but the Iron and Steel Act, 1953, established
an Iron and Steel Holding and Realisation Agency, with the duty of returning
the companies to private ownership. Only one company now remains under
the control of the Agency.
INDUSTRY
297
Iron Castings
Non-Ferrous
Metals
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
The 1953 Act also provided for the establishment of the Iron and Steel
Board to exercise a general supervision over the iron and steel industry.
Members of the Board are appointed by the Government and it is financed
by levies which it has power to make on firms in the industry. The major
trade association in the iron and steel industry, excluding iron and steel
founding, is the British Iron and Steel Federation.
Output of iron castings was 3-7 million tons in 1963, compared with 3-5
million tons in 1962 and 2-54 million tons in 1946. The main users of iron
castings are the general engineering industry, the motor vehicle industry, the
building and associated industries, manufacturers of pressure pipes and
fittings, and the steel industry. An important part of total output consists of
grey and malleable iron castings for use in motor vehicles, tractors, machine
tools, engines and all kinds of power units.
There are about 1,400 firms in the iron founding industry and the number
of employees is about 121,000. Exports are included in the total of steel
exports in the previous section.
The non-ferrous metals industry is the largest in Europe and as a consumer
of aluminium, copper and lead Britain is second only to the United States
among western countries. Output in 1963 included: aluminium, 31,000 tons
of virgin metal and 14,600 tons of secondary metal; refined copper, 90,000
tons of virgin copper and 121,000 tons of secondary metal; lead, 95,000 tons
of refined metal; zinc, 99,000 tons of slab metal; and tin, 19,000 tons.
Mining in Britain is confined to the working of lead and tin ores on a small
scale.
In 1963 exports of non-ferrous base metals were valued at ^96-1 million.
The main products exported, including semi-finished products, were copper
and copper alloys (^37-3 million), aluminium and its alloys (^18-5 million),
nickel and its alloys (£21-3 million), and tin and its alloys (^9-6 million).
The German Federal Republic (£11-5 million), Belgium (£7-5 million), Italy
(£7 million) and the United States (^6-8 million) were the largest purchasing
countries. There were also substantial exports of finished products incorporat¬
ing non-ferrous semi-finished products and non-ferrous metals in many
finished forms.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands; other centres include
South Wales, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth. It consists of over 900
firms engaged in smelting, casting and fabrication by rolling, extrusion and
drawing. The techniques of powder metallurgy and pressure diecasting are
also employed. Some non-ferrous metals, such as nickel, molybdenum,
tungsten and vanadium, are largely used in the making of high speed and
other special steels. New uses for non-ferrous metals with special properties
have emerged with the growth of new industries having particular requirements,
as, for example, production of nuclear energy (uranium, zirconium), jet
aircraft (niobium, magnesium, titanium) and electronic apparatus (selenium,
silicon, germanium, tantalum).
Mechanical engineering comprises a wide range of industries, including all
types of machinery, machine tools, engineers’ small tools, small arms,
mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment, industrial plant,
watches and clocks, and scientific instruments. Vehicle engines are included
in the section on vehicles (p. 304). The volume of production from these
industries rose by 22 per cent between 1958 and 1963, in which latter year
298
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agricultural
Machinery
and Tractors
Tractors
Metal-working
Machine Tools
.£1,676 million was the aggregate value of the main products of all sections
other than small arms, scientific instruments and watches and clocks. Exports
of the groups of products below had a total value of over £800 million. The
number of employees was over 1-33 million.
There are over 300 firms, employing 36,000 people, in the agricultural
machinery industry but three enterprises employing over a thousand workers
account for over half the net output of firms with more than 25 employees.
In 1963 output, excluding tractors, was valued at £60-9 million and exports
were worth £25 million; the main overseas markets were France, the Irish
Republic, the German Federal Republic, the Netherlands and Australia. The
use of self-propelled combine harvesters, forage harvesters, pick-up balers and
grain driers has increased in Britain in recent years and exports of dairy
machinery are expanding. Output in 1963 included 4,700 combine harvesters
(the highest number since 1958), 3,900 milking machines, 13,800 pick-up
balers and 2,600 grain and grass driers, one of the most rapidly expanding
items.
The bulk of British tractor output and exports consists of agricultural tractors.
Some 229,000 agricultural and industrial (wheeled and half track) tractors
were produced in 1963, about 187,000 (82 per cent) for export. Output also
included track laying tractors and 31,000 small market garden tractors of less
than 10 belt-horse-power. In addition, British firms produced 9,500 powered
industrial trucks, including 6,200 of the fork-lift variety. Exports of tractors
had a value of £115 million in 1963; of works trucks and tractors, £6-8 million.
Agricultural tractor production is dominated by five large organisations, two
of them producing about 80 per cent of output. Tractors are exhibited at the
annual Royal Smithfield Show and Agricultural Machinery Exhibition in
London.
Britain was the birthplace of the modern machine tool industry, and by the
early 1830s had developed to an advanced stage the boring machine and
screw-cutting lathe, as well as other machine tools. The industry’s output
today ranges from watchmakers’ lathes weighing a few pounds to machines
weighing hundreds of tons, including transfer lines for motor vehicle manu¬
facture and electronically controlled machine tools giving accuracies of one
ten-thousandth part of an inch.
The value of deliveries of metal-working machine tools fell by 11 per cent
in 1963 to £114 million, from the peak total of £127 million in 1962. Exports
in 1963 had a value of £45-1 million; and of the orders on hand at the end
of December 1963 (£69 million), 42 per cent were for export. India (£6-6
million), Italy (£4-2 million), Australia (£3-4 million) and France (£3-3
million) were the main overseas markets in 1963.
There are about 350 separate firms making machine tools (including
welding machinery), but over 40 per cent of net output is produced by 11
enterprises, each employing over 1,000 persons. The high degree of
specialisation makes it possible for the small firm to flourish. The industry is
centred mainly in the Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire, and to a lesser
extent near London and Glasgow. About 98,000 persons are employed.
The Machine Tool Trades Association of Great Britain is the representative
body of most manufacturers and importers, and is responsible for the Inter¬
national Machine Tool Exhibitions held in Britain every four years, the most
recent taking place in 1964. The industry is served by its own research
body, the Machine Tool Industry Research Association.
INDUSTRY
299
Industrial
Engines
Textile
Machinery and
Accessories
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Contractors
Plant and
Quarrying
Machinery
Britain manufactures a wide range of industrial engines other than those for
the vehicle construction industries (see p.304). Deliveries of engines (including
parts) had a value of £8y million in 1963 and exports (including marine and
rail traction engines) were worth £24-5 million; in addition, parts exported
were valued at £18-4 million. The total brake horse-power of the 347,000
internal combustion engines delivered was 9 million.
There are about 70 firms for whom industrial engines are their chief product.
Production is concentrated among the large firms, and 10 of these, each
employing over 1,500 persons, account for about five-sixths of the net output
of larger firms. About 43,000 employees work in the industry.
One of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical engineering industries, the textile
machinery industry, developed rapidly after the introduction of mechanical
spinning and weaving towards the end of the eighteenth century. Its range of
output embraces all stages in textile manufacturing processes. Deliveries in
1963 were valued at £87-0 million and exports at £66-6 million. Principal
markets were India (£6-3 million), Pakistan (^4-9 million), the Soviet Union
(£4-4 million), the United States (£3-9 million), the German Federal Republic,
Italy and Australia.
The industry, which has about 58,000 employees, comprises over 600 firms
situated mainly in Lancashire, Yorkshire, Northern Ireland, Dundee,
Leicester and Nottingham, making a wide range of machines and accessories
for the manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of
natural and man-made fibres. In the case of bast and leaf fibre machinery the
United Kingdom is still by far the world’s largest supplier. Five enterprises
with over 2,000 employees produce over half of the output of the 158 larger
firms.
Almost every industry makes use of mechanical handling equipment; the
products of the industry range from individual units and accessories to
complete operating systems but are usually taken to exclude colliery gear and
conveyors for underground mines. The value of deliveries in 1963 was about
j£io6-5 million, the main constituents being: cranes and bridge transporters
(about 28 per cent of the total value), lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators
and hoists. Exports of mechanical handling equipment (including industrial
and works trucks but excluding haulage machinery for mines) in 1963 were
valued at £31 million. There are about 270 firms in the industry but only 170
of these employ over 25 persons.
Production of equipment extends to almost the whole range of plant required
by the construction industry, including crawler tractors, motor graders,
scrapers, trenchers, dozer equipment, dumpers, excavators and loading shovels
and crushing, pulverising and screening plant.
The value of deliveries from the industry was about £119 million in 1963;
by far the most important single item was earth-moving machinery with a
value of £jy-8 million. Exports of excavating and earth-moving machinery
and road-rollers in 1963 totalled £53 million; the German Federal Republic,
France, India, Sweden, South Africa, Italy and Spain were important
markets.
Contractors plant and quarrying machinery is manufactured by over 120
firms, and of the larger enterprises, 8 with over 1,000 employees account for
47 per cent of net output. The labour force numbers about 25,000.
3 00
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Office
Machinery
Engineers’
Small Tools
and Gauges
Industrial Plant
and Steelwork
Boilers and
Boilerhouse Plant
Iron, Steel and
Non-ferrous Metal
Works Plant
Chemical Plant
and Mineral Oil
Refining Equipment
The office machinery industry has been expanding rapidly and is now second
in size only to that of the United States. In 1963 the value of deliveries of
office machinery (such as accounting machinery, punched-card machinery,
typewriters, dictating machines, and duplicating machinery) was ^85-2
million. Deliveries in 1963 included 124,000 standard typewriters and
205,000 portable typewriters. The value of deliveries of accounting and
similar machinery was £45-8 million, of which £21-3 million was for export,
and of other office machinery ^28-3 million, of which ^9-9 million was for
export. Exports of all office machinery were valued at £39-5 million and the
most important overseas purchasers were the German Federal Republic,
the United States, France and Australia. British subsidiaries or associates
of United States firms are prominent in the office machinery industry, in
which there are about 80 firms. About 64,000 persons are employed.
The manufacture of engineers’ small tools and gauges is an expanding
industry and is the main branch of production for over 1,100 firms, of which
4 have over 1,000 employees. Deliveries increased in value from £52-1 million
in 1959 to a peak of £75-1 million in 1961, but have since declined to £68-5
million in 1963. The industry has a labour force of about 55,000 persons.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial plant and
steelwork, and about 145,000 are employed in this branch. Of particular
importance are steam-raising boilers, lime and cement kilns, gas and coke
oven plant, sintering plant, metallurgical furnaces and plant, chemical and
mineral oil refining plant, nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment
plant, and steelwork for bridges, buildings, etc. The industry is composed
of over 800 firms, including several large-scale enterprises. Almost 60 per
cent of the net output of larger firms comes from 29 firms with over 1,000
employees, and nearly one-third is accounted for by 7 firms with a labour
force of over 3,000. In 1963 the aggregate value of deliveries was £322-8 million.
British companies delivered water tube boilers to the value of £S9'3 million
in 1963; shell boilers and other boilerhouse plant accounted for a further
£30-9 million. Water tube boilers of advanced design and of large steam¬
raising capacity are produced for power stations, whereas shell boilers are
used for steam-raising and heating in factories and buildings. Exports in
1963 amounted to £14-4 million.
The modernisation and expansion of the British steel industry gave rise to the
rapid development of the steelworks plant industry, which now provides,
in association with firms producing rolling mills, almost all Britain’s require¬
ments as well as plant for export. The value of deliveries in 1963 was £31-8
million; rolling mills and ancillary equipment accounted for an additional
£24-6 million. Exports of steelworks and non-ferrous machinery and similar
equipment (including rolling mills) were worth £12-8 million in 1963.
This industry consists of a small number of firms, most of which are
business associates or members of a consortium. Besides supplying the plant
and equipment for steel and non-ferrous metal works, they undertake the
planning, erection and supply of complete plants in any part of the world.
Finland, India, Rumania, Tunisia and Yugoslavia are a few of the countries
in which British firms are undertaking large-scale steelworks plant projects.
The manufacture of specialised equipment for the chemical and oil refining
industries has expanded rapidly in the last 15 years. Deliveries of chemical
plant had a value of £48-2 million in 1963 compared with a peak of £63-8
INDUSTRY
301
Nuclear Power
Station Plant
Miscellaneous
Non-electrical
Machinery
Refrigeration,
Space Heating and
Ventilation
Equipment
Pumps and
Industrial Valves
Other Machinery
million in 1961. Exports of mineral oil refining machinery came to a further
£3-3 million in 1963. If the whole range of equipment manufactured by
British firms for the petroleum industry is aggregated, Britain ranks second
to the United States as a supplier. The range of chemical plant produced
includes distillation columns, heat exchangers, high vacuum drying equipment,
and plant for the manufacture of chemicals from all feedstocks including
petroleum.
Three major groups of firms, consisting of leading firms in the heavy electrical
engineering, civil engineering, boiler, instrument, and associated industries,
build nuclear power stations for the United Kingdom electricity authorities,
and have built stations in Italy and Japan. The Atomic Energy Authority
grants them non-exclusive manufacturing licences and is working in close
collaboration with them in research and development.
In addition to the mechanical engineering firms described in preceding
sections, there are about 1,750 enterprises whose principal product is a type of
machinery not so far mentioned; about 900 of these firms have over 25 em¬
ployees and some 60 have more than 1,000. Four firms have a labour force
of over 4,000. The main products include: mining machinery, printing and
book-binding machinery, refrigeration appliances, space heating, ventilation
and air conditioning equipment, pumps and pumping machinery, industrial
valves and cocks, compressors, scales and weighing machinery, portable
power tools, food preparing machinery and many other types of equipment.
The total value of deliveries in 1963 was some £S9S'2 million, of which about
two-fifths were exported. About 352,000 workers are employed in these
industries.
This industry makes a wide range of equipment and appliances, extending
from refrigerators of varying sizes suitable for domestic and commercial use
to industrial refrigeration equipment for cold stores, manufacture of chemicals
and other products, ice-making plant and refrigeration plant for ships.
Important advances have recently been made in the development of acceler¬
ated freeze-drying equipment for the food industry and of refrigerated
transport vehicles. Production of commercial and industrial refrigeration
machinery was well established before the second world war, but the present
large production of domestic refrigerators has been built up since 1946.
Deliveries in 1963 had a value of £46-9 million.
The value of deliveries of space heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment has been rising steadily in recent years and in 1963 reached
£57-7 million. Exports of air conditioning and refrigerating equipment and
fans in 1963 had a value of £9-6 million.
Industrial valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are a vital
component in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil
and electric power industries. The value of deliveries of pumps and valves
in 1963 was estimated at ^98-3 million. Exports of pumps were valued at
j£i8-2 million and exports of industrial valves at £15-2 million.
The value of deliveries of other major products in 1963 was: mining machinery,
fS°'9 rnillion; air and gas compressors and exhausters, ^31-9 million; food
and drink machinery, £40-9 million; packaging machinery, £24 million;
and other machinery, ^244-9 million. Exports of mining machinery had a
value of £7-i million, those of air and gas compressors, £13-3 million,
and of food and drink preparation and sterilising machinery, £11-9 million.
302
Scientific and
Industrial
Instruments
and Apparatus
Clocks and
Watches
General
Mechanical
Engineering
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
Electrical
Machinery
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The industry comprises about 1,300 enterprises engaged in the manufacture
of photographic, scientific, surgical and industrial instruments. A rapidly
expanding sector is that making industrial and process measuring and control
instruments—an essential element of automation in industry—deliveries of
which amounted to £55-6 million in 1963, compared to ^41-3 million in i960.
The value of deliveries of other broad categories was: optical instruments
£8-6 million; electric, electronic, and nucleonic instruments ^16-5 million;
and nautical and aeronautical instruments ^21-5 million. The total deliveries
for 1963 amounted to ^146 million.
The industry has a labour force of 140,000 persons. About 54 per cent of
the net output of larger firms is accounted for by 21 large enterprises, each
employing over 1,000 persons.
Export deliveries of scientific instruments have been rising markedly,
amounting to about £41 million in 1963, compared with £19 million in 1957.
Britain was at one time the world’s leading producer of clocks and watches
but by the end of the nineteenth century production had virtually died out.
The present industry is largely a post-war development. It employs about
15,300 people, the great majority skilled craftsmen, and many of its factories
are located on new industrial estates in the older industrial areas, particularly
in Scotland. Deliveries in 1963 included clocks to a value of £7-3 million
and watches worth £4-8 million; exports were valued at about £3-7 million.
Behind the firms manufacturing the major products outlined in this section
are nearly 4,000 enterprises employing about 210,000 whose main functions
are to supply parts and components, to conduct research and development
work, and to undertake general sub-contracting and repair work. (Some enter¬
prises are included because the mixed character of their work makes it
impossible to classify them under any single industry.) They include several
very large undertakings: 23 have over 1,000 employees each and 7 have over
5,000 employees. Ball and roller bearings, and chains are particularly im¬
portant products; exports of the former were valued at £9-7 million in 1963,
and of chains at ^4-7 million.
The electrical engineering industry is engaged in the manufacture and
installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment, including all types of
generating, transmission and distribution equipment; motors; telecommunica¬
tions apparatus; domestic appliances; and specialised laboratory and electronic
equipment. Exports (other than record players, etc.) in 1963 reached their
highest ever value of £318 million. Products are exported to all parts of the
world; in 1963, Australia (£23-7 million), South Africa (£22-9 million),
India (£19 million), Canada (£15-9 million), the United States (^14-9
million) and New Zealand (£13-9 million) were the main markets.
Altogether the industry employs a labour force of almost 850,000. The
leading organisation of the industry is the British Electrical and Allied
Manufacturers’ Association.
Basic research on behalf of the industry is carried out by the Electrical and
Allied Industries Research Association.
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic
advances in the generation and transmission of electric power. The experi¬
ments of Michael Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity
as a source of cheap and abundant power; Sir Charles Parsons produced and
INDUSTRY
3°3
Radio and Other
Electronic
Apparatus
Consumer Goods
Capital Equipment
patented the first turbo-dynamo, the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating
sets of today. The industry is providing the plant required for the large-
scale expansion programme, now being further accelerated, of the United
Kingdom electricity authorities, and has built all types of equipment for
overseas countries.
In 1963 the output of electrical machinery was valued at £349-2 million,
including £135-9 million worth of rotating electrical machinery (motors,
generators and rotary converters), £54-6 million worth of transformers for
lighting, heating and power, £137-3 million worth of switchgear and control
gear and £21-4 million worth of other electrical machinery.
Exports of electrical machinery in 1963 had a value of £77-1 million;
Australia, South Africa and India were the main markets. Generators,
motors, converters, transformers and rectifiers accounted for £46-2 million
and switchgear, starting and control gear for £23 -7 million.
About 670 firms manufacture electrical machinery, including 27 with over
1,000 employees and five with over 7,500. The total labour force numbers
222,300. Manufacture takes place in many areas; among the most important
are Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside, Stafford and Larne (Northern Ireland).
Production of electronic equipment is one of the most rapidly expanding of
British industries. United Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many
basic contributions to electronics—the thermionic valve, the development of
radar (a British firm has fitted over half the world’s radar-equipped ocean¬
going ships), the first public transmission television service, and the ‘printed
circuit’, which has led to far-reaching changes in methods of production in
the radio industry.
There are about 450 manufacturers of electronic equipment of all types,
including some 250 firms engaged in the production of valves, transistors
and specialised components and accessories. The industry employs about
280,000 people and its output in 1963 was estimated to have a gross value
of £380 million, an increase of almost 10 per cent over the previous year.
The consumer goods sector of the industry is concerned with the manufacture
of radio, television sets and radiograms. More than nine-tenths of total output
comes from the six largest firms. Output of television sets in 1963, stimulated
by the opening in April 1964 of the second BBC transmitting channel, was
the highest since i960 at i-66 million sets, while the total value of sales was
£65 million, almost all of which was in the home market. The popularity of
portable transistor sets in recent years has encouraged sales of radios which,
together with radiograms, totalled 3-0 million in 1963 and were worth £29-2
million (including £i-6 million for export).
About four-fifths of the output of electronic capital equipment comes from
some 30 companies. Measured by value of output of home civil sales and
total export sales the largest sectors of the industry in 1963 were electronic
computers (£24-8 million, compared with £13-4 million in 1962), and radar
and navigational aid equipment of which three-quarters of the 1963 output
of £24-8 million was for export. Other important sectors include electronic
control equipment (£16-9 million in 1963), broadcasting equipment (£5-8
million), and radio communication equipment (£13-4 million). In addition,
the electronics industry makes an important contribution towards defence
production, and research and development.
Total exports of electronic apparatus and equipment in 1963 were worth
£81-5 million. Important markets include the United States, Canada, the
3°4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Insulated Wires
and Cables
Telegraph
and Telephone
Apparatus
Electrical Goods
and Domestic
Electrical
Appliances
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT
AND SHIPS
Motor Vehicles
Netherlands, the German Federal Republic, Sweden and Australia. Indirect
exports of equipment incorporated in other products, such as ships, aircraft
and machinery, are also considerable.
There are about 70 firms whose main products are cables and wires for the
distribution of electric power, for telegraph and telephone networks and for
many other purposes; they include submarine cables and those insulated by
a great variety of materials. The value of deliveries in 1963 was £ 159-7 million
and exports of electric cables, wires, etc., were worth £31-7 million.
The industry has a labour force of about 65,000 persons. Three firms
with over 5,000 employees account for about 60 per cent of net output of
larger firms.
Britain is the largest exporter of telegraph and telephone equipment. Shipment
overseas (including signalling apparatus and parts) had a value of £28-6
million in 1963. Research and development work is done by firms in the
industry in co-operation with the Post Office (see p. 3^5)- The industry,
employing nearly 75,000 persons, is organised for large-scale operations. Three
enterprises have over 10,000 employees and ten firms, each with over 1,000
employees, produce over 75 per cent of the output of the larger firms.
Deliveries of electrical goods in 1963 included: domestic electrical appliances,
^165 million; electrical equipment for motor vehicles, cycles and aircraft,
£76-7 million; batteries and accumulators, £47 million; electric lamps, £26-3
million; and other electrical goods, £96 million. By number, deliveries
included: 2-7 million electric blankets, 1 -6 million vacuum cleaners, 1 -4 million
domestic washing machines and 2-6 million electric irons. The industry has a
labour force of 213,300.
The industries which manufacture vehicles and aircraft provide a significant
contribution to exports; overseas deliveries in 1963 of railway and road
vehicles, aircraft, ships and boats had a value of over £593 million, accounting
for 17 per cent of exports of manufactured goods. The labour force numbers
i-13 million and includes: 454,000 in motor vehicle manufacture, 272,000
in aircraft construction and repairing, 242,000 in shipbuilding and marine
engineering, 121,000 in the manufacture of railway vehicles and carriages,
30,000 in cycle and motor cycle manufacturing, and 6,500 in the making of
perambulators and hand trucks.
In both size and value the largest section of the vehicle industry comprises
the manufacture of cars and commercial vehicles. In the last four years
development schemes costing some £200 million have been completed and,
whereas the industry had previously been located mainly in the Midlands
and London areas, new manufacturing plants are now in operation on
Merseyside, in Wales and in Scotland.
Car and commercial vehicle output is dominated by the five largest firms
(British Motor Corporation, Ford, Rootes, Leyland Motor Corporation and
Vauxhall) who account for about 90 per cent of complete vehicle production;
the balance is in the hands of specialist producers of heavy commercial
vehicles, omnibuses, coaches, limousines and sports cars. The principal trade
association is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT),
which holds a motor show annually in London and a Commercial Motor
Exhibition every two years.
INDUSTRY
3°5
Cars
Commercial
Vehicles
Accessories,
Parts, etc.
Cycles and
Motor Cycles
Cycles
Motor Cycles
Railway
Vehicles
Aircraft and
Aero-Engines
Car output in 1963 at i-6 million units was a record, well above the previous
peak of 1-35 million in i960. Exports in 1963, also a record, amounted to
611,000 cars with a value of £236-3 million. The United States (£37-7 million)
was again the largest single purchaser; South Africa (£18-8 million), Australia,
New Zealand, France and Italy were the other largest markets, but Western
Europe as a whole has in recent years shown the fastest rate of growth in
purchases of British cars.
Production of commercial vehicles, including chassis, increased from 146,000
in 1946 to the record total of 460,000 in 1961. In 1963 404,000 units were
produced. Although exports in 1963 were in numbers slightly below the
record level of 1961—158,000, compared with 167,000—their value, at £120
million, was the same. Australia (£12-8 million), South Africa (£12-8 million),
Turkey, New Zealand and Belgium were the main markets for goods vehicles.
It has been estimated that in some cases up to 70 per cent of the final cost of
a car is represented by bought-out components. Exports of parts and access¬
ories for cars and commercial vehicles in 1963 had a value of £100-4 million;
engines and parts were valued at a further £37-3 million. Caravan and trailer
exports were valued at £5-1 million.
Although deliveries of bicycles have declined from the post-war peak of over
4 million in 1951, the 1963 total of 2-04 million was the highest for three
years. Over 80 per cent of British cycle capacity is concentrated in the hands
of a single group of companies, and output is concentrated in the Nottingham
area. Nearly 1-5 million cycles worth £12-8 million were sent overseas in 1963;
the United States (£5-7 million) was much the largest single market. Parts and
accessories exported amounted to a further £4-4 million.
Deliveries of all types of motor cycle were 110,000 in 1963, slightly higher than
the 1962 total but well below the 1959 peak of 249,000. Output was increasingly
diversified during the 1950s, and the 1963 total of deliveries included 32,100
mopeds, 18,300 motor scooters and 8,400 three-wheeled vehicles. Manufacture
of motor cycles is dominated by two large groups. Exports were valued at
£4-9 million in 1963; parts and accessories came to an additional £1-4 million.
Britain was the first country to build railways and British engineers pioneered
railway development in most parts of the world. The industry is equipped
to meet the conditions resulting from the replacement of steam locomotives
by other forms of traction on most of the world’s railways.
Deliveries in 1963 included 53 electric locomotives, two-thirds for export,
648 diesel and diesel-electric locomotives, 1,086 coaching vehicles and 6,492
wagons. Deliveries of locomotives by private firms in 1963 were valued at
£15-3 million. The total value of exports in 1963 was £20-8 million; South
Africa (£3-5 million) and the Sudan (£3 -4 million) were the largest purchasers.
There are over 50 establishments making locomotives and railway track
equipment in Britain. The British Railways Board has its own workshops;
private firms build locomotives, carriages and wagons for the British Railways
Board, for industrial users and for export.
Since the second world war the British aircraft industry has concentrated on
the development of civil and military applications of the gas-turbine aero¬
engine first developed by Sir Frank Whittle. This propulsion was first used
in scheduled airline services by the turbo-jet Comet and the turbo-prop
Viscount, the latter one of the most successful post-war civil aircraft. The
3°6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aero-Engines
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Comet 4 jet airliner went into service in 1958. Other gas-turbine aircraft in
production and operation include the Argosy, the Herald, and the Hawker
Siddeley 748. Two of a second generation of jet airliners, the medium-haul
Trident and the longer-haul Vickers VC 10, entered airline service in 1964;
deliveries of the BAG One-Eleven, the world’s first short-haul jet transport,
which has been ordered by several overseas airlines, will start early in 1965.
The Concord, the world’s first supersonic airliner, designed to fly at speeds
of up to 1,450 miles per hour, is being developed jointly by Britain and France.
The industry produces a wide range of military aircraft. It is also engaged
on work on rockets, earth satellites and other aero-space requirements,
including the Blue Streak satellite launcher. In January 1964 the industry had
a labour force of about 262,000.
Exports of aircraft and parts in 1963 had a value of £46 million. Leading
buyers (who vary considerably from year to year) included Australia (^4-7
million), India (^4-5 million), the United States (£3-2 million), Brazil, the
German Federal Republic and Canada. In addition, exports of instruments
were worth ^2-6 million, and tyres over £1 million.
As a result of a series of mergers in 1959 and i960, the construction of
aircraft is dominated by two large airframe manufacturers and one helicopter
concern, though there are a few important smaller companies outside these
groups. Main centres of the industry are the Home Counties (i.e. counties
around London), Coventry, Bristol and the west of England, Lancashire,
Northern Ireland and Scotland.
Besides extensive research work by the industry, research on a substantial
scale on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out by the Ministry
of Aviation, chiefly at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the National
Gas Turbine Establishment, both at Farnborough, and the Royal Aircraft
Establishment at Bedford. This work is done in collaboration with the
industry and results are made known to manufacturers. In addition, the
National Physical Laboratory undertakes research on aerodynamics.
Aero-engines provided some £570 million in export earnings from 1946 to
1963; in 1961 exports reached the record total of £83 million, including parts
worth £26 million. In 1963 the figures were £63 million and £25 million
respectively. Licence arrangements have been made for about twenty types
of British engines to be made abroad, and in 1964 half of the world total
of jet and turbo-prop airliners on order or in service had British power
plants. Famous engines in production include the economical Dart turbo-prop,
the Avon, Conway and Spey turbo-jets and the revolutionary Pegasus lift-
thrust engine for vertical take off and landing (VTOL) aircraft. The power
plant for the Concord will be a further development of the Olympus.
Two companies are responsible for almost all aero-engine production.
The shipbuilding industry is concentrated in four main areas: the river Clyde
in Scotland, the north-east coast of England, the north-west coast of England,
and Belfast in Northern Ireland. Ships are also built in the Southampton
area, in the Isle of Wight, and along the estuaries of the rivers Forth and
Tay, in Scotland; while numerous yards along the coast build fishing vessels,
yachts, harbour craft and barges. Repair yards and dry docks are situated in
all the large ports. The shipbuilding, ship repairing and marine engineering
industries employed 220,000 persons in 1963.
Co-operative research into shipbuilding and marine engineering is under¬
taken by the British Ship Research Association with its headquarters in
London and a research station on the river Tyne. Pametrada, a commercial
Merchant
Shipbuilding and
Ship Repairing
Marine Engineering
MISCELLANEOUS
METAL
PRODUCTS
Cutlery and
Flatware
Domestic
Hollow-ware
INDUSTRY 3°7
organisation grouping turbine manufacturers, carries out design, development
and production liaison work.
Tonnage launched has gradually decreased from a peak of 1-5 million tons
in 1955 to 0-9 million tons in 1963. This is 11 per cent of the world total,
compared with 13 per cent in 1962. In 1963 Britain launched (after Japan
and the German Federal Republic) the largest quantity of shipping. At the
end of 1963 orders on hand of merchant vessels of 100 gross tons and over
were 286, totalling 2-4 million gross tons and valued at £281 million. Of these
vessels, 62 were for export. Completions in 1963 numbered 208 (i-i million
tons), 41 of which were for export. The 1963 total of completions included
oil tankers amounting to 469,100 gross tons. The oil tankers launched in 1963
included nine of over 30,000 gross tons, two of which (both over 86,000
deadweight tons) were the largest vessels to be built in Britain. The
Shipbuilding Credit Scheme (see p.354), introduced in 1963, has given an
important stimulus to new orders.
Modernisation in British shipyards involved the replanning of yards, the
erection of large prefabrication shops for welding massive sections under
cover, the installation of heavy-lift travelling cranes, and much other recon¬
struction. Facilities are available for building tankers of more than 100,000
(deadweight) tons carrying capacity.
Although there are many specialist ship repairing establishments, most of
the largest shipbuilding firms also carry on repair work; about one-quarter
of ship repairing activity is concentrated in the north-east coast of England
area.
Most of the larger shipbuilding yards maintain their own engine building
works; often they manufacture several types of diesel engine under licence.
Steam turbines of the highest powers are available, many designed by
Pametrada.
The group of industries manufacturing metal products not described above
consists of a large number of companies, with a total labour force of 560,000
in 1963; the main groups were tools and implements (24,700), cutlery (11,900),
bolts, nuts and screws (45,000), wire and wire manufactures (43,000), cans
and metal boxes (36,700), jewellery, plate, and refining of precious metals
(29,000), and other metal industries (370,000). The total value of exports in
1963 was about ^133 million.
The production of cutlery and flatware is centred mainly in the city of
Sheffield. The industry has been built up on the skill of its craftsmen. Mass
production methods are, however, now extensively used although some of the
highest quality wares are still produced by skilled craftsmen. Firms remain
mainly small and of some 290 enterprises manufacturing cutlery over 225 still
employ fewer than 25 persons.
The value of sales of cutlery, spoons and forks in 1963 w^s j£t2-5 bullion,
including export sales of £3-3 million.
This industry, located mainly in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, South
Wales and London, produces a wide range of domestic utensils, such as
saucepans, buckets and dustbins, mainly from wrought steel and aluminium.
Increasing quantities of plastic hollow-ware are being produced, though
aluminium manufacturers comprise the largest single group, both in the
value of total production and in exports. The value of sales (including some
3°8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tools and
Implements
Jewellery, Gold
and Silver Ware
CHEMICALS
Chemical
Elements and
Compounds
industrial hollow-ware) in 1963 was ^30-3 million, of which £3-8 million were
sales for export.
The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest British industries. Some
680 firms manufacture tools such as files, saws, hammers, axes and spades;
Sheffield, Birmingham and other Midland towns are the most important
centres.
The value of sales of implements and tools, other than machine tools and
portable power tools, was £34-7 million in 1963, of which £11-6 million worth
were exported. Sales of hand tools, at home and for export, were valued at
^19-6 million and £11 million respectively.
The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware and the refining of precious
metals is an industry in which British craftsmen are heirs to a long tradition.
Some 625 of the 885 firms in the industry have fewer than 25 employees.
The law requires that gold and silver plate shall not be sold until it has been
hall-marked at one of the Assay Offices situated in London, Birmingham,
Sheffield and Edinburgh. The Birmingham office, located in the main centre
of the jewellery industry, probably hall-marks as much gold and silver as
the rest together.
The total value of sales of jewellery, goldsmiths and silversmiths wares
and electro-plated nickel silver wares in 1963 was ^20-3 million, of which
£2-9 million was for export.
The chemical industry, with a labour force of about 464,000, comprises the
manufacture of: chemicals and dyes (220,000 employees), pharmaceutical
and toilet preparations (77,000 employees), explosives and fireworks (29,000
employees), paint and printing ink (48,000 employees), oils, fats, soap and
detergents (44,000 employees), synthetic resins and plastics (31,000 em¬
ployees), polishes and gelatines (14,000 employees). The industry is capital
intensive: during the decade 1952-62 some £1,000 million was spent on
fixed assets and in 1963 the capital expenditure of the industry, excluding
mineral oil refining, amounted to £142 million. The value of exports in 1963
was £368 million, or about 9 per cent of total exports. Production in the
chemical and allied industries rose by 38 per cent between 1958 and 1963.
The inorganic chemicals industry dates back to the middle of the nineteenth
century, when sulphuric acid and alkali were in increasing demand for the
growing heavy industries. Nearly 2-9 million tons of sulphuric acid were
produced in Britain in 1963. Large quantities of ammonia, ammonia salts,
chlorine and alkali are manufactured and about 70 per cent of the ammonia is
made into nitrogenous fertilisers. The most rapidly growing outlets for
chlorine are in the manufacture of solvents and the plastics material, polyvinvl
chloride (PVC).
The earliest organic chemicals were dyestuffs and explosives. Over 33,000
tons of dyestuffs were produced in 1963, the highest total since 1954. Newer
chemicals with organic structures which are manufactured in bulk by modern
synthesis from organic chemicals include plastics, synthetic rubber and syn¬
thetic fibres. These are among the most rapidly expanding sections of the
industry.
Exports of organic and inorganic chemicals and compounds amounted to
£92-6 million in 1963; organic chemicals, other than radioactive products,
accounted for £53 million. Exports go to a large number of countries
INDUSTRY
3°9
Petroleum-
based
Chemicals
Plastics
Synthetic
Rubber
Fertilisers
including, in 1963, the Netherlands (j£7'8 million), Australia (^5‘^ million),
the United States (£5-1 million), Italy (£4-7 million), the Soviet Union
(^4-5 million) and Canada (^4-1 million).
Since 1955 output of petroleum chemicals in Britain has increased by an
average of over 20 per cent each year; their share of total output of organic
chemicals is substantial. It is estimated that by the end of 1963 total investment
in petroleum chemicals had exceeded ^200 million. Most of the important
plants are adjacent to the oil refineries. Deliveries of feedstock for the
petroleum chemicals plants totalled 2-7 million tons in 1963* (In addition,
consumption of tar distillation products such as phenol, used in the manufac¬
ture of organic chemicals, has also increased in recent years.) Large quantities
of industrial ethyl alcohol, which was formerly produced from molasses, are
now manufactured from petroleum.
The first plastic, Parkesine (later called Celluloid), was produced and
patented in Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes; other British discoveries
include polyethylene. Manufacture of plastics is one of the most rapidly
growing sections of the economy. Output has doubled since 1957 total
production of synthetic resins in 1963 was 746,000 tons (an increase of
14 per cent over 1962), of which 500>°00 tons (an increase of 18 per cent
since 1962) consisted of thermoplastic resins.
Expansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of
which the most important are polyethylene (used in coverings, packaging—
notably for foodstuffs—and domestic mouldings), polyvinyl chloride (known
as PVC and used for a wide range of industrial purposes and consumer
goods) and polystyrene (a cheap non-inflammable material used for toys,
light mouldings and many consumer goods). Capacity for the production of
polypropylene (a versatile material for use mainly in electrical components,
mouldings, and domestic appliances) is being expanded substantially. Demand
from the building industry is also increasing markedly. Exports of plastics
materials amounted to 295>00° tons in 1963) valued at about ^64 million.
The first general purpose synthetic rubber to be manufactured on a com¬
mercial scale in the United Kingdom was marketed in 1958. Since then
capacity for production of this and other rubbers has increased rapidly.
High styrene rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use
where oil resistance is required, are in large-scale production, and neoprene
rubber is manufactured at Londonderry, in Northern Ireland. Production in
1963 amounted to 125,300 tons, by far the greater part of which came from the
styrene-butadiene plant at Hythe, near Southampton. Exports of synthetic
rubber were valued at million in i9^3» with France as the largest
market.
The production of fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of the British
scientists, Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert, and the research now
carried on at Rothamsted, Hertfordshire, and at the Macaulay Institute,
Aberdeen, is of world-wide importance. Two firms predominate in the
production of fertilisers and there are about one hundred firms marketing
compound fertilisers from the principal constituents nitrogen, phosphates
and potash. To encourage use, sales on the home market are assisted by
Government subsidies paid to the farmer (see p. 336). Output of nitrogenous
fertilisers (in terms of nitrogen content) in 1963 totalled 506,000 tons, and
Paints
Pharma¬
ceuticals
Toilet
Preparations,
Soap and
Cleaning
Preparations
TEXTILES
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
408,111 tons (in terms of phosphate content) of phosphatic fertilisers were
produced; sales of compound fertilisers are increasing and amounted to
2-8 million tons in 1963. The use of ammonium nitrate (35 per cent nitrogen)
and, to a limited extent, urea (mostly 45 per cent nitrogen) is resulting in
more concentrated fertilisers.
The value of exports of manufactured fertilisers, almost all nitrogenous,
totalled £4-9 million in 1963.
Sales of paint and varnish during 1963 by manufacturers employing 25 or
more persons amounted to some 85 million gallons; exports accounted for
8 per cent of sales. Sales have risen from about 72 million gallons in 1954.
Exports of pigments, paints, varnishes and related materials in 1963 amounted
in value to £29-3 million; over a quarter are in the form of ready-mixed
paints, which command a growing market overseas. The industry’s indirect
contribution to exports in the form of surface coatings for finished goods is
also considerable.
In recent years the application of improved techniques has resulted in
rapid development, in particular the use of important new ranges of synthetic
resins and pigments.
The value of the pharmaceutical industry’s annual output has doubled in a
decade to over £250 million. The whole range of drugs is produced in the
United Kingdom, including sulphonamides, anti-malarial drugs, anti-histamine
products, anaesthetics, vaccines, sera, and naturally occurring drugs. About
.£8£ million per annum is currently being spent on research; most of the
major firms have large projects in hand to expand production.
Notable British contributors to the development of new products include:
the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming and its evaluation by Sir
Howard Florey and E. B. Chain; the evaluation of sulphapyridine (M & B 693)
by Sir Lionel Whitby; the introduction of the anti-malarial drug proguanil;
the discovery of griseofulvin; and, more recently, the isolation of the penicillin
nucleus. A promising development is the Medical Research Council’s dis¬
covery of ‘interferon’ for the treatment of virus diseases. Several of the larger
pharmaceutical companies in Britain are subsidiaries of overseas firms.
In 1963 exports of medicinal and pharmaceutical products were valued
at £53'9 million, of which about ^6 million worth were antibiotics. The
largest purchasers were Australia (£3-4 million), Nigeria (£3-3 million), the
Irish Republic, New Zealand and Ghana.
Petroleum is the source of the principal raw material used in the manufacture
of organic surface-active agents in detergents; the other main constituent,
polyphosphates, is derived from inorganic sources. Sales of detergents
amounted to 334,000 tons in 1963. Production of soap was some 400,000 tons.
Exports of essential oils, perfumery and toilet preparations, soap and cleansing
and polishing preparations were valued at £33-8 million in 1963.
The textile industries in 1963 had a labour force of about 850,000 persons,
including employees engaged in the production of man-made fibres. Some
117,700 were in the spinning and doubling of cotton, flax and man-made
fibres, 112,700 in the weaving of cotton, linen and man-made fibres, 193,000
in the woollen and worsted trades, about 127,200 in hosiery and knitted goods,
79,000 in textile finishing and 40,500 in carpets. Over half the employees
are women. The total value of textile exports in 1963 was £254 million.
INDUSTRY
Gotton
Wool
311
Production of textiles rose by 9 per cent between 1958 and 1963, compared
with nearly 19 per cent for all industries.
The invention of mechanical spinning and weaving in the second half of the
eighteenth century led to cotton becoming Britain’s chief consumer goods
industry and cotton piece-goods its largest export during the nineteenth
century. Increasing foreign competition and the tendency of many countries
to set up their own textile industry have cut progressively into British
markets, especially since 1952. Agreements have been negotiated with
certain countries to fix temporary ceilings on their exports to the United
Kingdom.
Though it remains one of the largest consumer goods industries, the cotton
industry has continued to decline in employment, output and exports in
recent years. Output in 1963 consisted of: 395 million lb. of single cotton
yarn, 127 million lb. of spun man-made fibre and mixture single yarn, 132
million lb. of doubled yarn, 1,014 million linear yards of woven cotton cloth,
and 562 million linear yards of man-made fibres and mixture cloth. In 1963
exports of cotton yarn and woven fabrics (excluding man-made fibres)
amounted in value to £43-8 million, including woven fabrics worth £31
million. Australia, South Africa, New Zealand and the Irish Republic were
the most important markets.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county
being mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning.
Manchester is the commercial centre. Liverpool is the chief port of entry
for raw cotton and the Liverpool Cotton Exchange is the main market for
raw cotton dealings.
Legislation to assist the reorganisation of the industry was introduced in
1959. Exchequer funds have paid for two-thirds of the cost of removing surplus
capacity, and also provide grants of about one-quarter towards the cost of
approved re-equipment and modernisation. The reorganisation schemes are
administered by the Cotton Board, a development council, i.e. a statutory
body with constitution and powers laid down under the authority of an Act
of Parliament.
Scientific and technical research for the industry is carried out by the
Cotton, Silk and Man-made Fibres Research Association.
The wool textile industry, the largest in the world, is the most ancient of
Britain’s staple industries and has been important since medieval times.There
are two main branches—woollen and worsted. While about 70 per cent of
woollens and 95 per cent of worsteds are made in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, Scotland and the West of England have retained their importance
as specialised producers of high quality woollen cloth. In recent years an
increasing amount of man-made fibres has been blended with wool.
In 1963 output included 304 million lb. of tops and 313 million lb. of
woollen yarn. Deliveries of worsted yarn amounted to 240 million lb. and
those of woven fabrics to 325 million square yards. In addition, large
quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in Britain. Consumption
of raw wool in 1963 was 466 million lb., compared with 518 million lb. in 1959.
Exports of wool yarns and woven fabrics in 1963 were valued at £85 million.
Raw wool (cleaned or scoured in Britain) and other animal hair and tops
exported had a value of £75 million. The United States, Canada, Japan and
the German Federal Republic were the chief buyers of fabrics. Research is
carried on mainly by the Wool Industries Research Association. The National
L
312
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Man-made
Fibres
Wool Textile Export Corporation is responsible for assistance to exporters and
the development of new markets.
There are about 2,000 firms in the industry. The small or medium sized
business predominates and there are only a few large firms. In recent years
on the worsted side there has been a tendency towards the formation of holding
companies controlling a number of subsidiaries which combine all the worsted
processes within one organisation. Firms on the woollen side are normally
organised to include the full process of manufacture from raw material to
finished article.
Man-made fibres produced from cellulose were first made commercially
available in the United Kingdom in 1905, and much of the early development
of viscose rayon and acetate took place in Britain. Large quantities of chemicals
are consumed in their production, which is spread throughout the Midlands
and Lancashire. Northern Ireland is of growing importance, and there are
also factories in other areas. Nine enterprises manufacture man-made fibres
in Britain; three of these, each with over 3,000 employees, account for over
90 per cent of net output. There has been a rapid expansion of output in
recent years, the 1963 record total of 719 million lb. being about 22 per cent
higher than in i960. The total was made up of 389 million lb. of staple fibre
and 330 million lb. of filament yarn. Of the staple fibre, 91 million lb., and
of the continuous filament, 142 million lb., were of fully synthetic materials.
The output of a variety of the fully synthetic fibres, derived predominantly
from mineral rather than vegetable sources, has been expanding over the last
decade at a rate previously unattained in a major chemical product. Production
of nylon, the first fully synthetic fibre, started in Britain in 1941; large-scale
production began at Pontypool, in Wales, in 1948, and new factories were
opened in 1955 and i960. Another type of nylon (nylon 6) has been manu¬
factured since 1963 at Antrim, Northern Ireland. Nylon is used extensively in
the manufacture of clothing, fabrics and stockings, and has many industrial
uses.
‘Terylene’, a polyester fibre, was invented in the United Kingdom during
the second world war. It is resistant to fading and is particularly suited to
blending with wool. Annual manufacturing capacity now exceeds 50 million
lb. and is being further expanded. Firms in several overseas countries under¬
take its manufacture under licence, marketing it under a number of trade
names.
A group of fibres of growing importance are known as acrylic or poly¬
acrylonitrile fibres: ‘Courtelle' (a British discovery) and ‘Acrilan are examples.
Polypropylene fibre was introduced in 1962. These fibres are soft and warm and
have particular applications in the wool textile industry. Synthetic elastomerics
or spandex fibres, which are man-made textile fibres having inherent
properties of stretch and recovery, are now produced commercially by
British manufacturers.
Polyethylene fibres, such as 'Courlene', have been developed for industrial
uses and polymethane fibres have recently come into use: protein fibres, such
as ‘Fibrolane', are used for blending with other man-made fibres. British textile
manufacturers have developed a number of methods of blending man-made
with natural fibres and with each other in order to produce fabrics with new
combinations of texture, colour and finish, and with moisture-absorbent,
hard-wearing, drip-dry and crease-resisting properties.
Exports of man-made fibre yarns and woven fabrics had a value of £47-9
million in 1963. Sweden (£4-2 million), the Republic of South Africa
Hosiery and
Knitwear
Other Textiles
Linen
Jute
Lace
Miscellaneous
Textile
Manufactures
INDUSTRY 313
(£4 million), Australia (£3-8 million), the Irish Republic, New Zealand and
Switzerland were the most important purchasers.
The hosiery and knitwear industry is predominantly one of small scale
enterprises. Over 60 per cent of the 1,100 firms in the industry employ fewer
than 50 workers, and only 4 enterprises have more than 2,000 employees. The
industry is widely distributed, with Scotland and the east Midlands as the
two most important centres. The proportion of fully synthetic fibres used
in the industry is growing: between 1951 and 1963 the amount increased
from 5-5 million lb. to 72-1 million lb. Exports of stockings and socks in
1963 were worth £2-3 million, and those of knitted underwear and outer¬
wear totalled £12-i million; the largest buyers were the United States and
Canada and Switzerland. Exports of knitted goods in 1963 (other than those
sent by parcel post) amounted to ^18-7 million.
The Hosiery and Allied Trades Research Association, with laboratories at
Nottingham, undertakes collective research.
Linen has been made in Britain for more than a thousand years and it is
believed that the art of linen weaving was being practised during the seventh
century. Today the industry is concentrated in Northern Ireland (the greatest
linen manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder in
Scotland. The principal raw material of the industry is flax, which is almost
wholly imported (the chief supplier is Belgium), but considerable quantities
of man-made fibres and cotton are also used, and a certain amount of soft
hemp and jute, particularly in Scotland. Broadly speaking, the Northern
Ireland industry concentrates on yarns and the lighter types of fabrics, while
in Scotland production is largely, but not exclusively, of coarse linens and
canvas. In the 1950s the industry’s investments in new plant and machinery
amounted to £12 million. The Northern Ireland Government has given
financial aid for re-equipment. Exports in 1963 included £8 million worth
of linen fabrics and £3-1 million worth of flax yarns and linen thread.
Technical problems are investigated by the Research Institute of the Linen
Industry Research Association, formed in 1919.
Jute is manufactured on a large scale in Dundee—the centre of the world’s
oldest jute industry. About 40 per cent of jute yarn production is utilised in
the manufacture of carpets, cordage, ropes and other products. The balance
is woven into fabrics for a wide range of uses in the carpet, upholstery,
building and motor car industries, as well as its traditional use as a packaging
material. Production of jute cloth in 1963 came to about 80,000 tons. The
value of exports of jute fabrics in that year was £3 million. Research facilities
are concentrated at the laboratories of the British Jute Trade Research
Association. About ^14 million has been spent on a post-war modernisation
programme.
Sales of finished lace goods amounted to £17 million in 1963. The most
important lace product is from the warp knitting machines, with sales valued
at nearly -£8 million. Deliveries of lace products for export were worth £4-6
million in 1963.
In addition to the products mentioned specifically in this section, British
textile firms manufacture a wide range of other goods, including many special
yarns and fabrics, net, household textiles such as blankets, tablecloths and
curtains, and floor coverings other than carpets.
3H
Carpets
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FOOTWEAR
Clothing
Leather
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1963 manufacturers’ total sales of all types of carpet except tufted carpets
amounted to 74-6 million square yards. The carpet industry accounts for
about 5 per cent of the output of the textiles sector, and since 1951 the
average increase in production has been 2-3 per cent a year. Exports in 1963
had a value of £9-7 million, including processed imported oriental carpets
worth ^i-6 million; Australia is the largest single market.
There are about 130 enterprises engaged in the manufacture of carpets,
though only 71 have over 25 employees and 9 firms each employing over
1,000 persons account for 58 per cent of net output of larger firms. In addition
to the manufacture of woven carpets such as Axminster and Wilton, over
one-quarter of total sales by quantity at the end of 1963 were of tufted
carpets, a form of carpeting in which the pile, usually containing a high
proportion of artificial fibres, is inserted into a pre-woven backing. Axminster-
type carpets account for over a third of exports. There are about 40,000
employees, and the principal manufacturing centres include Kidderminster
(in Worcestershire), Halifax and Dewsbury (in the West Riding of Yorkshire),
Durham (in north-east England), Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland) and
several towns in Northern Ireland. Only about half the carpets and rugs
produced are made predominantly of wool and a growing proportion of
traditional-type carpets contain some man-made fibre.
There are about 642,000 employees in the clothing, leather and footwear
industries. Some 453,000 are in the clothing industry, 111,000 in the foot¬
wear trade, 64,000 in leather, leather goods and fur manufacture, and 14,400 in
the hats, caps and millinery trades. The aggregate value of their exports in 1963
was £71 *5 million.
The British clothing industry is the largest in Europe and total production
of made-up clothing has increased by 22 per cent since 1958. Exports in 1963,
including knitted goods, were valued at £39-5 million and, in addition,
substantial quantities are sent by parcel post.
Although there are some large firms employing mass production methods
on an increasing scale, the typical firm is small. Unofficial estimates suggest
that five-sixths of the concerns in the industry employ fewer than 100 workers.
The principal manufacturing centres are London, Leeds and Manchester,
but several firms are also situated on industrial trading estates.
Fashion is important in the production of haute couture models and through¬
out the ready-to-wear industry.
Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. In 1963, 16,000 tons of
sole and other heavy leather and 450 million square feet of upper, lining and
other light leathers were produced. Britain is the world’s leading exporter,
with exports in 1963 valued at ^19-1 million. The United States is the
largest single market (£3-9 million in 1963), followed by Italy (£i-8 million),
Canada (^1-7 million) and the German Federal Republic (^1-5 million).
Exports to the European Economic Community countries amounted to £5-9
million.
Tanneries are situated in most parts of Britain, but there are important
concentrations in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, the north Midlands and
the London area. Many different types of leather are produced, ranging
from the heavy types for industrial uses, such as machinery belting and car
upholstery, to high quality leather for footwear and for leather goods, and to
gloving and clothing leather.
INDUSTRY
Footwear
FOOD, DRINK
AND TOBACCO
Bread and Flour
Confectionery
and Biscuits
Cocoa,
Chocolate and
Sugar
Confectionery
3l5
Research into tanning processes and the improvement of the quality of
finished leather is undertaken by the British Leather Manufacturers’ Research
Association, the foremost association of this type in the world.
The British footwear industry is the third largest in the world. In 1963
manufacturers’ sales of footwear totalled 190-4 million pairs, the highest
volume recorded in any year. Exports of all types had a value of £12-9 million;
the United States and Canada were the largest markets.
Factories are located throughout Britain. Some areas concentrate on
production of particular types; for example, the Rossendale Valley region
of Lancashire on slippers, and Leicester and Norwich on women’s and girls’
shoes. There are about 800 firms in the industry, producing footwear of all
types. The Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world-wide
reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
The food, drink and tobacco industries employ about 851,000 persons in the
production of a great variety of goods. The value of their combined exports
in 1963 was ^234-7 million; a record. Exports of alcoholic and other beverages
accounted for £97-1 million; sugar, sugar preparations and honey for ^38-7
million; coffee, cocoa, tea and spices for £12-1 million.
The average weekly household consumption of bread per head of population
in Great Britain in 1963 was about zf lb., about f lb. less than in 1954. In
England and Wales particularly, the small ‘family’ type of baker, producing
bread with some mechanical aids, is still found in many areas, but the trend
towards concentrating production in large mechanical bakeries has become
more pronounced; at least two-thirds of the bread is made in these bakeries,
which specialise in sliced and wrapped loaves; 4 groups have a dominant
position. In the smaller bakeries production of cake and other flour confec¬
tionery is usually allied to bread production. There are about 2,000 firms and
158,000 employees in the bread and flour confectionery industry; a further
540 firms and about 45,000 employees are employed in grain-milling.
There are over 100 manufacturers, with some 54,000 employees, producing
biscuits, and annual output has been well over half a million tons in recent
years. Weekly consumption of cakes and biscuits per head in Britain was over
12j oz. in 1963. British biscuits have gained a world-wide reputation, and
despite the problem of import restrictions in several overseas markets, exports
in 1963 were valued at £5-9 million.
The chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which has some 98,000
employees, is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and
many hundreds of medium-sized and small manufacturers. Though there are
some 660 firms in the industry, about half the output is produced by 8 firms
with over 2,000 employees.
The main ingredients used by the industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose,
milk, nuts and fats. Production of chocolate and sugar confectionery was
643,000 tons in 1963. Consumption of chocolate and sugar confectionery in
the United Kingdom is far higher than in any other country, being equivalent
to about 7f oz. per head per week, a fall of about oz. compared with 1962.
The value of exports in 1963 of cocoa preparations (including chocolate)
was £10-2 million and of sugar confectionery, £g-g million. The German
Federal Republic, Canada, the United States and the Netherlands were the
main markets for cocoa preparations.
3l6
Fruit and
Vegetable
Products
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Beverages
Whisky
Gin
Brewing
and Malting
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fruit and vegetable products are manufactured in Britain by about 375
enterprises, including 11 with over 1,000 employees who account for 65 per
cent of net output. Among the products manufactured are jam, marmalade,
sauces and vinegar. The labour force numbers about 80,000.
The three largest manufacturers account for nearly half the total output
of jams and marmalade, which fell from 329,000 tons in 1949 to about 215,000
tons in 1956 and has since remained static, amounting to 212,000 tons in 1963.
Strawberry, raspberry and blackcurrant jams are the most popular. Exports
of jams and marmalade in 1963 were valued at about £2 million.
In 1963, 648,000 tons of canned vegetables were produced. The British
Navy was using canned foods in 1813, but rapid development in the industry
did not take place until after 1935. Processed peas (180,000 tons) and beans
in tomato sauce (225,000 tons) are the vegetables most in demand as canned
products. In addition, output in 1963 included 113,000 tons of canned and
bottled fruit, and 283,000 tons of canned soup. Plums are the most important
single fruit used for canning, followed by rhubarb and gooseberries.
The quick freezing of foods has been expanding rapidly in Britain since
1954. Some 79,900 tons of vegetables and 1,200 tons of fruit were preserved
by this method in 1963; peas accounted for three-fifths of all quick-frozen
vegetables.
There are some 980 enterprises, whose principal activities are: the curing
of bacon and ham, the canning and preserving of meat and fish, the manu¬
facture of sausages and pies or the preparation of extracts and pastes. The
labour force numbers over 81,000. Output in 1963 included 79,000 tons of
canned meat and meat products and 217,000 tons of bacon. There has been
a rapid expansion of frozen fish output, and some 58,000 tons were produced
in 1963; small quantities (8,900 tons in 1963) are also canned. Exports of fish
and fish preparations had a value of million in 1963 and those of meat
products were worth an additional £7-6 million.
The industries which manufacture beer, spirits, wines, cider and soft drinks
have a labour force of about 165,000. Exports were valued at £97-1 million
in 1963.
Exports of whisky (almost all Scotch whisky) reached nearly 32 million proof
gallons with a value of ^84-8 million in 1963; slightly over half went to the
United States (£43-9 million or 16-6 million proof gallons). Scotch whisky
was first distilled in the fifteenth century. It is blended from 20 or more
different types, some from malted barley and some from other grains. Whisky
requires several years to mature, and the 95-8 million proof gallons (a record)
produced in 1963 will not be on sale for some years. Stocks of whisky amount
to about 361 million proof gallons, of which one-third has been in stock for
more than three years. About three-quarters of annual sales are to overseas
buyers.
Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early 1950s. The
main distillers are in London and one company accounts for about half the
total output. Although the larger manufacturers also own distilleries abroad,
exports (3-2 million proof gallons) had a value of ^5-6 million in 1963.
There are 300 enterprises in the brewing and malting industry, with a labour
force of about 100,000. In recent years there has been a strong tendency
towards the creation of larger brewery units, partly to secure wide distributive
outlets for the products of the large brewing groups, many of which market
Soft Drinks
Tobacco
BRICKS,
POTTERY, GLASS
AND CEMENT
INDUSTRY 31?
beer throughout the country. Bottled beer consumption increased in recent
years to nearly two-fifths of total consumption, but has since dropped to
slightly more than one-third; draught beer, in which is included keg beer
(about 6 per cent of total output), accounts for the remainder, apart from a
small output in canned form. In 1963, 28-3 million bulk barrels of beer were
produced, the highest total since 1948, and consumers’ expenditure on beer
amounted to £691 million. Exports in 1963 of all types of beer were 359,000
bulk barrels, worth ^3-1 million. The industry’s investment in fixed assets
(including bottling equipment) is about £16 million a year. Firms are experi¬
menting with new methods, including continuous brewing processes.
The main raw materials used in brewing are malt, hops and some sugar.
Malt is made almost entirely from home-grown barley. Some brewers make all
or part of their own malt, others purchase it from independent maltsters who
also supply distillers, vinegar brewers, and malt extract manufacturers.
British malt is used by brewers throughout the world, and exports in 1963
amounted to nearly 40,000 tons, worth £i-g million.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly since 1954, although
weather conditions can cause a marked drop in demand in some years.
Output in 1963 included 42 million gallons of concentrated liquid and 212
million gallons of unconcentrated drinks. The trend has been towards
increasing consumption of concentrated squashes, sales of which are eight
times greater than in 1939.
Though there has been some amalgamation in recent years, there are still
several hundred firms supplying regional markets. There are three very large
firms among the twenty producing widely advertised brands which are
marketed on a national scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by
firms in the production of various types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based
drinks, squashes and cordials, tonic waters and ‘mixers’, and comminuted
drinks (in which the whole fruit is used).
The tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other
tobacco goods sold in Britain. In 1963 personal expenditure on these
goods amounted to ^1,286 million (of which over two-thirds was tax revenue)
and, in addition, exports worth million (over 90 per cent of which
were cigarettes) were shipped to a large number of overseas markets, of
which Aden, Kuwait and Singapore were the most important. The main
centres of production are in and around Bristol, Liverpool, London, Man¬
chester, Newcastle, Nottingham, Glasgow and Belfast. The two largest
manufacturing groups now account for about 90 per cent of output. The
industry has about 50,000 employees.
The tobacco industry used 313 million lb. of unmanufactured tobacco
in 1963 (about 2 per cent more than in 1962), all of which was imported.
The main sources are the United States, Southern Rhodesia, India and
Canada. Most of this tobacco goes to make cigarettes (nearly seven-eighths)
and pipe and cigarette tobaccos. Consumption of cigarettes showed a slight
rise of 3 per cent above the 1962 figure; consumption of cigars also rose but
that of pipe tobacco fell slightly. Filter-tipped brands now account for nearly
30 per cent of the output of cigarettes. Total consumption of tobacco in 1963
almost regained the i960 level, amounting to 274 million lb. (of this 2-1 million
lb. was in the form of cigars and o-8 million lb. was snuff).
This group comprises the manufacture of bricks, fireclay, refractory goods,
pottery, glass, cement, abrasives, asbestos and other building materials. The
318 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industries have a combined labour force of 348,000, which includes 75,600
in the bricks, fireclay and refractory goods trades.
Brickmaking About 700 firms manufacture items such as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
and Refractory pots, fireclay ware and heat-resisting products including furnace and kiln
Goods linings. Brickmaking, one of Britain’s oldest industries, was introduced by
the Romans, and manufacturing methods vary from traditional hand fabri¬
cation to highly mechanised systems. In 1963 about 7,140 million building
bricks were produced, 42 per cent of which were of the Fletton type, made
mainly in the Bedford and Peterborough areas. Refractory goods (firebricks,
silica bricks, magnesite bricks and chrome-magnesite bricks) are manufactured
mainly for home use. Exports of refractory construction materials in 1963
were worth £4-5 million.
Pottery The pottery industry is a long-established and complex industry, largely
located in the Stoke-on-Trent area of Staffordshire. Much of its raw material
is indigenous, such as china clay, ball clay and china stone from Devon
and Cornwall. It supplies nearly all home needs for domestic and industrial
pottery and its exports have recently been at an annual rate of about £20
million. Canada and the United States are important markets.
The largest section of the industry, about half, makes domestic pottery,
sub-divided into china, earthenware, stoneware, jet and Rockingham; the
other main divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware, but
other specialised industrial products such as acid-proof stoneware, porous
ceramics and laboratory porcelain are also manufactured. Among famous
makes of British pottery are Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal
Doulton, Minton and Royal Crown Derby.
The 350 firms in the industry employ about 69,000 people, of whom
some 35,500 are women. Since 1956 over ^12 million has been spent on
modernisation and re-equipment with new kilns, drying stoves and semi¬
automatic ‘making’ machinery.
Glass Britain’s glass industry, the third largest in the world, has some 78,000
employees. The section of the industry devoted to the manufacture of plate
and sheet glass in their various forms is organised for quantity production,
much of it in the form of the recently developed ‘float’ glass process. Its use
for internal decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has
greatly increased in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced
for the motor industry. Other products include glass bricks, tubular glass
(produced on a large scale), mirrors, lamp and bulb glass, scientific and
medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of glass container (often made
by fully automatic machinery). A traditional product is hand-made lead
crystal glassware of very high quality, much of which is exported.
Direct exports of glass and glassware reached the record value of ^21 -4
million in 1963. Those of glass were worth £13-8 million, the most important
markets being Australia, Canada, South Africa and the United States. The
figures included £3 million of ‘float’ glass, double the previous year’s total.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research
Association, and much research work is also carried on by the Department
of Glass Technology at Sheffield University.
Cement The cement industry of the United Kingdom is chiefly concerned with the
manufacture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented
PAPER, PRINTING
AND PUBLISHING
Paper and
Board
Printing and
Publishing
INDUSTRY 319
in 1824, this material and the methods of its production have been the subject
of continuous technical improvement and intensive research. The capacity
of the industry, which has some 17,400 employees, has increased substantially
since the war to meet the growing demands of the building industry. About
one-third of production comes from plants situated in the Dartford-Gravesend
district of Kent. Annual output, which reached 7-7 million tons in 1938 had
risen to 13-8 million tons in 1963, and is expected to expand further in 1964.
One group of companies is responsible for about two-thirds of total output.
In 1963 direct exports of cement, which have been tending to fall, were
worth .£3-2 million.
The paper, printing and publishing industries have a labour force of over
626,000 including 98,000 in the manufacture of paper and board, 68,000 in
the production of cardboard boxes and packing cases, 139,400 in the publishing
of newspapers and periodicals and 250,000 in other types of printing and
publishing.
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until
1678, but records show that some paper was produced as far back as the year
1492. The British paper and board industry is the largest of its kind in Europe.
Total production in 1963 of all types of paper and board amounted to 4-1
million tons, double the pre-war figure of 2 million tons and just above the
previous peak of i960. Of this, newsprint accounted for 672,000 tons, against
800,000 tons pre-war; since 1953 output of wrapping and packaging paper
and board has risen by two-thirds, mainly as a result of its growing use as
packaging material. Exports of paper, board and manufactured paper items
were valued at £46‘9 million in 1963- The bulk of the export trade is to
sterling area countries, mainly Australia, South Africa, the Irish Republic
and New Zealand.
Nearly three-quarters of the many different materials used by the industry
comes from abroad. The balance consists mainly of waste paper recovered
from domestic sources.
The industry comprises over 200 enterprises engaged in the manufacture
of paper and board. There are a few very large groups and a large number
of medium sized and small firms. The large groups hold considerable interests
abroad, including pulp and paper producing mills in the United States,
Canada and other parts of the Commonwealth and Europe. In addition, there
are nearly 500 enterprises which make cardboard boxes, cartons and packing
cases and some 600 firms which manufacture miscellaneous items such as
wallpaper and paper bags.
The printing industry produces an immense range of goods from national
newspapers and periodicals to books, catalogues and greetings cards. The
industry includes many very small enterprises. Mergers in recent years have
led to the formation of large groups in the newspaper, magazine and book
publishing sections. Of the 630 enterprises in the printing and publishing of
newspapers and periodicals, about half have over 25 employees and 22 of
these over 1,000 employees; 4 large firms employ more than 7,500 persons.
General printing, publishing, engraving and bookbinding remains essentially
an industry of small firms with over 75 per cent of the 6,500 firms having
fewer than 25 employees.
Total sales of books in 1963 amounted to £90 million, of which some
£39 million worth were exported. Popularity of paper-backed books has
3 20
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Rubber
Furniture
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
increased rapidly in recent years and they account for about a third of total
sales in Britain. According to official figures, exports of printed matter,
manuscripts and typescripts were valued at million in 1963) including
books (£20 million), and newspapers and periodicals (^7-1 million); but
since these figures do not include parcel post shipments, exports are con¬
siderably higher. The United States and Australia are the most important
overseas markets. A shortage of skilled workers has led firms to introduce the
latest developments in high-speed printing equipment, including electronic
engraving machines and advanced processes of photographic reproduction.
Other manufacturing industries include the timber and furniture group, with
about 291,000 employees, rubber manufacture, with 127,000 employees, and
a group of miscellaneous manufactures which together embrace some 189,000
employees.
Britain’s rubber manufacturing industry is the oldest in the world, dating
from 1819 when Hancock, who discovered the vulcanisation process, set up a
factory in London to manufacture elastic. He afterwards collaborated with
Macintosh, the inventor of waterproof garments, and it was another Scotsman,
Dunlop, who in 1888 devised the pneumatic tyre. Tyres and tubes represent
more than half the total output of the industry. British firms also make a great
variety of other rubber manufactures, the most important being rubber
footwear, conveyor belting, cables, hose, and latex foam products.
The British industry is one of the largest in the world. There are 470 firms
located throughout the country, and the industry has a labour force of 127,000.
In 1963 their consumption of rubber totalled 342,000 tons, including 168,000
tons of natural rubber, 139,000 tons of synthetic rubber and 35,000 tons of
reclaimed rubber; the proportion of synthetic rubber used is increasing. There
are 14 tyre manufacturers, including several subsidiaries of United States
and other overseas companies. In 1963, 163,000 tons of rubber (natural and
synthetic) were used in the production of tyres and tyre products. Tyres and
tubes exported were valued at £28-7 million; this figure excludes large indirect
exports on vehicles. Exports of all rubber manufactures in 1963 were worth
£49-4 million, with Denmark, Australia and Sweden as the main markets.
London is the largest centre for furniture manufacturing, but High Wycombe,
in Buckinghamshire, is an important centre for domestic furniture.
Deliveries of domestic furniture had a value of £126 million in 1963
and exports of furniture £10-9 million. There are some 2,400 enterprises
engaged in the manufacture of wooden furniture in Britain (including
domestic, upholstered, office, school and other furniture) with a total labour
force of about 100,000. Many firms are small and of the 600 larger enterprises,
8 with over 1,000 employees account for 25 per cent of net output. In recent
years there has been a tendency towards increased concentration.
A Furniture Development Council was established in 1949; it undertakes
research, training and study in technical and artistic subjects and design,
provides a technical information service and publishes statistics.
There are over 500 enterprises manufacturing toys and sports equipment in
Britain, though three large firms with over 1,500 employees account for
nearly a third of net output. The total number of persons employed is about
35,000. The British toy industry is today the largest in Europe; deliveries in
1963 were worth £41 million, and exports had a value of ^10-5 million.
INDUSTRY
32I
Australia, the United States and Canada were the main overseas markets.
The industry estimates that current annual expenditure in Britain on toys
amounts to about £6 per child; current trends are towards increased pro¬
duction of small-scale precision models of vehicles and equipment and greater
use of plastics materials; interest in construction kits is also growing.
The value of manufacturers’ sales of games was valued at £3-5 million and
that of sports equipment at £14 million, of which one-third was for export.
322
THE LAND AND
ITS USES
Size and
Ownership of
Farms
12
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES
AND FORESTRY
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on
imports for half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest and
most important industries. It occupies about 900,000 people, or just under
3^ per cent of those in civil employment, provides about 3^ per cent of the
gross national product, and uses 49 million of the 60 million acres of land.
Land used for farming is conventionally divided into improved land suitable
for cultivation (crops and grass) and rough grazing, nearly all of which is
hill or mountain land with a native herbage of coarse grasses, rushes, bracken,
heather or scrub trees. Rough grazing has a low potential output—usually
assessed at about one-sixth of that of agricultural land—but is valuable for
sheep. In England and Wales only about one-sixth of the 29-3 million acres
of farming land is classified as rough grazing. In Northern Ireland the propor¬
tion is about one-quarter of a total of 27 million acres but in Scotland it is
about three-quarters (12-4 million out of 16-7 million acres). In the United
Kingdom as a whole there are 30-7 million acres under crops and grass.
Improved land and rough grazing together represent 82 per cent of the land
area. The rest is mountain and forest, or put to urban and kindred uses.
The area available for farming is being gradually reduced to meet the needs
of housing and industry; however, the loss is outweighed by the increase in
output from what remains.
The soils of the country are extremely varied. Many of those in the west
and north, overlying hard rocks, are poor and thin. The lowlands and river
valleys are usually fertile, varying in texture from clay to sandy loam, silt
and peat. Clay soils everywhere necessitate under-drainage, and as all are
constantly leached by rainwater, lime has to be applied at regular intervals.
In hill country the area of improved land is often small, but is usually supple¬
mented by grazing on a comparatively large area of hill land.
For many centuries the bulk of land in Britain lay in estates ranging in size
from a few hundred acres upwards, comprising farms of varying sizes let to
tenants. At all times the tenanted holdings were interspersed with some owned
by the farmers who occupied them, and with some peasant or cottage holdings.
Social changes of the past half-century have completely changed the pattern
of rural life in England and Scotland. Estate duties have been a principal
factor in the breaking up of estates. Most surviving estates are still owned by
private individuals or family trusts, but the Crown, the Church Commissioners,
local authorities, the National Coal Board, and other corporate bodies hold
considerable areas. Of the farms sold, many have been bought by the tenants
already in occupation. About half the farms in Great Britain today are
owner-occupied.
Although the average size of all agricultural holdings in Britain is about
70 acres of crops and grass, many of them are smallholdings which do not
Types of
Farming
Tillage and
Grassland
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 323
provide a full livelihood for their occupiers. In England and Wales, for
instance, about half the 340,000 holdings are of this type, the occupiers
generally having another source of livelihood in addition to farming. Taking
full-time holdings only, the average size of holding in England and Wales
is about 130 acres of crops and grass. In Scotland the crops and grass area
of the 33,000 farms worked part-time average only 11 acres, but for the
28,000 full-time farms the average is 140 acres.
Scotland has two distinct farming zones: most of the good land lies in the
east and south of the country, while in the Highlands and Western Islands
agriculture is quite distinct from that of the rest of Britain, there being an
exceptionally high proportion of rough grazing to improved land. Numerous
small occupiers are grouped in scattered villages, each with a tiny area of
enclosed land and rights of grazing on an adjoining hill. The Highlands are
thus divided between a few large holdings and a great many very small crofts.
In Northern Ireland there are only a few large estates. Almost all the land
is divided into about 70,000 holdings varying from a few acres to 300-400
acres. Most of these holdings are occupied by the owner. Some 20,000 are
either re-let in conacre (seasonal lettings for crops or grazing) or owned by
people who do practically no farming. Of the remaining 50,000 farms, with
an average size of 40 acres of crops and grass, about half can be said to provide
a full-time occupation for the owner.
Most British farms produce a variety of products; the pattern varies from
farm to farm. In many districts the mosaic of farms is dominated by one type
and the bias towards one product or group of products is so marked that the
whole area takes on a distinctive character. In England the farms devoted
primarily to arable crops for sale are in the eastern part of the country, in
East Anglia, Kent, Lincolnshire, and the East Riding of Yorkshire. Potato
and vegetable growing on a substantial scale marks the farming of the Fens
(south Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the
rivers Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Else¬
where, horticultural crops are widely dispersed amongst agricultural crops.
In Scotland, the rich lowlands of the east coast, the Lothians and a fringe of
land around the Moray Firth are also primarily arable.
Interspersed between these arable areas, and also in the Midlands and the
south-east of England, there are large tracts where, although much of the
land is kept under the plough, the rearing and fattening of cattle is an im¬
portant enterprise. In the south-west of Scotland dairying is extensively
practised, but most of the north-west is devoted to rearing sheep on rough
hill land. The parts of England bordering the Pennine hills and most of
Wales are also sheep-rearing areas, though a good deal of dairying, based on
purchased feedingstuffs, is also done there. Dairy farming is widely practised
throughout much of the rest of Britain. In Northern Ireland mixed farming
is practised, the most important products being milk, fat and store cattle,
pigs and eggs, with sheep and stock raising in the hill areas. Oats and barley
are widely grown, mainly for livestock feeding, and the only important cash
crop is potatoes, both ware and seed.
Traditionally, in England and Wales old grass is regarded as the property of
the landlord; many leases still specify the fields which may not be ploughed,
except under penalty. But the tenant is free to sow other fields to grass if he
wishes and to plough them out whenever he wishes; so two types of grass
came into existence—old or permanent grass, the property of the owner, and
324
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION:
CROPS AND
LIVESTOCK
TABLE 20
Livestock in the
United Kingdom
1939-63“
temporary grass or ley, a rotational crop of the tenant, its lease of life de¬
pending on the system of farming. The ley farming system had its origin
in the use of grass in the cereal rotation to restore soil fertility and structure.
In Scotland, which has never had the same tradition, the tenant is free to
plough as he chooses, although in practice very high-lying fields are ploughed
with the main object of renewal of the grass. The area under temporary
grass has always been high.
The situation during the 1939-45 war called for a widespread ploughing
out of grass. Since the end of the war, in all parts of the United Kingdom
there has been a slow return to permanent grass; but not all of the gain in
tillage has been lost and there has been an increase of 2-8 million acres in
the area of temporary grass, so that the total arable area remains about
5 million acres more than it was pre-war. On the arable land of England and
Wales the old-style rotations have been abandoned, and a cropping system
has been adopted which allows a high proportion of cereals, sugar beet and
potatoes, with short or medium term leys. The western counties show a heavy
bias towards cereal crops with longer leys, and over the country as a whole
there has been a tendency for leys to lengthen with improved management
of grass. In Northern Ireland, while the greater proportion of the grassland
is under permanent grass, medium length leys are a common feature. Scotland,
with its choice of crops restricted by soil and climate, has returned to its
pre-war pattern of rotational cropping, in which leys occupy more than half
the arable ground. Thus, in England and Wales nearly one-half of the 24
million acres of arable and grassland is under permanent grass, about one-
quarter under cereals and one-sixth under temporary grass; of the 4-3 million
acres in Scotland, only just over one-fifth is in grass seven years old or over,
against more than two-fifths in grass under seven years old; while in Northern
Ireland over a half is permanent grass and about one-quarter temporary
grass.
Farmers everywhere are exposed to the vagaries of the weather, of pests and
diseases, and of the market; but during the present generation much has
been done in Britain to mitigate the risks. In part this has been effected
through the advance of science, in part through self-help by farmers
organisations, but in greatest measure by Government action. The role of
the Government, successively as financial supporter, as war-time controller,
and as guarantor and provider of technical and advisory services, is described
on pp. 332-37.
Between the two world wars British agriculture suffered a long depression
which reached its lowest point about 1930. Yet already the industry was
becoming organised: separate National Farmers’ Unions had been set up in
England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland to give farmers a collective
Cows and heifers in calf/milk
Other cattle
Sheep
Pigs  
Poultry . .
Millions
1939
3-9
5-0
26-9
4.4
74-4
1956
4- 7
6-2
23-6
5- 5
92-5
1962
5- 1
6- 7
29-5
6-7
109-0
1963
5- 0
6- 7
29-3
6-9
112-2
At the annual June census.
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics.
TABLE 21
Agricultural
Production in the
United Kingdom
(Years beginning
1st June)
Agricultural
Production
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
325
voice; breed societies had been established to watch over the interests of
stock breeders; young farmers’ clubs were becoming numerous; a chain
of research stations had been constituted; and a comprehensive system of
university, college and farm institute education was in being.
During the second world war 7 million acres of the permanent grass were
ploughed, the area under potatoes and barley was doubled, and that under
wheat increased by about 30 per cent. The total number of cattle increased
slightly, chiefly owing to larger dairy herds; sheep and poultry stocks
declined; and the number of pigs fell by more than half.
Product
Crop Production:
Wheat
Rye ..
Barley
Oats . .
Mixed corn
Potatoes
Sugar beet (Raw equivalent)
Livestock Products:
Milk..
Eggs"
Beef and veal
Mutton and lamb
Pigmeat"
Wool (clip) . .
Agricultural net output all
holdings0.
New index (average of
1954-55 to 1956-57=100)
Old index (pre-war average
= 100) 
Unit
’000 tons
mill. gals,
mill. doz.
’000 tons
Pre-war
average
1,651
10
765
1,940
76
4,873
415
1,556
545
578
195
401
34
100
1956-57
2,845
25
2,800
2,486
407
7,533
734
2,311
908
798
193
607
31
100
161
1962-63
3,911
17
5,773
1,747
154
6,668
722
2,545
1,091
894
251
781
38
125
186
1963-64
(prov.)
2,999
22
6,617
1,438
118
6,577
755
2,509
1,126
925
249
786
36
127
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
" Includes estimated production from units under one acie.
A steady expansion in cattle and sheep stocks occurred between 1953 an<^
1961, but numbers are now tending to remain stable. The number of pigs and
poultry has greatly increased. Output of wheat has shown only small variation,
although the trend has been upward; but output of barley has risen by 150
per cent since 1945. There has been a marked fall in the acreage under oats
and a smaller but significant drop in that under potatoes. Between 1953 and
1963, output of pigmeat and eggs increased by 40 and 50 per cent respectively;
and this, together with the increase in the sales of milk off farms, is in part
attributable to the increased import of feedingstuffs in recent years. It is
estimated that about 5-9 million tons of concentrates were imported in 1963-64
(more than twice imports in i952_53) an^ a further i-8 million tons were
available as by-products of imported grain and oil-seeds.
The index for agricultural net output at constant prices for 1963-64 is
forecast at 127 (average 1954-55 t0 I95^_57 = IO°) an increase of 13 per cent
over 1959-60.
326
Food Supplies
TABLE 22
Percentage of
Total Food
Supplies in the
United Kingdom
Provided by
Home Agriculture
TABLE 23
Food Consumption
in THE
United Kingdom
(selected items)
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since 1939 the population of the United Kingdom has increased by about
5-5 million, or slightly more than 10 per cent. Britain now produces about
half of its food requirements or two-thirds of all that can be grown in tem¬
perate climates. The percentages by weight of total supplies of the principal
foods provided by home production in relation to the pre-war average are
shown in Table 21.
Table 22 shows how, for selected items, total food supplies have changed
since before the second world war and since food rationing ended (in 1954)*
The main trends reflected in Table 23 are that consumption of bulky foods
(carbohydrates), such as flour and potatoes, has been declining almost
uninterruptedly, while that of high-protein foods, such as meat and eggs, has
increased with greater availability and rising living standards.
Food Product
Wheat and flour (as wheat equivalent)
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent)
Sugar (refined value) . .
Carcase meat and offal. .
Bacon and ham (excluding canned)
Butter
Cheese . .
Condensed milk
Dried milk (whole and skimmed)
Shell eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Potatoes for human consumption
Pre-war
average
23
16
17
51
32
9
24
70
59
71
100
96
1951
33
10
23
65
49
4
18
63
43
86
100
98
1962
47
13
26
68
38
14
45
95
66
98
100
92
1963
(prov.)
41
13
23
69
38
10
43
95
56
98
100
93
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
lb. per head per annum
Flour
Sugar® . .
Fresh and frozen meat
Bacon and ham . .
Poultry ..
Fresh, frozen and cured
fish
Liquid milk
Cheese . .
Eggs in shell
Butter
Margarine
Dried and fresh fruit
Canned and bottled fruit
Potatoes ..
Fresh vegetables (includ
ing tomatoes)
1934-38
average
194-5
100-6
90-7
28-1
5-1
21-8
217-1
8-8
25-9
24-7
8-7
86-5
10-3
190-0
115-3
1946
221-2
79-5
70-8
15-1
4-0
26-3
309-4
10-0
18-0
11-0
15-1
60-0
2-4
281-2
130-7
1954
187-2
106-1
83-8
25-0
5-6
18-3
328-2
9.4
28-4
14-1
18-3
74-4
10-5
242-3
107-0
1961
164-8
115-2
94-0
25-3
14-1
17-5
324-1
10-2
31-3
19-8
13-3
75-4
17-9
227-1
108-1
1962
161-4
112-6
97-4
26-0
14-6
17- 7
324-7
10-3
31-2
20-3
13-2
79-0
18- 8
213-6
106-5
1963
(prov.)
162-7
112-6
98- 5
25-2
14-9
16-8
325-9
10-3
31-1
19-3
13-5
77-0
18-4
227-6
99- 5
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics.
0 Including sugar in all home-produced and imported manufactured foods and in
brewing.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
327
Crops
Wheat
Barley
Oats
Fodder Roots
Sugar Beet
Potatoes
The possibilities of wheat growing, which is mainly confined to England,
have been changed out of all recognition by the advent of new strong strawed
and heavy yielding varieties, mainly from the continent of Europe but some
home-bred. These permit the liberal use of fertilisers, and spring dressings
of nitrogen have become accepted practice. Crop yields of 2 tons per acre
are no longer unusual. About 3-0 million tons were harvested in 1963, with
yields averaging 31 cwt. per acre.
The widespread use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation
of drying and storage facilities on many farms. Such equipment is also used
on a co-operative basis.
There are two distinct markets for barley—for malting and for feeding to
stock. Malting barley has in the past commanded a much higher price than
feeding grain, but the disparity has now decreased. New varieties have
greatly enlarged yields. Since 1956 the acreage under barley has doubled and
production has more than doubled.
The total area under oats has halved since 1956; even in Scotland, where it is
the most extensively grown cereal, there has been a decline of a third in
acreage. No longer needed for horses, oats cannot compete in yield of grain
with modern barleys.
In England the turnip crop is giving way to kale and cabbage. The total
acreage of fodder crops (except kale) has, however, been declining steadily
because in many cases farmers can provide winter feed more economically
by increased grass production and improved methods of conservation. In
Scotland the decline in turnips and swedes has been less rapid and the
acreage under these crops is now greater than in England. The area under
mangolds (grown almost entirely in England) has been falling sharply—by
40 per cent since 1958—while fodder beet is grown on only a small scale.
Rape retains a modest place as sheep fodder.
Beet is grown mainly in East Anglia and Lincolnshire where most of the beet
sugar factories are situated. The crop is grown under contract to the British
Sugar Corporation, which takes the entire output at guaranteed prices and
also provides technical advice and assistance. Yields per acre are increasing
and in 1963 a crop of 5-3 million tons was harvested, with a yield of 12-9 tons
per acre. Precision drilling is the usual method of sowing and more than
three-quarters of the crop is mechanically harvested.
Early potatoes are grown in England and Wales in numerous, widely scattered
districts with favourable soils and climate. The crop is marketed during the
summer months and reaches the consumer within a few days of lifting.
Main crop varieties, which are normally stored before sale, are grown chiefly
in the Fen counties, Essex, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire. In Scotland early
potatoes are grown in coastal areas of Ayrshire and Wigtownshire, but a
substantial part of the industry is concerned with supplying seed potatoes
to English and foreign growers. In Northern Ireland both main crop and
seed potatoes are produced, and a large part of the crop is shipped to Great
Britain and abroad. In recent years the area planted with potatoes in the
United Kingdom has been about 750,000 acres, with a yield of between 8|- and
9 tons per acre. Although cultivation and harvesting is largely done mech¬
anically, a good deal of hand labour is still necessary for planting, harvesting
and grading.
Dairy Farming Milk is much more valuable when sold on the liquid milk market than when
converted into cheese, butter or other milk products. In Great Britain milk
328
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Livestock
Beef Cattle
is produced primarily for liquid consumption, but in Northern Ireland the
greater part of the milk is used for manufactured products. Production and
liquid sales are now much greater than before the war. Sales promotion by
the industry is helping to maintain these higher liquid sales. The average
consumption per head is now about 5 pints per week.
Average yields per dairy cow are still rising steadily; in England and Wales
they have increased during the last decade by about 15 per cent and now
average about 794 gallons a year. Freedom from tuberculosis has reduced
herd wastage, and through the artificial insemination (AI) centres, operated
by the Milk Marketing Boards and other organisations, the influence of a
small number of high-potential bulls is widely disseminated. The Friesian
breed now dominates both AI centres and farms on which bulls are main¬
tained in England and Wales; the Ayrshire breed is by far the most in demand
in Scotland; and in Northern Ireland the Dairy Shorthorn still predomin¬
ates although Friesians are on the increase. Milk production has also been
stimulated by advances in grassland management, intensive grazing tech¬
niques and new methods of making high quality hay; new methods of
conversion into silage are being exploited. Most dairy farmers practise
some degree of intensive grass management, but hay of the traditional type
remains the basic winter feedingstuff; it is supplemented with purchased
concentrates.
Clean dairy farming methods and hygienic standards for equipment and
buildings used in milk production are enforced by regulations. The Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food’s Milk Service has a general responsibility
for enforcing the regulations and for advising farmers in England and Wales
on clean milk production. In Scotland these functions are performed by local
authorities but central supervision is exercised by the Scottish Home and
Health Department. In Northern Ireland all farmers producing milk for sale
must hold a Ministry of Agriculture licence.
A great number of specialised breeds of livestock have been developed over
the centuries in Britain. It has been found that they meet the needs of breeders
in most countries and substantial export sales are made to buyers seeking
to replenish and improve their herds with British animals.
Although home production of beef is considerably greater than it was before
the war, imports are lower and consumption per head has not yet overtaken
the pre-war level. Taste is changing and the majority of buyers no longer
want joints from fully fattened beasts. The average age of slaughter is below
two years and systems of intensive beef production, such as that involving
large daily quantities of cereals and correspondingly little roughage, are being
increasingly adopted. In upland regions herds of pure-bred, nearly pure-bred,
or cross-bred (especially of Aberdeen Angus, Beef Shorthorn and Hereford)
beef stock are kept on ‘natural’ lines, the cows calving in early spring and
grazing with their calves through the summer. Usually the calves are sold
at weaning to farmers with arable fodder and good grazing for fattening.
Nowadays much beef derives from the dairy herds, some females (usually
the first calf heifers) being mated to beef sires, the majority by AI.
The cross-bred calves make useful beef animals; so too do the pure-bred
male calves from Friesian, Shorthorn and some other types of herds.
There is a large and complex trade in store cattle (increased by animals
imported from the Irish Republic) whose general movement is from
the upland west to grazing areas in the Midlands and arable areas of the
east.
Sheep
Pigs
Poultry
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 329
Britain has outstandingly good pastures for sheep. Moreover, veterinary
researches have provided vaccine and sera protection against nearly all the
epidemic diseases to which sheep are subject. More than thirty breeds and
innumerable crosses are to be found in Britain, each breed having originated
within a circumscribed area. The basic stocks are everywhere maintained by
local selection, but lowland flocks are continually reinforced by fresh blood
from the hills.
In the hills, and especially in the Highlands, winter conditions are usually
severe. Draft ewes and lambs are brought from the hill areas every autumn
to swell the lowland flocks, usually in two stages: firstly, to farms at inter¬
mediate altitudes, where they are mated with rams of a larger and more
rapidly maturing breed; then, the cross-bred progeny pass on in due course
to the more genial lowland conditions and especially to the Midlands and the
south and east of England, where they become crossed again with Down
rams for fat lamb production. The hill breeds bring in hardiness and the
first-cross sires fecundity and early maturity.
Wool, at one time of relatively little value, is now of importance to the
sheep farmer; research into breeding for wool is being undeitaken, notably
among Welsh flocks. But the prime purpose of British sheep farming today
is the production of fat lambs, in response to the change in the preference
of consumers away from mature sheep. Leys are largely relied on for fodder,
although in Scotland the turnip crop is still of considerable importance.
Pig production is a complex enterprise, owing to the varying uses to which
the carcase is put. In Britain the carcase has always been used in three different
ways: for curing as bacon, for sale in fresh condition as pork, and for sausages
or other processed forms. For the several trades, pigs of three different
weight ranges seem to be called for but leanness is desirable in all three.
Breeders, in the main, aim at the long type required by bacon curers, for
which there is a grading system based on weight, carcase measurements of
length and back-fat. The native Large White and the Landrace breeds
imported from Sweden yield carcases conforming closely to these require¬
ments. For the trade in pork and meat for processing, the Large White boar
is generally used.
Apart from type, breeders’ attention is now focused on utility qualities,
such as size and weight of litters, and on food consumed per pound of
liveweight gain. Litter recording and the performance and progeny testing
schemes for boars operated by the Pig Industry Development Authority are
providing basic data. This authority, set up under the Agriculture Act, 1957,
promotes improvements in the production of pigs and in the processing
and distribution of pigmeat.
Many farmers keep some poultry but a considerable number of the birds in
the country are kept on non-agricultural holdings, whether in backyards or
on a commercial scale. In the past 20 or 30 years specialist techniques have
been used increasingly and the industry has become more intensive. In
consequence, by 1963 over 40 per cent of laying birds on farms were in
flocks of 1,000 or more. With the rise in the poultry population and in the
yield of eggs per bird, the estimated production of eggs has reached double
the pre-war level and for several years nearly all eggs consumed in Britain
have been home-produced.
Within the industry the trend is towards specialisation in the breeding and
supply of stock and in the production of eggs and table poultry. The mass
production of special table chickens, or ‘broilers’, has now become a major
33°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Horticultural
Crops
industry; it is estimated that about 140 million birds were produced in
1963.
Horticultural crops occupy only a tiny fraction of the cultivated land of the
country—less than 2% per cent of the area under crops and grass—but their
value in terms of output per acre is very high. The total value of horticultural
crops sold in 1963-64 is estimated at about ^164 million, compared with some
£308 million for farm crops. About 400,000 acres are under vegetables and
about 270,000 acres under fruit.
Market gardening has grown up around all the large centres of population,
and in the Lea Valley, near London, for example, some very large capital
investments have been made. It has also flourished in more rural areas with
favourable soil or climatic conditions—in Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire,
Hampshire and Kent, and in a concentration of smallholdings around
Evesham, in the Avon valley. Districts with mild climates, such as the
Penzance region of Cornwall, have been favoured for the production of
selected early crops. More recently, selected vegetable crops have been grown
in increasing quantities by farmers as an alternative to potatoes: this applies
particularly to cabbages and brussels sprouts and to peas for canning, drying
and quick-freezing.
Specialised horticultural holdings range from a few acres up to about
300 acres, and many have glasshouses, frames or forcing houses. Use of
fertilisers, particularly of an organic nature, is very heavy, and much of the
field work is mechanised. The larger holdings normally have specialised
packing sheds, with washing and grading machinery, and irrigation plants.
More and more growers, however, are coming together in co-operatives for
marketing their produce and many of these co-operatives provide grading
and packing facilities for members.
Britain has about 4,500 acres of glasshouses, more than half of the area
being used primarily for the cultivation of tomatoes, the main centres of which
are the Lea Valley in Essex and Hertfordshire, and the Worthing district
in Sussex. In the Lea Valley, on a narrow belt of gravel and brick earth,
about 700 acres are covered with glass. Total production of tomatoes in the
country is estimated at about 75,000 tons annually and the value of all glass¬
house crops at about £18 million per year.
Hard fruits grow well in many parts of England and Wales, the chief risk
associated with their culture being late frosts. The main centres are in the
south, south-west and east of England, and Kent in particular. Production
of apples has been about equally divided between cooking and dessert varieties,
with Cox’s orange pippin heading the latter group, but production of cooking
apples is now declining. About 30,000 acres of varieties of cider apple are
grown mainly in Devon, Herefordshire and Somerset for the cider-making
industry. In Northern Ireland there are 8,000 acres of cooking apples—
Bramley Seedlings—-mostly concentrated in County Armagh. Plums and soft
fruits are grown in many counties; concentrations of plums are found in
Kent and Worcestershire, of blackcurrents in Norfolk, Kent and Hereford,
of cherries in Kent and of strawberries in Norfolk, Kent and Hampshire.
Raspberries are exceptional in that of some 9,000 acres grown in Britain nearly
three-quarters are in Scotland, mainly in the Blairgowrie district of Perthshire
and in Angus.
Hop-growing for the brewing industry is confined to two main areas, in
Kent and Sussex and in Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Capital outlay
and cultivation costs are very high, but crops per acre average about
FARM
EXPENDITURE
AND EARNINGS
Capital
Requirements
Mechanisation
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 331
12 cwt., worth some The total annual value of the crop is about
million.
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and the aggregate net income of agri¬
cultural producers are prepared annually by the agricultural departments.
The estimates show that Britain’s farming is based on livestock; fully
two-thirds of farmers’ income in Britain is derived from the sale of animals or
their products. The aggregate net income of farmers, after fluctuating around
£350 million for some years, now exceeds £400 million. The annual cost of
Government support to the industry has been about ^300 million in recent
years.
Growing items of farm outlay are machinery and equipment, amounting
currently to about one-sixth of total expenses. Feedingstuffs amount to more
than one quarter but show signs of decreasing slightly. Since 1955 wages have
risen by about 50 per cent, offsetting the reduction in manpower made possible
by mechanisation.
Until 1958 rents tended to lag behind other costs. This was due partly to
the reluctance of landlords to put up the rents of satisfactory tenants, and
partly to the terms of reference given to arbitrators. These terms were
modified in the 1958 Agriculture Act and since 1959-60 rents in England and
Wales have gone up by nearly a half. Average rents now being negotiated are
£3 10s. an acre for all types of tenancy.
The capital required for land and buildings may be provided by the farmer,
if he is an owner-occupier, or by the landlord, if the farm is let to a tenant.
Each year ‘fixed capital’ totalling some £55 million is added to the value of
land and buildings. (Annual gross investment in fixed assets exceeds £150
million.) The bulk of the capital required to stock and run the farms is
provided by the occupiers. Bank advances are an increasingly important
source of outside capital, both fixed and working; about half the total bank
advances to agriculture are believed to be for short-term purposes. Agricultural
merchants are also an important source of short-term credit.
Accounts of some 2,200 farms in England and Wales, analysed by university
agricultural economists, show average valuations of occupiers capital ranging
from £20 to £50 per acre. In Scotland a similar sample of 850 accounts shows
a wide range in tenants’ capital per acre, from about £3 on hill sheep farms
with extensive rough grazings to between £50 and £60 per acre on lowei
ground farms. In Northern Ireland, on the small intensive farms, occupiers
capital ranges from £50 to £70 an acre. Dairy farms are usually more heavily
capitalised than other types of stock farms. On all types of farms machinery
is a heavy item; on dairy farms it is often £15 per acre and on arable farms
up to £20 per acre; even on stock rearing farms it may amount to £5 per acre.
Britain has one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world, with 480,000
tractors in 1964, or one to every 36 acres of arable land. Power-take-off
implements now characterise arable farming; and some 60,000 combine
harvesters were in use in 1964. A wide variety of machines for harvesting and
preservation of grass are employed. Milking machines are installed on all
except the smallest farms, many with mechanical means of handling milk.
About 90 per cent of the farms in Great Britain have an electricity supply
and accompanying equipment. There are about 600 farmers machinery
syndicates through which farmers have the use of expensive equipment
without tying up their own capital.
332
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Net Income
THE ROLE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Government
Policy
Research, development and testing of farm machinery are carried out at
the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering in Bedfordshire. This
Institute developed the first farm tractor in the world employing hydrostatic
transmission and also one of the most effective complete potato-harvesters
now in production.
The range of profits between individual farms is very wride, varying with the
size of farm, quality of land, and managerial ability of the occupier. Farms
do not lend themselves readily to exact classification by type, so even averages
must be treated with caution. Nearly all group averages of recent years,
however, show profits of £5 to £10 per acre: there is a marked tendency for
small farms to show higher profits per acre than large ones, owing principally
to the higher proportion of profit represented by personal work on the small
farm.
Profits per acre on arable farms have, with occasional seasonal exceptions,
been maintained at a higher level than on other types; dairy farming has
shown consistent but moderate profits, while those on stock-raising farms
have usually been low, except where arable sale crops are also grown or
pedigree stock is bred. The profitability of pedigree stock breeding can
be assumed from the rise in prices for breeding animals throughout the
period.
During the last hundred years the Government has played an ever-increasing
part in British agriculture. Since the opening up of the great primary-
producing countries of the New World and the Antipodes in the latter part
of the nineteenth century, producers of food had been at a disadvantage
because supplies tended to exceed effective demand. By the beginning of the
1930s the need for some form of State assistance to agriculture had become
pressing; during the following decade and subsequently, the main object of
the Government’s agricultural policy was to find methods of supporting
domestic agriculture without prejudice to Britain’s position as a world trading
nation; thus during the 1930s the Government initiated various forms of
protection and financial assistance for agriculture.
During the second world war and the immediate post-war years, agri¬
cultural production was closely controlled by the State, with County War
Agricultural Executive Committees, composed of landowners, farmers and
farm workers, acting as the Government’s local agents. To ensure a reasonable
standard of living for farmers and farm workers, while at the same time
keeping the cost of living steady, most of the basic farm products were
purchased at fixed prices on Government account and sold at controlled
prices, often below the cost of procurement; the difference in price was
borne by public funds. This practice continued as long as rationing lasted.
Government policy today is founded on the Agriculture Act of 1947* The
main objective, as set out in Section 1 of the Act, continues to be ‘a stable
and efficient agricultural industry capable of producing such part of the
nation’s food and other agricultural produce as in the national interest it is
desirable to produce in the United Kingdom, and of producing it at minimum
prices consistent with proper remuneration and living conditions for farmers
and workers in agriculture and an adequate return on capital invested in
the industry’. To this end, the Government is empowered to provide, for
the main agricultural products, guaranteed prices determined in the light of
annual reviews (see p. 334).
Machinery of
Government
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 333
Post-war policy falls broadly into two periods, with the dividing line about
1954. During the first, the chief aim was to encourage expansion and a return
to something like the traditional pattern of British farming. ‘Production
objectives’ were set for each of the main commodities, as they had been
during the war, though the Government gradually ceased to direct farmers
what to grow.
As world supplies of food and Britain’s own agricultural production and
trading position improved, the Government gradually restored to private
business both the importing of food and domestic trading in food. Since the
ending of the period of scarcity, policy objectives have changed: stress has
been laid on more economic production of food of the kinds and qualities
demanded by the market, rather than on indiscriminate expansion of pro¬
duction. The Agriculture Act of 1957 assured farmers that the prices
guaranteed under the Act of 1947 would not be steeply reduced, and at the
same time provided grants towards the cost of bringing fixed equipment up
to date.
In recent years increasing pressure and poor phasing of supplies (at home
and from abroad) brought depressed prices and unstable conditions in the
British market for meat and cereals. The Government accordingly decided to
introduce new arrangements to secure a greater degree of stability in the
market and to ensure that the support system would not be undermined by
excessively low market prices, which in turn would increase the cost to the
Exchequer of agricultural support.
The Agriculture and Horticulture Act, 1964, gave the Government power
to introduce minimum import prices for agricultural and horticultural
products. In the same year an understanding with overseas suppliers on the
sharing of the bacon market became effective and agreed minimum import
prices for cereals were introduced. Home production of pigs was already
regulated by arrangements which reduce the guaranteed price if the quantity
produced is likely to exceed a certain figure and in 1964 the ‘standard quantity’
concept (see p. 335) was extended to guarantee arrangements for wheat and
barley.
The functions of Government in relation to agriculture are mostly exercised
by the agricultural ministers, that is to say, for England and Wales the Minister
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, for Scotland the Secretary of State foi
Scotland, and for Northern Ireland the Home Secretary, who is the minister
responsible for United Kingdom aspects of Northern Ireland agriculture,
local aspects being the responsibility of the Northern Ireland Minister of
Agriculture. The agricultural ministers are assisted by a number of advisory
committees composed of general agriculturists and specialists.
The headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is
divided functionally, each division being responsible for a particular subject
or service. Its relations with individual farmers are conducted mainly through
its local offices, grouped in England in regions, each administered by a
regional controller working in close collaboration with the regional heads of
the technical services. Local offices in Wales are grouped under a W elsh
Secretary, with similar functions and with special responsibility for W elsh
affairs. County Agricultural Executive Committees have a number of duties,
including those of promoting technical development and advising the minister
on local aspects of policy.
In Scotland most of the agricultural functions of the Secretary of State are
discharged through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, which has
334
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CURRENT
SUPPORT POLICY
Annual Review
Price
Guarantees
its headquarters in Edinburgh, with the help and advice of n Agricultural
Executive Committees.
The Secretary of State also appoints the members of the Crofters Com¬
mission, which has powers to deal with the unique and difficult circumstances
of crofting in the Highlands and Islands, and the Red Deer Commission,
which deals with the conservation and control of red deer.
In England and Wales two councils, the Agricultural Advisory Council
and the Horticultural Advisory Council, advise the Minister on the problems
of the industry that require research and on the dissemination of research
results to working farmers. In Scotland this function is exercised by the
Agricultural Improvement Council.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for imple¬
menting agricultural policy inaugurated by the Northern Ireland Government.
It is organised on similar lines to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, for which it acts as agent in the administration in Northern Ireland
of United Kingdom agricultural schemes. Its administrative headquarters are
in Belfast and each of the six counties has an Agricultural Executive Officer.
In February each year, in accordance with the Act of 1947, the agricultural
ministers review the economic condition and prospects of the industry.
Between annual reviews, a special review may be held if the ministers consider
it warranted, but this has seldom been necessary. In holding reviews, the
ministers are required to consult with representatives of agricultural pro¬
ducers—in practice, the three farmers’ unions in the United Kingdom. The
ministers consider such factors as production trends and market requirements,
world market prospects, the cost of subsidies, the trend of profits in the
industry as a whole, the increasing efficiency of the industry and changes in
production costs, trading relations (especially with the Commonwealth) and
the national economic situation. In the light of their conclusions, they
determine guaranteed prices for fat cattle, fat sheep, fat pigs, eggs, wool,
milk, cereals, potatoes and sugar beet. These guarantees apply to livestock
and livestock products for the ensuing twelve months, and to crops to be
harvested in the current year. Various grants in aid of particular kinds of
production or farming practice (known as ‘production grants’) are also
considered. Any changes in ‘relevant’ production grants (broadly, those
payable to occupiers rather than landowners) are taken into account. The
Government’s conclusions and its decisions on changes in guaranteed prices
and relevant production grants are published as a White Paper.
The long-term assurances provided for in the 1957 Act require the total
value of the guaranteed prices and relevant production grants in any year to be
maintained at not less than 97^ per cent of their value in the preceding year,
after allowing for changes in costs. In addition, the guaranteed price (adjusted
for any change in the basis of the guarantee) for each commodity must be
not less than 96 per cent of that of the previous year. For livestock and live¬
stock products—where farmers’ decisions need time to take effect—there is
a further provision that reductions in the guaranteed price for any product
must not total more than 9 per cent in an period of three years. The cost
of Government support to the industry in 1963-64 was £294 million and
the estimated cost of support for 1964-65 shows an increase to £327 million.
The general policy of the Government is to use methods of agricultural
support that allow the ordinary channels of trade to flow freely. The form of
guarantee most generally used is the deficiency payment, which means that
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 335
the Government makes payments to producers, related to the differences
between the average market price realised and the guaranteed price, for
output eligible for the guarantee.
The deficiency payments schemes for cereals and fatstock are administered
directly by the agricultural departments. Payments for wheat and rye are
made on the quantity of millable grain or, in the case of wheat, potentially
millable grain sold and delivered by the grower. For barley and oats, much
of which is consumed on farms, payments are made on the acreage grown.
New arrangements, first introduced for the 1961-62 season, provided growers
with an incentive to hold barley until later in the season. Standard quantity 1
arrangements for wheat and barley were introduced for the 1964 crop.
Deficiency payments for fatstock are made weekly to individual producers on
certified sales on a liveweight or deadweight basis but under new arrangements
introduced for 1964-65 there may also be a second payment at the end of the
year for cattle and sheep. The weekly standard prices for fat cattle and
fat sheep vary on a seasonal scale; for pigs there is no seasonal scale but the
weekly prices are adjusted for changes in feed costs and, under a flexible
guarantee arrangement designed to stabilise pigmeat production, adjustments
may also be made quarterly by reference to a forecast of the number of pigs
likely to receive the guarantee payment during a period of 12 months. In
Northern Ireland guarantee payments are administered through the prices
paid to producers by the Pig Marketing Board.
For most of the remaining commodities the Government operates the
guarantee through the appropriate marketing board, which takes account of
any payments from or to the Government in deciding what to pay producers
for their produce. In the case of milk there are five such boards, and the full
guaranteed price is paid only on a ‘standard quantity which relates to the
volume of liquid milk sales plus a substantial reserve. Milk produced in
excess of the standard quantity is sold for manufacturing considerably below
the full guaranteed price. The retail price of liquid milk is determined by
the Government so as to cover the full cost of the guarantee and, taking one
year with another, there is no Exchequer subsidy. For eggs, a subsidy is paid
to the British Egg Marketing Board on all first quality eggs sold to the board
through packing stations. So far as potatoes are concerned, a deficiency
payment is made in years in which the average British growers price foi
potatoes for human consumption (excluding new potatoes) is less than the
guaranteed price. Payment is made to the Potato Marketing Board for the
benefit of growers in Great Britain and to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Northern Ireland, for the benefit of growers there.
For wool a fixed price is guaranteed to the British Wool Marketing Board
for every pound of fleece wool it buys from producers. This enables it to
fix in advance a schedule of producers’ prices, based on types and quality,
after making allowance for its marketing costs.
Under the Sugar Act, 1956, and the Agriculture Act, i957> British
Sugar Corporation contracts to buy the whole of the sugar beet crop produced
from a specified acreage (at present 435,000 acres) at a scale of fixed prices,
1 The Agriculture Act, 1947, postulates that the guarantees should be related to the
volume of agricultural produce which, in the national interest, it is desirable to produce
domestically (see p. 332). This is effected by including standard quantities in the
guarantee arrangements for milk, pigs, barley, wheat, potatoes and sugar beet
‘Standard quantity’ agreements vary in form but, in general, the basic guaranteed price
determined in the Annual Review is related to a specific quantity of produce marketed
annually on a national basis; if this quantity is exceeded the producers average unit
return falls.
33^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production
Grants
Fertilisers and Lime
Grassland
Improvement and
Winter Keep
Silo Subsidy
Calf Subsidy
Hill Cow Subsidy
Small Farmers
Grants for
Long-term
Improvements
Farm Improvement
Scheme
determined as a result of the annual review and related to sugar content.
Refined sugar produced by the corporation is sold, under market-sharing
agreements with the refiners, at a price based on the world price.
The Sugar Board buys Commonwealth sugar under the Commonwealth
Sugar Agreement and sells it commercially. The deficits or surpluses which
result from the transactions of both the corporation and the board are
ultimately reflected in the board’s accounts. When these accounts show a
deficit a levy is charged on all sugar, imported or home-produced, entering
the United Kingdom market, including the sugar content of composite sugar
imports, and when there is a surplus a distribution payment is made corre¬
spondingly, so that taking one year with another the board balances its account.
The following are the main grants and subsidies which are ‘relevant production
grants’ for the purposes of the Agriculture Act, 1957, and the annual review.
Schemes under the Agriculture (Fertilisers) Act, 1952, provide contributions
towards the cost of nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilisers applied to agri¬
cultural land or crops thereon, or used for the growing of mushrooms.
Farmers can also obtain contributions towards the cost of liming land to
improve soil fertility.
Ploughing grants are available at two different rates. To encourage the
regular ploughing up and extended use of leys, grants are payable at £5 an
acre on land which has been continuously under grass for three years or more.
Grants at £12 an acre are available for the more expensive operations needed
to bring unproductive grassland into cultivation. Schemes for winter-keep
grants (in hill and upland areas) and grassland renovation grants were intro¬
duced in the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963.
Grants up to a maximum of £250 on any one farm are available under the
Agriculture (Silo Subsidies) Act, 1956, for constructing and improving silos
for conserving grass and fodder.
To stimulate the breeding and rearing of calves suitable for beef production,
a subsidy is paid to the rearer of suitable calves at the rate of £9 15s. a head
for steers and £7 10s. a head for heifers.
A subsidised scheme, encouraging the establishment on hill and upland farms
of regular breeding herds for the production of store cattle for sale, is provided
by the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963.
To establish on a firm economic basis small farm businesses whose main
handicap is lack of working capital, grants are offered to small farmers who
carry out improvement plans lasting at least three years which are approved
by the agricultural departments. The limit is £1,000 for any one business.
In addition there are several types of grants for long-term improvements
which are not ‘relevant production grants’. Among them are the following:
Under the Agriculture Act, 1957, grants are available to the owners and
occupiers of agricultural land towards the cost of improving certain kinds
of fixed equipment, including farm buildings, roads and fences, and the
supply of electricity. The rate of grant is one-third of the cost. Grants are
also available towards the incidental costs of amalgamating uneconomic hold¬
ings. Some 250,000 schemes have been approved and, taking into account a
further £35 million made available under the 1963 Act, bring the total
available Exchequer contribution to £90 million.
Hill Sheep
Subsidy
Farm Drainage
and Water Supply
Schemes
Farmers’
Machinery
Syndicates
Horticulture
OTHER
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE AND
ACTION
Land Use
Agricultural
Credit
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 337
Powers for a subsidised scheme, to help maintain the foundation flocks of
hardy hill sheep, were provided by the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act, 1963.
The State contributes towards the cost of land drainage and water supply.
In England and Wales, for example, grants for farm drainage may be up to
50 per cent of the approved cost. Farm water supply grants are at the rate of
25 per cent of the approved cost where the connection is to a public main,
and 40 per cent where a private source is utilised. Grants of up to 5° per cent
are available in Scotland and Northern Ireland for farm drainage and towards
the cost of installing and improving farm water supplies. Separate legislation
provides grants for these services in Northern Ireland.
One-third capital grants are made under the Agriculture (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1963, towards expenditure incurred by landowners or
syndicates of farmers in erecting buildings to house machinery or grain
drying and storage facilities for use by farmers’ machinery syndicates (see
P- 331)-
Horticultural produce, because it is perishable and liable to seasonal variation
in quantity and quality, does not lend itself to a system of guaranteed price
support. Until 1964 the principal means of support was the application of
tariffs on imports, although a fairly wide range of grants were available to
producers to increase efficiency by building and re-equipment and by the
promotion of co-operative marketing. The Agriculture and Horticulture Act,
1964, gives greater emphasis to increasing productivity and so reduces the
industry’s dependence on the tariff, and it greatly extends the range of items
for which grants may be approved.
It is an integral part of the Government’s planning policy (which is adminis¬
tered in England and Wales by the Ministry of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment, and in Scotland by the Scottish Development Department) that the
better agricultural land should not be taken for other use if there is less
valuable land that would serve the purpose. The Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food assists in carrying out this policy in England and Wales by
providing expert advice to planning authorities and other departments on the
implications, from the standpoint of the public agricultural interest, of all
substantial proposals to take agricultural land for other purposes. Appropriate
arrangements exist for the Ministry to be consulted about such proposals. In
Scotland similar arrangements exist for the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries to give advice.
The Government has never pursued a general policy of making credit
available to agriculture on easy terms. Nevertheless, a number of facilities
for specific purposes enjoy government ecouragement and support.
In England and Wales finance for the purchase or improvement of agri¬
cultural property is available from the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
Ltd. and takes the form of a loan on the security of a first mortgage on freehold
agricultural land and buildings or of an improvement loan against the security
of a terminable rent charge created on the land improved. The corporation s
funds are derived mainly from public issues of stock, but it receives a measure
of government support. In Scotland, loans for agricultural purposes secured on
agricultural land in Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation Ltd.; this corporation also receives support from the Government.
338
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smallholdings
Crofting
Improvement loans for carrying out improvements to agricultural land and
buildings are also available to landowners from the Lands Improvement
Company, whose funds are provided privately. The amount of such loans is
charged on the land and buildings in the form of a terminable rent charge.
Improvement loans require the sanction of the agricultural ministers.
In Northern Ireland loans are available to farmers from the Agricultural
Loans Fund, administered by the Ministry of Agriculture and financed out
of public funds. The bulk of the loans issued are short-term for agricultural
machinery, but loans for other purposes are for medium terms, usually up to
ten years and occasionally for longer periods.
Since 1892 county councils and county borough councils in England and
Wales have had powers to provide smallholdings. Legislation imposes on
county councils an obligation to provide smallholdings and enables the
Minister of Agriculture to contribute towards their losses. The aim was at
first to foster a peasant economy, but later to provide holdings for ex-Service-
men of the 1914-18 war, and then for the unemployed. Now, under the
Agriculture Act, 1947, the object is to give opportunities for persons with
agricultural experience, particularly agricultural workers, to become farmers
on their own account. In England and Wales, about 16,000 smallholdings
are provided by local authorities and about 1,300 by the Ministry. Of the
smallholdings provided by the Ministry, approximately 1,000, situated on
18 different estates, are managed by the Land Settlement Association Limited,
which was originally formed in 1934 for the purpose of developing small¬
holdings for unemployed men from industrial areas. The association provides
centrally on each estate various services for the tenants’ use, including the
supply of agricultural stores and requisites, the operation of a machinery
pool, and facilities for the packing and marketing of produce.
The Minister has power under the 1947 Act to make loans for working
capital to tenants of statutory smallholdings. In this way they can be helped
to obtain livestock, machinery, implements and other necessary items; tenants
must, however, have available at least 25 per cent of the capital required.
In 1963 an independent Committee of Inquiry was set up to review the
operation of the 1947 Agriculture Act as it applied to smallholdings and to
advise as to further provision of such holdings.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central
Government, which now owns and maintains about 430,000 acres of land
settlement estates, with some 4,000 holdings, mainly in the crofting counties.
In the seven Scottish counties known as crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness,
Inverness, Orkney, Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland, and Shetland—much
of the land is farmed by crofters, tenant farmers whose holdings are generally
either rented at a cost of not more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding
75 acres.
In these counties there are about 20,000 crofts, which produce about
one-quarter of the total agricultural output of the area. The special problems
of the crofting counties, which had for some time been suffering from a
declining population, led to the setting up, in 1955, of a Crofters Commission
whose functions are to reorganise, develop and regulate crofting in the crofting
counties, to promote the interests of crofters and to keep under review matters
relating to crofting. The commission’s powers, embodied in the Crofters
(Scotland) Acts of 1955 and 1961, include that of carrying out reorganisation
schemes in ‘townships’ (crofting communities) if a majority of the crofters
Arterial
Drainage and
Sea Defence
Land Tenure
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 339
agree, by reallocating the land in a way which, in the commission’s opinion,
would lead to the proper and efficient use of the land and the general benefit
of the township. The commission has also powers over the letting and sub¬
letting of crofts and it is responsible for approving regulations governing the
use of common grazings. It acts as agent for the Secretary of State for Scotland
in the administration of schemes of loans and grants for the development of
agricultural production on crofts, and collaborates with other bodies in
carrying out measures for economic development and social improvement in
crofting areas.
Land drainage in England and Wales is administered by 32 river boards,
two catchment and 400 internal drainage boards. Each river board area
comprises a major river system. They cover the whole of England and
Wales, apart from the London area. There are no comparable authorities in
Scotland, where drainage is the responsibility of owners and occupiers of land.
River boards have powers to maintain and improve watercourses scheduled
as main rivers. Their work is concerned with the improvement of land drainage
by increasing the capacity of rivers and erecting pumping stations, the
prevention of inland flooding—both urban and agricultural—and the erection
of defences to protect low-lying areas from coastal flooding. River boards
also have powers relating to freshwater fisheries and river pollution. From
April 1965 the river boards will be replaced by 27 river authorities, responsible
for conservation of water resources as well as for the present river board
functions.
Internal drainage boards are concerned with very much smaller areas ana
their work is chiefly in low-lying agricultural districts. Their main function is
to keep the land drained in their area by improving the main drams and,
where necessary, by pumping from low-lying land.
The authorities derive their income directly or indirectly from rate-payers.
The Government pays grants towards the cost of the improvement schemes
carried out by both types of organisation. Grants to river authorities vary
from 20 per cent to 80 per cent according to the financial position of the
authority. Internal drainage boards receive grants at a flat rate of 50 per cent.
The gross capital expenditure of drainage authorities on new and improved
works is now nearly £8 million a year. Government grants, including grants
towards the repayment of loans raised in previous years, amount to nearly
£5 million. Drainage authorities’ expenditure on maintenance is estimated
at over I'll million a year and is rising steadily.
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Agriculture is the drainage authority
in respect of determined main watercourses, with the exception of the Erne
and Lower Bann which are the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance.
The cost is met by the Exchequer in the first place, offset by contributions
from the county and county borough councils. Joint land improvement
schemes on smaller watercourses may be promoted by the riparian owners
and receive Government assistance. Urban drainage schemes, towards which
an Exchequer grant is available, can be promoted by local sanitary authorities.
In Great Britain about half, and in Northern Ireland all farms are owner-
occupied. The traditional form of tenancy in England and Wales runs from
year to year; in Scotland leases for terms of 10 to 14 years are more common
The tenancy agreement may be either written or verbal and may (but need
not) include provisions about such matters as rights of cropping, liability for
repair and maintenance, and compensation for tenant’s improvements.
34°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MARKETING
In order to protect the respective interests of landlords and tenants and to
eliminate uncertainty as to their rights and liabilities, a code of landlord and
tenant relationships has been written into legislation. The Agriculture Acts
of 1947 and, for Scotland, 1948, lay down the basic rules of good estate
management and good husbandry for owners and occupiers respectively.
The Agricultural Holdings Acts of 1948 and 1949 contain more detailed
provisions, some of which apply to all tenancy agreements (i.e. the parties
may not contract out of them) and some of which apply only in the absence
of specific provision in the tenancy agreement.
Among the compulsory provisions are those relating to security of tenure.
The Acts provide for any tenancy of agricultural land, with the exception
of certain short-term lettings to which exemption can be given by the Minister
or Secretary of State, to continue in force from year to year until determined
by a valid notice to quit. With certain exceptions, such as where the notice
to quit is given on account of a breach of contract by the tenant (for instance,
failure to pay rent or carry out repairs), the tenant can contest it by serving
a counter-notice; the notice to quit then becomes inoperative unless the
landlord can satisfy an independent body (in England and Wales the Agri¬
cultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish Land Court) that his
claim for possession is in the interests of sound estate management or good
husbandry or that the land is required for certain purposes specified in the
Acts.
The Acts lay down a code of compensation to which the tenant is entitled
on termination of the tenancy. Compensation is normally payable both for
disturbance (between one and two years’ rent) and for improvements which
the tenant has carried out during the tenancy. The landlord is normally
entitled to counter-claim for dilapidations, and machinery is provided for
the settlement of claims by arbitration in default of agreement between the
parties. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord and tenant and
may be varied by agreement at any time or, failing agreement, by arbitration
at intervals of not less than three years in England and Wales and five years
in Scotland. A landlord is entitled to claim additional rent for improvements
carried out at his expense. The Acts also forbid provisions in tenancy agree¬
ments which would unduly restrict the tenant’s farming operations.
Agricultural products are now marketed mainly through private trade channels
such as corn merchants, livestock auctions and markets, and bacon factories;
or through producers’ co-operative organisations. For certain commodities,
however, marketing arrangements are influenced by boards operating under
the Agricultural Marketing Act, 1958 (which consolidated earlier legislation).
These marketing boards are producers’ organisations with statutory powers
to regulate the marketing of particular products. The schemes under which
they are constituted and operate must be approved by Parliament and
confirmed by a poll of the producers. Most of the members of the board are
elected by the producers but a minority are appointed by the minister or
ministers concerned. Further safeguards serve to protect consumers and other
interests affected by schemes and the public interest generally.
Marketing boards fall into two broad categories: first, those which have
powers to trade as the first selling agency for all producers not specially
exempted or, alternatively, to exercise a comparable influence by controlling
all contracts between producers and first buyers; and secondly, boards
which maintain only a broad control over marketing conditions leaving
producers free otherwise to deal individually with buyers. The boards for
Market
Development
Scheme
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 341
eggs, hops, milk and wool fall into the first category and the potato board
into the second.
A Horticultural Marketing Council was set up in i960 but was dissolved in
1963 because of lack of support from the organisations representing producers,
wholesalers and retailers. A Covent Garden Market Authority was established
by law in 1961 to reorganise and modernise the largest of London’s five
horticultural wholesale markets; moving the market to a site south of the
Thames is being considered.
Under the Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963, the Government
is providing £1^ million over a period of three years for grants towards the
cost of research and development in the marketing of agricultural and
horticultural produce; the industry makes a similar sum available from its
own resources. The majority of applications for grant have come from pro¬
ducer groups. About half the projects assisted relate to livestock or meat of
one kind or another.
The Government makes certain relatively small grants towards the cost
of setting up or improving the efficiency of horticultural producers’ marketing
co-operatives.
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
The day-to-day work of treating animal disease is the responsibility of the
veterinary profession in private practice. The State veterinary service,
inaugurated in 1865 and covering Great Britain, deals with situations beyond
the control of the individual veterinary surgeon. Centred on London and
Edinburgh, it is able, at any hour, to deal promptly with outbreaks of
infectious diseases. Northern Ireland has its own veterinary service.
For many years Britain has been free from eight serious animal diseases,
including rinderpest, sheep scab, glanders and rabies. During the last two
years the whole country has been free of foot-and-mouth disease. Northern
Ireland is already free of swine fever and fowl pest and a slaughter policy to
eradicate swine fever in the rest of the United Kingdom was introduced
in 1963.
On 1 st October, i960, the whole of Great Britain became a bovine tubercu¬
losis attested area and Northern Ireland followed a month later. Bovine
tuberculosis is now a disease of extreme rarity: all cattle are tuberculin tested
at regular intervals and reactors to the test are slaughtered, compensation
being paid to the owners.
The work of the service is backed by the extensive facilities of the Central
Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, Surrey, and those of its subsidiary
laboratory at Lasswade, near Edinburgh. In addition, there are 18 investiga¬
tion centres with well-ec|uipped laboratories in England and Wales. These
centres perform work requiring specialist knowledge and give advice on
disease problems to private practitioners. In Scotland a similar service is
provided by investigation centres attached to agricultural colleges. The
veterinary laboratory for Northern Ireland is situated at Stormont, Belfast.
Advice to growers on the general control of plant pests and diseases is given
by the advisory services. In addition, the State plant health service is res¬
ponsible for statutory controls designed to limit the spread of plant pests
and diseases present in Britain and prevent the introduction of new ones
from abroad. It also issues the health certificates required by other countries
to accompany plant material imported from Britain.
Voluntary certification schemes are operated to encourage the development
342
Agricultural
Chemicals
AGRICULTURAL
ADVISORY
SERVICES
The National
Agricultural
Advisory
Service
The
Agricultural
Land Service
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks, particularly of crops
subject to degenerative diseases.
Although the increasing employment of pesticides has contributed appreciably
to expansion of agricultural output in Britain, it has been recognised that
effective safeguards are needed against the dangers arising from uncontrolled
use. The Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act, i952> and the regulations
made under it, provide protection for agricultural workers using toxic
chemicals. In addition, to safeguard the many interests which might be
adversely affected by the use of chemicals in agriculture and food storage, a
voluntary notification scheme is operated by the Government, with the help
of an Advisory Committee and with the full co-operation of the agricultural
chemicals industry. A report by a Research Study Group, set up in i960,
stated that present arrangements were proving generally effective but recom¬
mended further research. This is being undertaken by the Research Councils,
and the Agricultural Research Council has set up a scientific committee to
keep all research relating to the use of pesticides under review. In April 1964
this Committee reported its fear that the cumulative residue of certain
pesticides—notably aldrin and dieldrin—might prove deleterious in the long
run, and advised curtailing their use.
In England and Wales free technical advice on all agricultural and horti¬
cultural matters is available to every farmer and grower through the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food’s National Agricultural Advisory Service
(NAAS). Every county has a county advisory officer in charge of advisory
work and is divided into districts, in each of which there is a district advisory
officer who can call on an extensive system of specialist advisers. In Northern
Ireland advisory work is organised by the Ministry of Agriculture, with a
county organisation similar to the NAAS. In Scotland the advisory services,
likewise similar in scope to the NAAS, are based on the three agricultural
colleges.
Facilities are provided at the NAAS experimental farms and horticultural
stations in England and Wales and at agricultural college centres in Scotland
and Northern Ireland for field-scale extensions of research work and investi¬
gations of local problems.
The main functions of the Agricultural Land Service, which operates in
England and Wales, are:
(1) to advise owners of agricultural land on estate management matters,
including farm buildings;
(2) to provide professional advice and services to the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and his agents on all matters relating to farm land
and buildings;
(3) to provide expert professional advice to the Minister and department
on the agricultural land use implications of planning proposals, including
the possibilities of reclaiming to agriculture, land worked for minerals
by open-cast methods; and
(4) liaison with other departments and planning authorities about such
proposals.
In Scotland similar duties are carried out by officers of the Department
of Agriculture and Fisheries but advisory work regarding farm buildings is
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
RESEARCH and
EDUCATION
Research
Agricultural
Education
343
undertaken by the agricultural colleges. In Northern Ireland advice on matters
relating to farm land and buildings falls within the scope of the Ministry’s
advisory service.
The work of the advisory and veterinary services is supplemented by
numerous technical publications.
Agricultural research in Britain is planned and co-ordinated by the Agri¬
cultural Research Council (see p. 214) and is largely financed by the State.
The council has 24 research stations and units under its direct control and is
responsible for the administration of Government grants to 14 independent
research institutes in England and Wales; in Scotland, eight independent
research organisations receive grants through the Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries for Scotland. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland also
have their own investigation laboratories (see p. 215). Grants are also made
by the Agricultural Research Council to universities and to other recognised
research institutions. Among the more famous institutes are the Rothamsted
Experimental Station in Hertfordshire (soils and crops), the Foot and Mouth
Research Institute at Pirbright, Surrey (animal virus diseases), the East
Mailing Research Station, in Kent (fruit), the Welsh Plant Breeding Station at
Aberystwyth, the Rowett Research Institute (animal nutrition) and the
Macaulay Institute for Soil Research, both at Aberdeen.
Information on research is exchanged with other Commonwealth countries
through the machinery of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and
Institutes (ten Bureaux and two Institutes in the United Kingdom and one
Institute in Trinidad).
In England and Wales, research and advice on farm economics are combined
in the Provincial Agricultural Economics Service, which comprises ten
university Departments of Agricultural Economics and which is co-ordinated
by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. In Scotland, agricultural
economists are on the staff of the three agricultural colleges. The agricultural
departments in both England and Wales and Scotland have economics and
statistics units.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture also has an Economics and
Statistics Division and has, in addition, its own research divisions investigating
problems of animal and crop production. The staff of these divisions are
also responsible for lectures in the Faculty of Agriculture of Queen’s University,
Belfast, and for specialist advice to the county advisory staffs.
Industrial concerns manufacturing weed-killers, insecticides, fertilisers,
feedingstuffs and agricultural tractors and implements undertake research on
a considerable scale and in most cases maintain experimental farms and estates.
There are four types of institution which provide full-time education in
agricultural subjects: universities and agricultural colleges; in England and
Wales, county farm institutes, and in Scotland, farm schools. Twelve univer¬
sities in the United Kingdom provide degree and postgraduate training in
agriculture, and one other university offers postgraduate diploma courses. A
National College of Agricultural Engineering was established in i960 at
Silsoe, Bedfordshire. This is the eighth of the national colleges (see p. 168)
established to train people for highly specialised industries, the needs of
which cannot be met at local technical colleges.
Two-year diploma courses and some specialised courses are given at five
agricultural colleges and at two of the county farm institutes in England and
M
344
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fishing Ports
Methods of
Sea Fishing
Wales; three agricultural colleges in Scotland give two-year to three-year
diploma courses and also offer two- or three-term certificate courses.
In Northern Ireland there are two agricultural colleges; a third is to be
built.
There are 31 county farm institutes in England and five in Wales run by
local education authorities. They provide residential courses in general
agriculture, dairying, horticulture, poultry husbandry and rural domestic
economy. Local education authorities also provide a wide range of short
courses and classes for farmers, farm workers, horticulturists and domestic
producers.
There are eight farm schools in Scotland, run by local education authorities,
providing courses—mainly residential—of from one to three years’ duration
for boys and girls of from 12 to 16 years. There is one residential agricultural
school in Northern Ireland, which provides short courses for boys and girls
over 15 years of age.
Courses in land management are available at the Universities of Cambridge
and London and at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester.
FISHERIES
Although the sea fishing industry contributes only about £ per cent of the
United Kingdom’s gross national product, it is of greater importance to the
economy of Scotland. It is also by far the most important source of employ¬
ment in some of the major fishing ports. The industry falls into three main
divisions, concerned respectively with white fish, herring and shellfish. White
fish, such as cod, haddock, plaice, turbot and sole, are demersal fish which live
on or near the sea bed. Herring and similar species, such as pilchard, mackerel
and sprats, are pelagic fish which live mainly in intermediate waters or near
the surface. Shellfish include Crustacea (such as lobsters, nephrops and crabs)
and molluscs (such as escallops, mussels, cockles and oysters).
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three main groups:
the distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The
distant waters are those off Iceland, Greenland, Bear Island and the north
coast of Norway, and the Barents Sea; the middle water grounds lie around
the Faroe Islands; and the near water grounds are those in the North Sea,
the Irish Sea and in the coastal areas around Britain. The herring fishing
grounds are mainly within 60 miles of land. The inshore waters also yield
considerable quantities of shellfish.
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleet-
wood, Milford Haven and Lowestoft for white fish, and Great Yarmouth
and Lowestoft for herring. In Scotland the chief centres for white fish are
Aberdeen, Fraserburgh, Granton, the Moray Firth, the west coast and Shet¬
land; herring landings are made mainly at the east coast ports of Aberdeen,
Fraserburgh and Peterhead, the west coast ports of Ullapool, Mallaig, Oban
and Portpatrick, and in Shetland. In Northern Ireland the herring fishing
ports are Ardglass, Portavogie and Kilkeel.
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining, and ring
and drift netting. Trawling is carried out throughout the year in the distant
and near waters for all species of demersal fish. Seining is also used for
catching demersal fish all the year round, mainly in the North Sea, the
Minches, the Firth of Clyde, and the Irish Sea. There are about 570 Scottish
The Fishing
Fleet
Supplies
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 345
and Northern Ireland seiners, and about 215 operating from English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is summer fishing for herring
based on the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland, and the north-east
coast ports of England, and autumn fishing off East Anglia based on Lowestoft
and Yarmouth. Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast of
Scotland, in the Isle of Man area and off Southern Ireland.
The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and
methods of capture; in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs,
lobsters, shrimps, mussels, escallops, cockles and oysters, and, off Scotland,
north-east England and in the Irish Sea, there are substantial catches of
‘Norway lobsters’ (nephrops).
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and
Fleetwood, numbered 207 at the end of 1963. They are over 140 feet and up to
220 feet in length and make voyages of 17 to 23 days to fishing grounds in
the Arctic Circle, although in the past few years there has been an increasing
tendency to fish the waters bordering Newfoundland, Labrador and Greenland.
The increase in fishing in these areas is due in part to the introduction of
factory trawlers of up to about 260 feet in length which spend up to three
months at sea and fillet and freeze much of their catch immediately it is
taken. At the same date, near and middle water vessels numbered 449; they
are under 140 feet long and most of them work nearer home, making voyages
of from a few days up to more than two weeks, although some of the
larger vessels fish regularly off the Faroes and seasonally as far afield as
Iceland. Included in the near water group are vessels engaged in drift net
fishing for herring; these vessels usually make daily voyages. The inshore
group consists mainly of vessels of under 80 feet which are seldom at sea
for longer than two or three days and more usually make daily landings,
often fishing within sight of land.
In the British fishing industry in 1963 there were about 22,000 fishermen
in regular employment and some 6,000 occasionally employed; 8,300 of the
former and 2,200 of the latter were from Scottish ports. In Northern Ireland
there were about 500 regular fishermen.
In 1963 landings of fish, both demersal and pelagic, by British fishing vessels
totalled 811,000 tons (148,000 tons of demersal fish and 663,000 tons of
pelagic), valued at about £51 million. Landings at British ports by foreign
vessels totalled about 114,000 tons of fresh and frozen fish (including 46,000
tons brought direct from the fishing grounds), valued at about ^16 million.
British landings of shellfish yielded £2-5 million. Cod accounted for 42 per
cent of the total value of wet fish (i.e. fish other than shellfish) landed by
British vessels; haddock (18 per cent) and plaice (9 per cent) were the other
most important sources of earnings to the industry.
Net imports of all types of fish (fresh, frozen, salted or canned) in 1963
amounted to about 189,000 tons valued at £49 million, including 33,000 tons
of canned salmon to the value of ^21 million and other canned fish worth
£S-y million.
Weekly consumption of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish
and imported canned fish) in Britain averaged 15,200 tons landed weight in
1963. Consumption has been declining slightly; on an edible (fillet) weight
basis, it was estimated provisionally at 17-5 lb. per head in 1963, com¬
pared with 18-8 lb. in 1958, a peak total of 28-7 lb. in 1948 and an annual
average of 21-8 lb. from 1934-38.
346
Sea Fish
Processing
Freshwater
Fisheries
Distribution
System
Promotion and
Regulation of
the Industry
The Herring
Industry Board
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Processing and packaging of fish—curing, kippering, canning and quick-
freezing for consumer packs—are the subject of continuing research and
development. The production of quick-frozen fish has been increasing steadily
since 1952. With the increase in quick-freezing, new export outlets have opened
up for white fish, which in 1963 accounted for nearly half the total British
exports of fish and fish products, valued at ^7-7 million. Markets abroad for
quick-frozen fish, mainly in Europe, have been expanding; exports of herrings
have continued to decline.
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal for
animal food and to a much lesser extent for fertilisers. Home production of
white fish meal and herring meal has over the past three years remained
constant at around 72,000 tons per annum.
Whaling is regulated by the International Whaling Commission (of which
Britain is a member) set up under the International Whaling Convention of
1946. Its headquarters are in London. The last remaining British whaling
expedition has been disposed of to foreign interests.
The main commercial freshwater catches are salmon, sea-trout and eels. In
Scotland and Northern Ireland, fixed nets along the coast and sweep or
draught nets in rivers and estuaries are used; in England, drift nets are used
for catching salmon in the sea, and draught nets and fixed traps in estuaries.
In England and Wales the value of the salmon catch is approximately
£200,000 a year, in Scotland it amounts to nearly million, and in Northern
Ireland to some £250,000. In Northern Ireland, eels, worth about £200,000
a year, are captured by long lines and by eel nets placed in river weirs.
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate
Market in London, which handles about 300 tons a day, but other large
cities also have central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is
through wholesalers, located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell
to inland wholesalers; the port wholesalers prepare the fish for onward ship¬
ment. Many special express fish trains transport the catch daily from the
ports to inland centres, but increasing use is being made of road transport.
Retail sales are handled by some 25,000 to 30,000 fishmongers and fish friers;
the latter use about a third of the landings of white fish.
Recent developments include the entry of trawler-owning companies into
the system of distribution. This process is being speeded by the growing
popularity of quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold by other retail
outlets as well as by fishmongers.
The Government departments mainly responsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
and the Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland; the Ministry of Health
and the Scottish Home and Health Department are concerned with questions
of nutrition and hygiene affecting fish and fish products. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels are provided for under the Merchant
Shipping Acts, which are administered by the Ministry of Transport.
The Herring Industry Board was set up under the Herring Industry Act of
1935 to reorganise, develop and regulate the herring industry; subsequent
amending Acts have also been passed. The board consists of a chairman and
three other members, all part-time and independent of the industry, who are
appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
347
The White Fish
Authority
Subsidies
and Grants
Secretary of State for Scotland and the Home Secretary. The board, whose
activities are financed partly by levies and licence fees and partly by Govern¬
ment grants and loans is advised by the Herring Industry Advisory Council,
consisting of 33 members representing all sections of the industry and
consumers.
The functions of the board include the promotion of sales of herring, both
at home and abroad, and the application of the benefits of technical progress
to the industry, including the adoption of new methods of catching, processing
and distributing herring. The Board administers the Government grant
scheme which provides for assistance towards the purchase of new fishing
vessels and new engines for existing vessels. To supplement grants, fishermen
may also obtain loans from the Board towards the purchase of second-hand
vessels under 80 feet in length and towards the cost of new nets and gear.
£1,388,500 in loans and £389,000 in grants had been advanced up to 31st
March, 1964.
The White Fish Authority and the Committee for Scotland and Northern
Ireland of the Authority were set up under the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1951.
The function of the Authority is to reorganise, develop and regulate the white
fish industry, and that of the Committee to advise the Authority about the
exercise and performance of its functions in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The Authority is composed of six independent members, and the Scottish
Committee of five, under the chairmanship of a member of the Authority.
They are appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Home Secretary. The White
Fish Industry Advisory Council was also set up under the Sea Fish Industry
Act, 1951, to advise the Authority about the exercise and performance of its
functions. It consists of 48 members representing the various interests of the
fishing industry.
The White Fish Authority administers Government grant and loan
schemes for the purchase of new fishing vessels and engines and loans for
the purchase of nets and gear and processing plants. Up to 31st March, 1964,
£31-3 million in loans and £13-3 million in grants were approved for these
purposes by the Authority. Its other activities are financed by a levy on first¬
hand sales of fish.
Since 1950 a Government subsidy has been paid towards inshore, near and
middle water vessels fishing for white fish. This subsidy, now paid under
the White Fish and Herring Industries Act, 1953, varies according to the
class of vessel concerned and is paid at the rate of so much per day at sea for
the larger vessels and at so much per stone of fish landed from the smaller
boats. In 1963-64 the amount paid in this way was £4-4 million. The White
Fish and Herring Industries Act, 1957, extended the subsidy to vessels
fishing for herring, the conditions being broadly the same as for white fish
vessels. In 1963—64 the herring subsidy totalled £401,372. In addition to
the rate per day at sea or stoneage rate subsidy is payable, subject to certain
conditions, on herring sold for reduction to oil and meal. Grants and loans
are also available under these Acts for vessels and engines for the fishing
fleets. No subsidy is paid for shellfish but vessels fishing for them are eligible
for grants and loans.
The Sea Fish Industry Act, 1959, which came into operation in December
1959, provided for further funds for subsidies and grants, and the White
Fish’and Herring Industries Act, 1961, extended the white fish subsidy
348
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to vessels over 140 feet in length and to other vessels fishing distant
waters.
The Sea Fish Industry Act, 1962, passed in consequence of the report
of a Committee of Inquiry into the Fishing Industry, extended the scope of
these forms of aid and made provision for their continuance until the end of
1972. The Act, however, has special provisions for annual reductions in the
rates of white fish subsidy payable to vessels of 80 feet or over in length.
FORESTRY
The total woodland area of Great Britain is more than 4 million acres, or
over 7 per cent of the total land area. Except for the period of the two world
wars, when much over-felling took place, home woodlands have made only
a limited contribution to the nation’s timber requirements. At present,
Great Britain imports about 85 per cent of its needs of timber and wood
products; however, through the Forestry Commission, the Government is
successfully devoting effort to the long-term task of increasing the country’s
timber resources.
Forest Areas
TABLE 24
Classification of
Forest Area in
Great Britain
1963
On 30th September, 1963, the area of woodland in blocks of one acre and
over in extent was estimated to be 4-25 million acres, of which about half were
in England, about two-fifths in Scotland and the rest in Wales. The greatest
density of woodland in Great Britain occurs in north, east and central Scotland
and in the southern counties of England, although afforestation is now in¬
creasing the importance of forestry in many counties which were not
previously heavily wooded. The classification of forest area showing type and
ownership in 1963 is given in Table 24.
Thousands of acres
Forest Type
Forestry
Com¬
mission
wood¬
lands
Private
wood¬
lands®
Total
Per¬
centage
of total
forest
Mainly coniferous high forest. .
Mainly broadleaved high forest
Coppice and coppice with standards
Unproductive woodlands
Totals
1,311
138
26
71
698
748
291
963
2,009
886
317
1,034
1,546
2,700
4,246
48
21
7
24
100
Percentage of total forest area
36
64
100
Source: Forestry Commission.
a Forest owned by private individuals and bodies ; in this classification a small area of
communal forest is included, i.e. forest owned by public bodies such as local authorities
and water supply undertakings.
The high proportion of still unproductive woodland (scrub and areas
where trees have been felled and partially felled) is largely a legacy of two
wars, when many woods were felled to meet the need for timber. Since 1945
the area of this unproductive category has been reduced by about 275,000
acres, but the large area which remains gives some indication of the problem
of rehabilitation which still lies ahead.
The Forestry
Commission
and Forestry
Policy
Finance
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 349
The most common of the coniferous tree species in Great Britain is
probably the Scots pine, but such trees as the Sitka and Norway spruce are
also plentiful. Of the broadleaved species, the most common tree is the oak,
and there are considerable numbers of beech, ash, birch, sycamore and elm.
The climate and soil of Great Britain are such that the growth of timber
which can be obtained under systematic management compares most favour¬
ably with that achieved in other European countries.
In 1919 the Forestry Act was passed establishing the Forestry Commission
as the national forest authority, with the general duty of promoting the
interests of forestry, the development of afforestation and the production
and supply of timber in Great Britain. The commission consists of a chairman
and not more than nine commissioners who are appointed by the Crown;
in exercising their functions, they are required to comply with such directions
as may be given to them by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
and the Secretary of State for Scotland. There is close liaison between
the commission’s staff and private owners of woodland, and the staff gives
advice, free of charge, on silvicultural and management problems; substantial
grants for planting and forest management are paid to woodland owners.
In 1958 the Government decided that the planting programme of the
Forestry Commission for the five-year period 1959 to 1963 should be about
300,000 acres; after a further review of forest policy (promised in 1958),
the Government announced in July 1963 that over the decade 1964 to 1973
the Commission’s aim would be to plant another 450,000 acres.
The Commission manages some 500 forests, which together embrace more
than 1,750,000 acres of forest land, of which about 1,500,000 are under trees.
They are distributed over England, Scotland and Wales. All these forests are
covered by management plans, which provide for such work as planting, road
construction, thinning and fire protection.
A substantial amount of the Forestry Commission’s new planting has been
carried out in Scotland, much of it in the Highland counties. The poorer
types of land are being used, such as sour, peaty soil which is unsuitable for
other agricultural purposes, and has become suitable for forestry as a result
of recent advances in the technique of deep ploughing. Sand dunes are also
used to a limited extent: on the southern shore of the Moray Firth, Culbin
Forest now includes nearly 7,500 acres of plantations formed on dunes which
had been unstable for centuries. Similarly, in Wales, about 3,000 acres of
sand dunes at Mon, Anglesey, and nearly 2,000 acres at Pembrey, Carmarthen¬
shire, have been successfully planted.
By 1970 production of coniferous timber from Commission woodlands,
mainly in the way of trimmings, is expected to rise to 33 million hoppus feet
(1 hoppus foot equals 1 -237 cubic feet). By 1980 production will probably have
risen to 72 million hoppus feet. Much of this kind of produce is meeting
traditional requirements of the coal mines but a great deal is also going to
new wood-using industries, for instance, for the manufacture of particle
boards and paper pulp.
The Forestry Fund was established by the Forestry Act, 1919; from it is
paid all the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid
their receipts from sales of produce, rentals and other sources, together with
the amounts voted annually by Parliament. In the year ended 30th September,
1963, expenditure amounted to °f which nearly £1-2 million
represented various grants to private forestry.
35°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Forestry
Consultative
Machinery
Forestry
Education and
Research
Privately owned woods comprise about two-thirds of the total forest area in
Great Britain (as shown in Table 24), and contain most of the mature and
semi-mature timber. The size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges
from a few acres to several thousand acres, and a high proportion of private
woodland area is in small ownership (i.e. owners of up to about 250 acres).
Impetus has been given to the effective management of private woodlands
by the introduction of the Dedication of Woodlands Scheme under the
Forestry Act, 1947. Under this scheme, owners are invited to put their land
permanently to timber production and to manage their woods in accordance
with a plan agreed with the Forestry Commission, in return for the provision
of planting and management grants and technical assistance. By September
1963 the total area dedicated was 760,300 acres. In addition, there are the
woodlands covered by the Approved Woodlands Scheme in which a planting
grant, but no management grant, is made; and these bring the total area
managed under an agreed plan to over 922,000 acres. Woodland owners are
represented, in their relations with the Forestry Commission, by the Forestry
Committee of Great Britain, which co-ordinates the work of two associations
of woodland owners, the Timber Growers’ Organisation (for owners in
England and Wales) and the Scottish Woodland Owners’ Association.
The Forestry Commissioners have encouraged the development of co¬
operative forestry schemes. The co-operative societies provide for landowners
and farmers the services of skilled staff, centralised purchasing facilities, and
a central agency for the disposal of forest produce. The Commission also
co-operates with the principal forestry societies, such as the Royal Forestry
Society of England and Wales and the Royal Scottish Forestry Society, in
disseminating technical knowledge.
In 1959 the Home Grown Timber Marketing Corporation was established
by the timber merchants to promote the use of home grown timber.
The Forestry Act, 1945, established national committees for England,
Scotland and Wales, composed partly of Forestry Commissioners and partly of
persons outside the commission. These committees keep under review certain
aspects of the Commission’s work and matters concerning the development
of private forestry.
Other bodies have been set up to provide for consultation on the marketing
and utilisation of home grown timber. The Home Grown Timber Advisory
Committee, established by the Forestry Commissioners in 1939, includes
representatives of associations of landowners and timber merchants, under
an independent chairman. In 1949 the Forestry Commissioners set up the
Advisory Committee on Utilisation of Home Grown Timber to advise on
measures designed to promote the sale and utilisation of produce from
British woodlands. A voluntary scheme was agreed upon in 1961 for consulta¬
tion on proposals for afforestation of land within National Parks (see p. 183)
that has not previously been planted with trees. The Forestry Commission
agreed, and the Timber Growers’ Organisation and the Country Landowners’
Association undertook to advise their members, to submit such proposals to
the park planning authorities.
The Forestry Commission maintains four forester training schools: in
England, at Parkend in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire; in Wales, near
Betws-y-Coed in Caernarvonshire; and in Scotland at Benmore, Argyllshire,
and Faskally, near Pitlochry in Perthshire. Northerwood House in the New
Forest, Hampshire, is the Commission’s educational centre, and is used for
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
351
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
practical courses for university students, landowners and agents, planning
officers, school teachers and others connected with, or interested in, forestry.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities; a proportion
of suitable graduates is recruited by the commission as forest officers.
The Commission’s Forest Research Station at Alice Holt Lodge, near
Farnham, Surrey, was opened in 1946. Expenditure on research work at this
station and in experimental areas in many forests in Great Britain amounted
to £437,000 in 1963. This sum included grants for special forestry research
work to various institutions and to university departments including the
Imperial Forestry Institute at Oxford, which is also financed by the University,
the Colonial Office, and Colonial Governments. Research into the qualities
of home grown timber is carried out by the Forest Products Research
Laboratory at Princes Risborough, Bucks, which is one of the establishments
of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and also by grant-
aided research associations.
When the Government of Northern Ireland was formed in 1922, the new
Ministry of Agriculture became the forest authority working with similar
powers and duties to those conferred on the Forestry Commission by the
Forestry Act, 1919. At that time the Ministry took over some 4,000 acres
for afforestation, of which 700 acres had been planted.
Forest policy in Northern Ireland is now implemented by the Forestry Act
(Northern Ireland), 1953, which replaced earlier legislation. This Act pro¬
vides the Ministry with powers to acquire and manage land, and to give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. It introduced measures
for the protection of all woodlands, whether owned by the State or privately
owned, against destruction by over-cutting, fire or depredation by animals.
The State forest area has grown steadily and at a greatly accelerated pace
since the end of the second world war. By 1964 nearly 123,000 acres had been
acquired, of which about 72,000 acres had been planted. The present
afforestation programme provides for the creation, as soon as possible, of an
area of 150,000 acres of productive State forest. To reach this objective, a
minimum annual planting rate of 5,000 acres has been set.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and
from receipts from forest produce and other sources. From 1922 to 1964
net expenditure amounted to about £13 million. About 1,200 people are
employed in field labour and ancillary work. The area of exploitable private
woodlands is at present about 27,000 acres, and private planting, which is
gaining impetus, is assisted by schemes for the supply at a low cost of young
trees from the Ministry’s nurseries, by grants towards the cost of the estab¬
lishment of new plantations, and by free technical advice.
Pomeroy Forestry School at Pomeroy House, Co. Tyrone, provides
training and refresher courses for forestry workers, school teachers and
others interested in trees and forestry.
352
13
THE MERCHANT
FLEET
TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
Inland and overseas transport and communications employed 7-1 per cent
of the total labour force in the United Kingdom in June 1963. Of the 1,664,190
persons so occupied, 29-3 per cent were engaged in road passenger transport
and road haulage contracting, 25-1 per cent in railways and 20-1 per cent in
postal services and telecommunications. Sea and air transport absorbed
respectively 8 9 per cent and 2-8 per cent. Port and inland water transport
and miscellaneous transport services and storage absorbed 13-8 per cent.
Transport and communications contribute about 8 per cent to the gross
national product and are responsible for 9 per cent of the nation’s gross fixed
capital formation.
SHIPPING
Of the world’s active sea-going tonnage of too gross tons1 and over, 16-6 per
cent is registered in the United Kingdom. Although the British merchant
fleet is still the largest in active employment, British shipowners have been
subject to increasing competition from the growing fleets of other nations.
Between 1953 and 1963 the British merchant fleet increased by 16 per cent
from 18-6 million to 21 -6 million gross tons, while the total tonnage of all other
countries increased by 85-5 per cent, from 58-5 million to 108-6 million gross
tons. The balance of payments for shipping services was positive until about
1959 (it was minus £19 million in 1963). Shipping, however, still makes one of
the largest contributions to Britain’s total earnings of foreign exchange and in
1963 freights, charter receipts and passage money amounted to £665 million, or
about one-quarter of the total value of invisible exports. In recent years freight
earnings in cross-trade have amounted to about 60 per cent of total shipping
earnings. The proportion of the United Kingdom’s own sea-borne trade
carried in British ships is not known exactly, but is believed to amount to
about half.
Of the 216 million gross tons of merchant shipping of 100 gross tons a/id
over registered (though not all owned) in the United Kingdom on 30th June,
1963, a tonnage only a fraction less than the previous year’s record, tankers
constituted 7-8 million gross tons; this was 16-5 per cent of the world’s sea¬
going tanker tonnage and an increase over previous years.
Recent trends in the composition of the merchant fleet have been the
reduction of tramp tonnage other than specially built bulk carrier tonnage,
the growth of tanker tonnage, the increasing size of tankers, and the com¬
missioning of vessels specially built to carry ore, sugar, and other commodities
in bulk.
1 One gross ton (g.t.) = 100 cubic feet. One deadweight ton (d.w.t.) = 1 long ton
(2,240 lb.). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed spaces on a ship.
Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before
sinking to the load line.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
353
Modernisation,
Age and Size
Propulsion
Employment
of Shipping
SHIPOWNERS
As a result of replacements built in recent years, 60 per cent of the total
gross tonnage in 1963 was less than ten years old, compared with 45 per cent
in 1953. The corresponding figures for tankers were 77 per cent in 1963 and
60 per cent in 1953. There has been a tendency for replacements to be larger
because big ships are more economical to run; between 1953 and 1963 the
average size of all ships (over 500 gross tons) increased from 5,500 to 6,600
tons, and that of tankers (over 500 gross tons) from 9,200 to 13,200 gross tons.
In 1964 there were four liners from British shipyards of 30,000 gross tons
and over operating on transatlantic passenger services: namely, the Queen
Elizabeth (83,673 g.t.), the Queen Mary (81,237 g.t.), the Mauretania (35,673
g.t.), and the Caronia (34,173 g.t.). The two largest liners to be built in Britain
in recent years, the Oriana (42,000 g.t.) and the Canberra (45,000 g.t.), came
into service in i960 and 1961 respectively on the services from Britain to
Australia and across the Pacific to North America. A new liner, of about
58,000 g.t., is to be built for the Cunard Company with financial aid from the
Government. In June 1963, 40 tankers of 40,000 d.w.t. and over were owned
and registered in Britain (24 in June 1962) and of these, four were of 80,000
to 90,000 d.w.t.; there were a further 22 tankers of 40,000 d.w.t. and over on
order, of which one was of 80,000 d.w.t. and two of 100,000 d.w.t.
Steam has continued to give place to the diesel engine, 50-8 per cent of all
tonnage being diesel-driven in 1963. The virtual disappearance of coal-fired
tonnage from the foreign-going fleet has been accompanied by a continued
fall in the amount of coal-fired tonnage in the coasting and home trade tramp
fleet.
In June 1963, 17-2 million gross tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons
and over were both owned and registered in Britain.1 The usual employment
of this fleet has been analysed by the United Kingdom Chamber of Shipping
as follows: 7-8 million gross tons were employed as ocean-going passenger
and cargo liners; 3 million gross tons as ocean-going tramps; 5-5 million
gross tons as ocean-going tankers; and 0-9 million gross tons in coasting and
trade with ports between the Elbe and Brest (home trades).
About half of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom
consists of ocean-going passenger-cargo and cargo liners, mostly the latter.
Practically all these ships are owned by large liner companies or groups of
liner companies. Many of them operate wide networks of scheduled freight
and passenger services which, between them, cover every ocean. The 3 million
gross tons of ocean-going tramp ships are operated by a large number of
private owners, some of them having only a small number of ships and some
only one ship.
According to a survey published in 1959. the British shipping industry was
composed of some 270 companies, over half the tonnage being owned by
nine or ten main groups controlling about 50 companies. The many world-
famous British shipping lines operating services on international routes
include: the Cunard, to North America; the Royal Mail, to South America;
the Blue Funnel, to Australia and the Far East; the Peninsular and Oriental
(P. and 0.)-0rient and the British India lines, to India, Australia and the
1 The remaining tonnage included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary craft.
Admiralty vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carnage of
cargo, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in other Commonwealth countries
(including over 978,000 gross tons of tankers).
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Far East; the Union Castle, to South and East Africa; Elder Dempster, to
West Africa; Furness Withy, to North America and the West Indies; the
New Zealand line, to North America, Australia and New Zealand; and Shaw
Savill and Albion, to Australia and New Zealand.
Over two-thirds of the total tanker fleet belongs to the oil companies,
although there are a few important independent United Kingdom tanker¬
owning companies. A new type of specialised bulk carrier—the ore-carrier—
is in use on a substantial scale; some of the ore-carriers are partly owned by
companies in the steel industry, but are managed and operated by shipping
companies.
Since the end of the second world war shipowners have received no direct
financial assistance from the Government. For some years, however, the
Government has recognised that the shipping industry is faced with severe
competition from foreign shipping, some of which is operated with consider¬
able tax advantages. The investment allowance for capital expenditure on
the construction of new ships was raised to 40 per cent in 1957. (In other
industries there has been since 1962 an investment allowance of 30 per cent
plus an initial allowance of 10 per cent on plant and machinery.) To assist the
shipbuilding industry the Government introduced in 1963 a Shipbuilding
Credit Scheme, whereby £75 million has been made available to British ship¬
owners, at Government lending rates, for financing the building of ships in
British yards. Of this sum, a maximum of £17-6 million was allocated for the
new Cunard liner due to come into service on the transatlantic route in 1967.
The total of £75 million had been fully allocated by the end of 1963.
SHIPPING
ORGANISATIONS
Lloyd's Register
of Shipping
Shipowners' and
Shippers'
Organisations
Employers'
Organisations
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s, see
p. 410) which surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their
safety and operational efficiency. It will accept responsibility for surveying
and giving technical advice on vessels of all flags from the initial stages of
building, at regular intervals during their service, and after casualties. A
satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an underwriter that he may
accept the risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between the Register
and the Society of Lloyd’s.
The representative body speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for
the most part, owners of fishing vessels) is the Chamber of Shipping.
There are a number of local associations of shipowners centred around the
main port areas, for example, the Liverpool Steamship Owners' Association, the
Bristol Steamship Owners' Association, the London General Shipowners' Society,
and the North of England Shipowners' Association. Others represent companies
specialising in a particular trade or type of cargo.
The British Shippers' Council was formed in 1955 to represent the shipping
interests of exporters and importers in matters of both national and inter¬
national concern.
The Shipping Federation and the Employers' Association of the Port of Liverpool
are the employers’ organisations concerned with labour relations and the
regulation of employment throughout the Merchant Navy. They are res¬
ponsible for the administration of the Merchant Navy Established Service
Scheme, under which shipowners engaging crews for ships of 200 gross tons
and above engage them through the Merchant Navy Establishment Adminis¬
tration unless they are prepared to offer two-year Company Service contracts.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
355
Seafarers’
Organisations
The National
Maritime Board
Conferences
The Baltic
Exchange
RELATIONS
WITH THE
GOVERNMENT
The Shipping Federation is also responsible for the day-to-day operation of
the National Sea Training Schools, administered under the National Sea
Training Trust, which train ratings for the deck and catering departments
and as firemen.
Shipmasters are represented by the Mercantile Marine Service Association',
navigating officers, engineer officers, apprentices, cadets, pursers and ships’
surgeons by the Merchant Navy and Airline Officers’ Association', and radio
officers by the Radio Officers’ Union. Some uncertificated engineer officers are
represented by the Amalgamated Engineering Union. The interests of the deck,
engine-room and catering ratings are represented by the National Union of
Seamen.
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representa¬
tives of the shipowners and seafarers and is responsible for all negotiations
of wages and conditions of service in the Merchant Navy, although, except
by special arrangement, National Maritime Board agreements do not apply
to vessels of under 200 gross tons, or to certain other ships, including tugs
and salvage vessels. Detailed working of the board is carried on by a number
of ‘panels’ representing the various interests of those forming the seafarers’
part of the board.
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other
and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in
a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of
rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential
principle of a conference is the establishment of a common tariff of freight
rates or passenger fares from each port of departure. Each conference meets
from time to time to review and revise existing rates, or to compile new ones.
Some of the conferences are connected by rate agreements, or have joined
together to form wider groupings. There are over 60 conferences dealing
with trade to and from the United Kingdom.
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of
London’s seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world s largest market
for the chartering of ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’
representatives meet here to arrange the chartering of dry-cargo tramp ships
for the carriage of goods to and from all parts of the world.
The Ministry of Transport is the Government department responsible for
most matters connected with merchant shipping. Under the Merchant
Shipping Act of 1894 and subsequent legislation, it administers many
regulations for marine safety and welfare, for instance: certifying the load-
line (or Plimsoll line) that ensures that a ship is not overloaded; ensuring that
standards of safety are observed in ship construction; ensuring the provision
of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and radio equipment; and dealing with
the discipline, professional standards, health and accommodation of seamen.
Most of the work which these responsibilities entail is carried out by the
officers of the Marine Survey and Mercantile Marine at the ports. There is
also a Registrar-General of Shipping and Seamen in whose office at Cardiff
a complete record of all British ships and seamen is kept. The Afimstry is
represented on the Merchant Navy Welfare Board and on the Merchant
Navy Training Board (see p. 357). The Ministry fosters the development
and use of modern navigational aids.
The Ministry of Transport arranges for the provision of space in merchant
356
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lighthouses,
Pilotage and
Rescue
THE MERCHANT
NAVY
ships to meet the sea transport needs of the armed forces and looks after
ships that it owns or has chartered. It is concerned with general shipping
policy and the strategic implications of the Merchant Navy; and it is also
the sponsoring department for the shipbuilding, ship repairing and marine
engineering industries.
Abroad, certain parts of the Merchant Shipping Acts, in particular those
provisions dealing with the engagement and discharge of crews outside the
United Kingdom, are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers of
Commonwealth and Colonial Governments.
A Shipping Advisory Panel advises the Minister of Transport on commercial
and economic matters affecting the prosperity of British shipping.
Britain is a party to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention
of the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. The nations
which have ratified this convention agree to prohibit their national fleets
from persistent discharging of oil within 5° miles of any coast and also in
extensive areas of the Atlantic Ocean, the North Sea and around Australia.
Amendments to the Convention were agreed at an international conference
held in London in 1962. British ships registered in the United Kingdom were
already prohibited from discharging oil within a wide zone of the sea around
the United Kingdom under the Oil in Navigable Waters Act, 1955 (the
discharge of oil from any source into United Kingdom territorial waters and
harbours was first prohibited in 1922); a further Act was passed in 1963 giving
effect to the amendments agreed at the 1962 conference.
The Ministry of Transport administers the Coastguard Service. This is
primarily a life-saving organisation which keeps watch at danger points around
the coast for vessels in distress and renders assistance either by rocket life¬
saving apparatus or by informing other authorities who may be able to give
help. There is close liaison between the Coastguard Service and the Royal
National Life-boat Institution. The latter maintains lifeboats and fast inshore
rescue boats around the coast of the United Kingdom; it is supported entirely
by voluntary contributions, and depends largely for its operation on voluntary
workers. From its foundation in 1824 to the end of 1963 the Royal National
Life-boat Institution saved 84,594 lives. Lifeboats and inshore rescue boats
were launched 824 times in 1963, and rescued 364 people.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel
Islands and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received its
first Royal Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a Board
of ten Elder Brethren, elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Navy.
Lighthouses in Scotland and Ireland are the responsibility respectively of
the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses and the Commissioners of Irish
Lights.
Trinity House is also the chief pilotage authority, licensing some 750 pilots
in 41 districts in England and Wales, including London. In some cases the
harbour authority or local council is the pilotage authority. The Ministry of
Transport also has certain responsibilities in connection with lighthouses and
pilotage.
The number of masters, officers and men serving in December 1963 in
British ships on articles of agreement opened or closed in the United Kingdom
was 125,000. Masters and deck and engineer officers numbered 40,000 and
deck and engine-room ratings 39,000. There were 34,000 catering personnel,
nearly 6,000 apprentices and cadets and 3,000 radio officers.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
357
Qualifications
Conditions of
Employment
and Welfare
PORTS
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies at
sea of apprentices and cadets who are preparing for their examinations for
certificates of competency as second mate.
The Ministry of Transport holds examinations for, and issues certificates
of competency to, ships’ officers as master, first mate and second mate of
foreign-going ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as first-class
engineer and second-class engineer. Officers may not normally serve on
board ships in these grades unless they hold the appropriate, or a higher,
certificate.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of competency in radio¬
telegraphy issued by the Postmaster General on the results of an open
examination.
A seaman may not be rated as A.B. (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom
registered ships unless he holds a certificate of competency as A.B., granted
by the Ministry of Transport, or an equivalent certificate. To obtain this
certificate a seaman must, among other qualifications, have served three years
at sea on deck, have obtained a certificate of efficiency as lifeboatman and
have passed a qualifying examination.
Seamen qualify by seniority for promotion to the rating of petty officer.
Service as a deck rating qualifies for the purpose of admission to the examina¬
tion for a second mate’s certificate.
Wages and conditions of employment are negotiated by the National Maritime
Board. Minimum wages and holidays with pay are guaranteed for both officers
and ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme,
introduced by the Board in 1947, has removed a great deal of the uncertainty
formerly associated with a seafaring life. Officers and men can now take
two-year contracts, not only with individual shipping companies but
with the industry as a whole, and get special benefits, in addition to
the normal unemployment insurance benefit, when they are ashore between
voyages.
The Merchant Navy Welfare Board, on which are represented officers’ and
seamen’s unions and associations, shipowners, voluntary societies, the
Ministries of Transport, Labour, and Pensions and National Insurance, and
the Colonial Office, has been responsible since 1948 for the control and
co-ordination of the welfare services for merchant seamen in the United
Kingdom and of British merchant seamen abroad.
There are over 300 ports in Britain. It is estimated that 1387 million tons of
imports passed through the ports in 1963) an<^ 3^'5 million tons of exports
and re-exports, including 10 million tons of coal.
Under the provisions of the Harbours Act, 1964, the National Ports Council
was set up as a statutory body (it had originally been established in the previous
year as a non-statutory body). The functions of the Council are primarily
advisory, and the executive powers needed to enforce its recommendations
are vested in the Minister of Transport. The Council’s main task is to
formulate comprehensive plans for the modernisation of harbour facilities
in Great Britain, but any harbour development schemes of a substantial
nature have first to be authorised by the Minister. The intention is that ports
should operate as commercial undertakings but Government financial
assistance will be available, mainly in the form of loans at rates of interest
below the market level, to a total of £50 million (though there are provisions
in the Act for an extension to a total of £100 million).
358
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Minister of Transport may confirm schemes, whether suggested to
him by the National Ports Council or by individual harbour authorities, for
the amalgamation of ports in certain areas or for the amalgamation into
single bodies of various authorities and employers in certain ports.
The Port of London, with 92 miles of waterway and over 4,000 acres of
dock estate, including 42 miles of quayage, is the largest port in the Common¬
wealth, and with New York and Rotterdam is one of the three largest ports
in the world. Goods of every kind, from meat to marble, from plywood to
perfume, pass through the docks; over 58 million tons of cargo were handled
in the year ending in March 1963. Imports are distributed all over the United
Kingdom, though the port supplies, primarily, Greater London and the home
counties. The Thames Navigation Service, operating from Gravesend,
provides navigational surveillance and information, by means of radar and
radiotelephone and other methods, for vessels between the estuary and
London Bridge.
Liverpool is the second largest port and the major export cargo outlet of
the United Kingdom. The port handles one-sixth of Britain’s grain imports,
and has one of the largest grain-handling plants in Europe. There are tobacco
warehouses with a capacity of 200,000 casks, and for wool imports, a warehouse
with a capacity of 60,000 bales. In 1963, 8-2 million tons of imports (excluding
petroleum and cattle) passed through the port. Full use of the new terminal
at Tranmere raised imports of oil from under a million tons in i960 to 8-i
million tons in 1963, and crude oil is now the major commodity entering the
port of Liverpool. In 1948 the Harbour Board was the first in the world to
install radar to cover its sea channels.
Manchester is an inland port, access to which is by the Manchester Ship
Canal. Petroleum is both the main import and export. At Eastham is the
largest oil dock in the United Kingdom, covering 19 acres.
Southampton is the chief port for ocean passenger traffic, and the principal
port for imports of deciduous and citrus fruits. Southampton’s value as a
port is enhanced by its deep water, double tides and its easy access to London.
A considerable volume of oil for the refinery at Fawley (see p. 279) is handled.
Newcastle upon Tyne and the other Tyne ports serve the industrial north¬
east of England and comprise the most important coal-shipping and largest
ship repairing centre in the country.
Hull, on the Humber estuary, serves particularly the industrial centres of
Yorkshire and the Midlands, and is one of the largest white fish ports in
the world. Other imports are grain, timber and oil.
Middlesbrough is one of the largest importing centres in Britain for iron
ore, and exports mainly steel and engineering products.
Swansea has the largest trade of the group of ports serving South Wales.
As well as coal, Swansea exports the steel and tinplate manufactured in its
immediate neighbourhood. It is also an important oil port.
Newport (Monmouthshire) is one of Britain’s principal ore-importing centres.
Bristol and nearby Avonmouth serve the industrial Midlands as well as the
city of Bristol itself, and also have a large coastal trade. About 7^ million tons
of cargo are handled annually, including a quarter of Britain’s banana imports
and one-fifth of its tobacco imports. There are also extensive oil installations.
Glasgow, the principal Scottish port, serves as an entrepot centre for the
industrial area of central Scotland, and is the principal outlet for exports of
Scotch whisky.
Grangemouth, Scotland’s second port, is associated particularly with oil
and timber.
NEW BRITISH AIRCRAFT
The VC 10,
long-range
airliner.
The Trident,
short-medium
haul airliner.
l
The BAC One-Eleven,
world’s first short-haul jet airliner.
il
Operator assembling a Milliard transistor.
Modern industry tends to extremes.
The machine dwarfs the men (opposite)
but still demands the highest degree
of precision engineering and skill.
Miniaturisation (above) lies at the
other end of the scale.
<41
An English Electric 500 megawatt steam turbine being
dismantled for delivery after completing tests.
THE BANK OF ENGLAND
Founded in 1694, the Bank
of England has been on the
same site since 1743. The
present buildings were
completed in 1939
Scene outside the Bank
on the announcement of
a change in bank rate.
Developments
Ownership
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 359
Leith is the port of the city of Edinburgh. The chief import is grain and
the main export coal from the Lothian coalfields.
Belfast is the principal port of Northern Ireland and handles the main
traffic across the Irish Sea.
Other important ports are Immingham and Cardiff.
The National Ports Council’s first studies are to be concerned with harbour
facilities in the Firth of Forth and South Wales. Other ports and areas for
which a high degree of priority was recommended in the Report of the
Committee of Inquiry into the Major Ports of Britain (Rochdale Committee)
are Tilbury, Southampton, Leith, the Tees (including Middlesbrough and
Hartlepools docks), the Clyde, the Humber and the Upper Bristol Channel.
Annual expenditure on port improvement projects has averaged about
^23 million in recent years. Among the most important in 1963 were a new
dry dock, quay and tanker-cleaning installation at Greenock, on the Firth of
Clyde (£4 million); improvements to the oil basin in Avonmouth Docks at
Bristol (nearly fz million); and reconstruction of the St. Katharine Dock
House in London (£1 million). Work is in progress on a new dry dock at
Glasgow and on improvements to the Tilbury Docks in London, both of which
projects are expected to be completed in 1965; they will cost ^1-3 million and
fx million respectively. A £5 million improvement scheme for Hull Docks is
in hand, as is a .£ 1 • 5 million scheme for a new cargo and passenger terminal
at Southampton Docks.
Since 1948 about a third of the total port capacity has been in public owner¬
ship. Under the provisions of the Transport Act, 1962, the majority of these
ports are managed by the British Transport Docks Board (see p. 363). The
ports of Cardiff, Hull, Swansea, Immingham, Grangemouth and Southampton
are among those controlled by the Docks Board; the conservancy authorities
at Southampton and Hull are the Southampton Harbour Board and the
Humber Conservancy Board respectively.
Certain ports and docks used largely for the cross-channel services of the
railways are administered by the British Railways Board: examples of these are
Folkestone, Holyhead, Heysham, Stranraer and Parkeston Quay (at Harwich).
In 1963 shipping arrivals and departures at British Transport docks, at
which 12,000 were employed at the end of that year, totalled 52 million net
tons, and the total cargo handled was about 86 million tons.
Other ports are controlled by public trusts on which are represented users
of the port (such as shippers, importers and shipping companies) and other
bodies, such as local authorities. Examples are London (controlled by the
Port of London Authority), Liverpool (Mersey Docks and Harbour Board),
Belfast (Belfast Harbour Commissioners) and Glasgow (Clyde Navigation
Trust). The Port of London Authority has 28 members, nominated by
Government departments, local authorities, port users and the Corporation
of Trinity House. A few ports—Bristol is the most important example—are
owned by the town or city council and controlled entirely by a committee
of the council. Finally, there are about 100 ports which are privately owned.
Manchester is the only major port so owned—by the Manchester Ship Canal
Company—and here the Manchester City Council exercises considerable
control by appointing 11 of the company’s 21 directors.
The powers and responsibilities of the port authorities are, in the main,
set down in private Acts of Parliament. A model set of clauses dealing with
many of the details is set out in the Harbours, Docks and Piers Act, 1847.
36°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Labour
Tanker
Terminals
Most ports are represented on the Dock and Harbour Authorities' Associa¬
tion, formed in 1917 to represent the common interests of port authorities
in their relations with Government, shipowners and traders.
There are about 125,500 people employed in the operation of ports in the
United Kingdom. Just under half of these are administrative, clerical and
technical staff, and pilots, lightermen and customs officials. Over half are the
dock workers (popularly called ‘dockers’) who do the physical handling of cargo.
Shipping arrivals and departures do not all conform to a regular schedule,
with the result that there is sometimes too much work for the dock workers
available, sometimes too little. Dock labour was therefore largely casual
labour until 1941, when war-time schemes were introduced to control the
port registers of employers and workers. The war-time arrangements were
superseded in 1947 by a permanent scheme administered by the National
Dock Labour Board, which consists of a chairman, vice-chairman, and eight
members appointed by the Minister of Labour, four to represent employers
and four to represent employees. Workers on the board’s registers now
receive a guaranteed minimum wage for attendance, even when there is no
work available. The National Joint Council for the Port Transport Industry
agreed in 1959 to a pension scheme which came into operation in January
1961. Proposals for further ‘decasualisation’ are being considered by the
National Joint Council.
Most of the oil tankers coming to the United Kingdom to discharge crude
oil are berthed at special tanker terminals which are near the oil refineries
and are owned and operated by the oil companies. The maximum deadweight
tonnage of tankers that some of the most important terminals can accommodate
is: Finnart (West of Scotland) 100,000; Isle of Grain (Thames estuary) 42,000;
Coryton (London) 45,000; Tilbury Reach (London) 47,000; Thames Haven
(London) 60,000; Tranmere (Liverpool) 65,000; Milford Haven (Pembroke)
100,000; and Fawley (Southampton) 65,000. Long pipelines connect Finnart
with the refinery at Grangemouth on the Firth of Forth, and Angle Bay
(Milford Haven) with the refinery at Llandarcy (near Swansea).
New terminals for crude oil are being built at Milford Haven and on the
river Tees, whilst the capacity of existing terminals on the Thames and at
Southampton is also being increased by dredging.
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain1 is carried mainly
by road and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, inland
waterways are important in carrying certain types of freight, particularly
bulk cargoes.
Part of the inland transport system of Great Britain is nationalised; namely,
the railways, passenger transport in the London area, certain road haulage
and road passenger services, most of the inland waterways and some of the
vessels on them. Many local authorities and private firms run road passenger
services, while road haulage is largely, and coastal shipping entirely, in the
hands of private enterprise.
Table 25 gives comparative figures relating to the carrying activities of the
nationalised transport undertakings in Great Britain. At the end of 1963 the
1 For an account of inland transport in Northern Ireland, see p. 376.
Long-term
Trends in
Transport and
Traffic
NATIONALISED
TRANSPORT
Transport
Legislation,
*947-56
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 361
nationalised sector owned 15 per cent of the 96,000 public road passenger
vehicles and over 2 per cent of the 1,585,000 road goods vehicles in use.
British Railways and Road Services and London Transport were responsible
for 43 per cent of the 14,369 million passenger journeys made in public
passenger vehicles in 1963. In May 1964 there were nearly 7-4 million motor
cars and 1-5 million motor cycles, scooters and mopeds licensed for use on the
roads.
A sample survey of goods transport by road was made by the Ministry
of Transport in 1962. It showed that 81 per cent of the total tonnage carried
in that year (estimated at 1,540 million tons) went by road, while in terms of
ton-mileage1 * the proportion was 55 per cent. The railways accounted for
15 per cent of all tonnage carried and 26|- per cent of the ton-mileage. The
proportions for coastal shipping were 3-J per cent and 18 per cent, and for
inland waterways slightly less than 1 per cent of the total tonnage. A previous
survey in 1958 had already shown that road transport had become the major
means of inland carriage of goods whatever unit of measurement was used.
In terms of ton-mileage, transport by road exceeded that by rail for the
first time in 1955; three years later it was responsible for 47 per cent of the
total ton-mileage (against 35 per cent for rail) and a further expansion in
1959 resulted in it accounting for over half the total.
The rapid growth of private and commercial motor traffic, causing congestion
problems of increasing severity, especially in cities and towns, and the changing
pattern of demand for transport services have led the Government to under¬
take a series of long-term studies of probable trends in transport and problems
which may arise therefrom. A survey of needs for inland transport facilities
over the next 20 years (the Hall report, published in March 1963) envisaged
an annual rate of increase in total traffic of 4 10 5 Per cenll a large rise in
ownership of private cars by 1980; and a further switch of goods traffic from
rail to road. A systematic assessment of the future of the railway system was
also published in the same month (the Beeching report, see p. 367).
The study group set up to make an independent report on the long-term
problems of traffic in urban areas issued its report (the Buchanan report) in
November 1963. It estimated that Britain would have 40 million vehicles on
its roads by a.d. 2010 and proposed radical measures to rebuild and adapt
cities and roads to handle the growth of traffic. To help in assessing future
needs, comprehensive transport surveys of the large conurbations are being
made or will be made by the Government.
The present role and structure of the nationalised transport undertakings are
the result of a series of legislative measures passed over the last 16 years.
On 1 st January, 1948, in accordance with the provisions of the Transport
Act of 1947, the British Transport Commission (BTC), came into being and
assumed control of Britain’s railways, all railway-owned steamships, docks,
hotel and road transport interests, most of the country’s canals (including all
those owned by the railways), certain rivers (as navigation authority) and the
whole of the London passenger transport system. In addition, the BTC
was to arrange for the gradual acquisition of privately owned long-distance
road haulage firms. Road passenger transport outside London was not taken
1 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual distance
it was transported.
362
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
over, but the BTC was given powers to prepare area schemes for co-ordinating
passenger services by road and rail, including power to acquire road passenger
undertakings for this purpose. A considerable amount of road haulage,
several waterways and many docks were left outside the Commission s scope.
The Conservative Government which took office in 1951 announced a new
policy for the operation of public transport, including decentralisation of the
railway administration, greater freedom to adopt normal commercial practice
(particularly in charging), the partial return of long-distance road haulage to
private enterprise, and the revocation of the commission s power to make
schemes for the co-ordination of road and rail passenger services. The policy
was put into effect by the Transport Act of 1953, and the actual reorganisation
of the BTC was completed by 1st January, 1955. A further Act, the Transport
(Disposal of Road Haulage Property) Act, 1956, provided for the completion
of the denationalisation of road haulage.
TABLE 25
Nationalised
Inland Transport
Undertakings
Operating and
Revenue Statistics
for Main Services
British Railways
Road Haulage
British
Road Services
Road Passenger
Services
Provincial
and Scottish
London Transport
Railways <
Road Services
Inland
Waterways
1955
1960
1963
1955
1960
1963
1955
1960
1963
1955
1960
1963
1955
1960
1963
1955
1960
1963
19,061
18,369
16,982
228
228
216
3,021
3,119
3,162
l,430e
1,236*
1,178*
P-i
20,308
21,547
19,575
11,172
10,126
n.a.
3,469
3,204
3,075
7,656
5,942
5,575
•M U
& M w
K a
1-40
1-68
1-97
1-17
1-47
n.a.
1-42
1- 97
2- 51
1- 67
2- 30
2-63
W c
'5 ^
u
b
21,353
18,650
16,537
23*
16*
n.a.
184
169
148
£
& ^3
3 K
c 's
GO -M -s;
577
519
476
56
36
35
59
57
58
90*
77d
74d
(/)
4-* 4-*
cv
tii •-* £
453-9
478-6
463-1
55-7
55-5
65-0
54-3
62-2
70-7
21-0
26-4
32-1
53-2
56-9
61-1
1-0
1-0
0-8
a Estimated sum of miles paid for by each passenger.
b Freight carried (in long tons of 2,240 lb.),
multiplied by distance travelled in miles.
* Freight carried (in long tons of 2,240 lb.).
d Figures refer to all London Transport.
* Figures refer to miles of canal in commercial use.
Source: Report and Accounts
of Nationalised Transport
Undertakings.
The British
Transport
Commission
Reorganisation
Under the
Transport Act
of 1962
Statutory Boards
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 3^3
The British Transport Commission (whose members were appointed by and
responsible to the Minister of Transport) was a policy-making and not a
managing body. Management functions were carried out by seven divisions,
corresponding to various activities, namely: British Railways, British Road
Services, the Tilling Bus Group, the Scottish Omnibus Group, British
Transport Docks, British Waterways, and British Transport Hotels and
Catering Services.
The London Transport Executive was established by the Transport Act,
1947, as an agent of the BTC to operate road passenger transport and the
underground railways in the London area.
The BTC was required to submit an annual report and statement of
accounts to the Minister, who laid it before Parliament. The Commission
was under obligation to cover its outgoings, taking one year with another,
but during the period of railway modernisation it was permitted to carry
forward the deficits arising on British Railways. Meanwhile, in order to meet
financial needs during the critical years of reconstruction, the Government,
under the Transport (Railway Finances) Act, 1957, and the Transport
(Borrowing Powers) Act, 1959, was empowered to make repayable advances
to the Commission of up to ^400 million to meet the annual revenue deficits
until 1962. From the financial year 1960-61 these deficits were met by the
Exchequer from revenue and are not repayable advances. The Commission s
ordinary borrowing powers (i.e. excluding those to meet deficits) had been
limited to £1,200 million.
The Transport Act, 1962, gave effect to the Government’s policy, set out
in the White Paper on the Reorganisation of the Nationalised Transport
Undertakings. The Government concluded that the activities of the British
Transport Commission were so large and diverse that they could not be run
effectively as a single undertaking. The commercial capacity of the railways
was circumscribed by outmoded statutory obligations and restrictions on
their trading operations. Mounting deficits, the size of the capital debt in
relation to the earning capacity of the assets and the increasing burden of
interest as modernisation proceeded, were detrimental to the morale of
railwaymen, to financial control, and to hopes of recovery. The Government
therefore proposed that each of the main activities of the Commission should
be managed by a separate board, holding its own assets and responsible for
its own capital debt.
The Transport Act, 1962, dissolved the BTC1 and set up four boards for
British Railways, London Transport, British Transport Docks and British
Waterways, each of which is responsible directly to the Minister of Transport,
who appoints the members. Road passenger and haulage undertakings, such
as British Road Services, the Tilling Bus Group, the Scottish Omnibus
Group, Road Freight Shipping Services, Thomas Cook and Son and other
holdings, are operated as companies incorporated under the Companies Act,
with their own boards; they are grouped under a Transport Holding Company,
responsible to the Minister of Transport, who appoints its directors. The
hotel property of the BTC was transferred to British Transport Hotels Ltd.,
a wholly owned subsidiary, first of the BTC and later of the British Railways
Board.
The cross-channel shipping services operated by British Railways and
certain ports and docks used for them passed to the British Railways Board.
1 The BTC remained in existence until 1st January, 1964, to facilitate the transfer of
its foreign assets to the new boards.
364
Duties and Rights
of the Boards
Financial Changes
Nationalised
Transport Advisory
Council
Transport Tribunal
Transport Users'
Consultative
Committees
Coastal Shipping
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Each board is required to conduct its business so as to pay its way, taking
one year with another, and to set up general reserves. The Railways Board
and the British Waterways Board may receive financial assistance from the
Exchequer for five years from vesting date. All the boards may borrow up to
specified limits from the Minister with the approval of the Treasury. The
Act facilitates operations on a commercial basis by conferring on the boards
powers to sell or develop their land and to construct and operate pipelines,
and by freeing them from controlled charges schemes. Except for railway
passenger fares in the London Passenger Transport area, certain harbour
charges and road passenger fares in an area including London, the boards
are free to fix the rates charged for their services. The boards are also released
from common carrier obligations as regards carriage by rail or inland
waterway.
The Treasury assumed responsibility for outstanding British Transport
stock (amounting to about ^1,45° million), so that interest on this debt is
now met out of taxation instead of the BTC’s receipts. The Treasury
also became responsible for Exchequer advances for capital purposes, which
amounted to about £690 million by the end of 1962, and for about ^300
million lent to the BTC since 1957 to meet revenue deficits. Altogether, the
community as a whole took over liabilities for debt amounting to about
£2,440 million.
A Nationalised Transport Advisory Council of up to twelve members has
been established to advise the Minister on questions relating to the co¬
ordination, or any other aspect, of the nationalised transport undertakings.
At present the Minister presides over the council.
The Transport Tribunal, set up under the 1947 Act, had jurisdiction over
the charges schemes governing maximum charges which the British Transport
Commission could make in respect of all its activities save road services. It
could also hear appeals arising from applications for road haulage (goods
vehicles) licences. Under the 1962 Act, the tribunal sits in two divisions, one
having jurisdiction over London rail and road fares and the other continuing
to hear appeals relating to road carriers’ licences.
The 1947 Act set up a structure of Area Transport Users’ Consultative Com¬
mittees which could consider criticisms of nationalised transport services and
suggestions made for improving them. The Area Committees sent their
findings to the Central Transport Consultative Committee which could make
formal recommendations. Where it did so, the Minister had power to give
directions to the BTC. The committees continue under the 1962 Act, with
some changes in functions and membership. In particular, they have been
given a principal role in a new statutory procedure which the Railways Board
and the London Transport Board have to follow when they want to close a
railway passenger service. When a closure is proposed, the area committee
concerned considers objections from users and reports to the Minister on any
hardship which is likely to arise. The Minister considers the area committee’s
report and decides whether, bearing in mind all the issues involved, he should
consent to the closure.
The main features of the previous safeguards for coastal shipping were that a
complaint might be made on behalf of coastal shipping to the Transport
Tribunal if charges made or proposed by the railways in competition with
coastal shipping place coastal carriers at an unfair disadvantage, or were in¬
adequate in relation to the cost of the service provided. The 1962 Act provides
that complaints of this kind can be made to the Minister.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
RAILWAYS
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
Operations
365
Britain was the pioneer of railways. The opening of the Stockton to Darlington
Railway in 1825, an^ °f the Liverpool and Manchester line in 1830, when
George Stephenson’s famous ‘Rocket’ locomotive was used, began a century
of widespread railway development. The great period of railway building
was from 1840 to 1875, with a short lull following the collapse of the specula¬
tive railway boom in 1846.
During the first world war, the railways came under centralised Govern¬
ment direction through a Railway Executive Committee. This experience
emphasised the need for concentration and a reorganisation of the whole
rail system. The Railways Act of 1921 amalgamated some 130 private
companies into four large regional groups: the London, Midland and Scottish;
London and North Eastern; Great Western; and Southern. In the 1920s and
1930s the railways suffered from the prolonged industrial depression and the
growing competition from road transport. The causes of road competition were
twofold: first, motor transport often offered cheaper and better facilities;
secondly, the statutory regulation of the railways’ charging system resulted in
the loss of some lucrative traffic and the forced retention of unprofitable traffic.
In 1938 the railways made proposals for relief from statutory regulation of
charges, but the outbreak of war in 1939 postponed action and the railways
again became controlled by the Government; at the end of the war the
railways were returned to the control of the regional groups for a brief period.
The Transport Act of 1947 brought the railways under public ownership as
a single enterprise, British Railways. It was grouped in six regional sub¬
divisions and operated under the overall management of a Railway Executive
established as the agent of the BTC.
The 1953 Transport Act abolished the Railway Executive and provided
for decentralisation of the administration. The operation of British Railways
was placed in the hands of six area boards (the areas corresponding with the
former regions). The general manager of each board was responsible for
day-to-day management but matters affecting general policy were reserved
to the Transport Commission.
It became clear, however, that even under this arrangement the organ¬
isation of the Commission, with responsibility for diverse transport
undertakings, was too unwieldy. The Transport Act, 1962, therefore set up
a new board—the British Railways Board—with sole responsibility for
managing railway affairs. Under the Act the railways were also relieved of
much of their burden of accumulated debt and were given freedom to alter
their charges at will, except for passenger fares in the London area. The
Board came into existence on 1st January, 1963. Its responsibilities for the
operation of the various parts of the system are delegated to six regional
boards.
Statistics relating to the operations and traffic revenue of British Railways are
given in Table 25. The number of passenger miles travelled increased between
1955 and i960; but there was a fall in 1963, compared with i960. The urban
and suburban passenger commuting services for London and other large
conurbations carry about 2| million passengers a day, mainly to and from
their work in brief rush hour periods. These services account for about half
the annual total of 1,000 million passengers on British Railways. The number
of freight ton-miles carried decreased by 23 per cent between 1955 and 1963.
Traffic revenue increased, partly owing to increases in fares and freight
charges.
366
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Capital Expenditure
Progress in
Modernisation
Electric and Diesel
Traction
British Transport Hotels Ltd. own refreshment rooms at 309 stations and
also 37 hotels. Gross receipts for 1963 were ^24-6 million. At 67 of the
stations, tenants operate refreshment services.
Because of the economic difficulties of the early 1930s, the strain of the war
years, and the numerous post-war claims on national resources, for many
years it had not been possible for the railways to carry out any large modern¬
isation schemes or to maintain an adequate replacement programme. The
Government and the BTC decided that this should be remedied and, in 1955,
the BTC produced a modernisation plan which was designed to transform
virtually all the services offered by the railways. Since then the plan has been
modified in the light of economic and technical developments which have
occurred since its conception. Some £ 1,100 million was invested in British
Railways and their associated activities in the eight years 1955-63, and
capital expenditure is still substantial, with investment in 1964 estimated
to reach £110 million.
In 1955 there were on main lines about 18,000 steam, 7 main line diesel
and 71 electric locomotives. At the end of 1963 the corresponding figures
were 7,050 steam, 2,051 diesel and 191 electric locomotives. In addition,
there were 4,145 diesel and 7,021 electric passenger-carrying multiple units.
The phase of railway modernisation represented by the diesel multiple unit
was completed by 1961; no more are expected to be needed.
Passenger services have continued to improve as steam is replaced by
electric or diesel traction. The replacement of out-of-date passenger coaches
by new stock, with improved amenities, continues and diesel electric de luxe
trains are in operation on routes from London to Manchester, to Birmingham,
to Wolverhampton, and elsewhere.
The efficiency of freight services is being improved as new and modern
type freight vehicles come into service and as facilities become available for
concentrating freight traffic at fewer and better equipped and better sited
marshalling yards and terminals. For example, a new marshalling yard is
being constructed at Sheffield at a cost of over ^6 million. This yard will
be capable of sorting wagons quickly for the 130 different destinations for
which traffic passing through the area requires to be marshalled. Many
other new freight facilities, such as the marshalling yard at Lamesley and the
new central goods depot on Tyneside which together cost over £$ million,
are in use.
The installation of modern colour-light signalling, coupled with the
installation of either electro-mechanical or power-operated signal boxes and
the rapid extension of the automatic warning system, is enabling faster and
more frequent trains to be run with a greater degree of safety. Schemes are in
hand, costing about £8 million, for the complete modernisation of signalling
on the main line between London and Didcot (an important junction in
Berkshire) and on the South Wales main line between Cardiff and Port
Talbot.
One of the most important suburban electrification schemes carried out is
that of the Glasgow central lines (‘Blue Train service’) at a cost of nearly
£13 million. The extension of the Southern Region’s electrification of the line
to the Kent coast at a cost of over £20 million has been completed. Good
progress is also being made on the electrification of the London Midland
Region’s lines from Euston via Crewe to Liverpool, the total cost being about
£175 million. This expenditure includes the cost of rolling-stock and
Reorganisation
Channel Tunnel
ROADS
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 367
works such as overhead equipment, signalling improvements and station
modernisation.
In spite of the considerable injection of new capital over the period 1955-62
British Railways incurred a steadily increasing overall deficit (including
interest charges), which rose to a peak of more than ^150 million in 1962.
The new Railways Board was given the task of preparing a scheme for re¬
organising the railways in such a way that they could be run as a commercially
viable undertaking. In March 1963 a Report on the Reshaping of British Railways
(‘Beeching Report’) was published and has been accepted in principle by the
Government. Its proposals include the withdrawal of passenger services from
about a third of the country’s railway system. (These little-used lines carry
only 1 per cent of the total passenger traffic.) Before any passenger service is
withdrawn there must be provision for any objectors to state their case against
closure and a final decision must be given by the Minister of Transport.
Other important proposals are for the improvement of inter-city passenger
services, with the emphasis on speed, reliability and comfort; the introduction
of express freight services (‘liner trains’) to link all the main industrial areas,
increased mechanisation in the carrying of coal (the railways’ most profitable
traffic); and the continuing replacement of steam by diesel and electric
traction.
Although many of the changes foreshadowed in the plan have not yet had
time to have any significant effect on the railways’ financial results, there was
a reduction in 1963 by ^22 million to ^82 million in the railway operating
deficit, the result mainly of economies and increases in efficiency.
Early in 1964 the British and French Governments agreed in principle to the
construction of a rail Channel Tunnel (either a bored tunnel or an immersed
tube). The cost is estimated at £160 million (at 1962 prices) and the time for
completion six years from the start of work. In the summer a preliminary
geological survey was instituted to determine the line of the tunnel.
The advent of the motor vehicle made it necessary for the Government to
set up a central road authority; accordingly, the Road Board was established
by the Development and Road Improvement Funds Act of 1909. In 1919
the board’s responsibilities were taken over by the newly established Ministry
of Transport.
In April 1963 Great Britain had 198,455 miles of public highway. There
were 194 miles of motorway, 8,347 miles of trunk roads, 19,797 miles of
Class I roads, 17,608 miles of Class II roads, 48,982 miles of Class III roads
and 103,527 miles of unclassified roads. Roads are classified according to
their traffic value, those of purely local traffic importance remaining un¬
classified. On maps and signposts the trunk and Class I roads can usually
be identified by the letter ‘A’ in front of a route number, and Class II roads
by a letter ‘B’. Trunk roads are the main arteries of national traffic and the
whole cost of their upkeep is met from Exchequer funds. The Minister of
Transport is the highway authority for trunk roads in England and Wales
and on these roads he administers expenditure, which is provided wholly
from central Government sources, although for many purposes he employs
local authorities as his agents. The highway authority for Class I, Class II
and Class III roads is, in general, the council of the county or county borough
in whose area the roads lie. The Minister makes grants towards approved
expenditure on construction and major improvement of these roads at the rate
of 75, 60 or 50 per cent accounting to the class of road. (Classified roads include
368
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Motorways
nearly all the main streets of the large cities.) The Secretary of State for
Scotland has corresponding responsibilities for roads in Scotland. Unclassified
roads are entirely the responsibility of the local authority in whose area they lie.
While it was impossible in the years immediately following the second world
war to spend much more on the roads than was required for their essential
maintenance, a large road-building programme has now been in progress for
several years. Central Government expenditure on new construction and
major improvements has recently been rising steadily and annual outlay on
motorways, trunk roads and classified roads is expected nearly to double
during the period 1964-69. Public investment on new construction and major
improvements is planned to amount to over £1,000 million during the next
five years, including about £126 million from resources of the local authorities.
A substantial part of central Government expenditure will be in the form of
grants to local authorities for work on classified roads, mainly in urban areas.
The current programme includes Britain’s first motorways, constructed for
the use of limited classes of traffic under the powers granted to the ministers
by the Special Roads Act, 1949 (consolidated in the Highways Act, 1959).
The motorways form part of a programme designed to provide a national
network of modern through routes. At the same time, work done under this
programme will eliminate the worst bottlenecks in urban areas and thus give
free outlets from the big cities and from other main sources of traffic to the
trunk routes.
It is planned that 1,000 miles of motorways should be completed by the
early 1970s. At the end of June 1964, 292^ miles had been opened for traffic and
construction had started, or tenders had been invited, for a further 160 miles.
The lines of a further 210 miles had been fixed and draft schemes been pub¬
lished for a further 117I miles. It is probable that 600 miles of motorway will
be in use by 1968-69. Among the motorways in Great Britain open to traffic
or under construction were:
M 1—London to Yorkshire (Leeds). The projected length of this motorway
is about 190 miles, of which 73 miles, providing a link between London
and Birmingham, have been opened to traffic since 1959. Construction of
the section from Crick (Northamptonshire) to the river Trent started in
1962 and in 1964 work was under way on a further 44 miles north of the
river Trent and on an 8|-mile extension southwards into London.
M 2—Medway motorway, London to Dover. The 26 miles of this motorway
came into use in 1963.
M 4—London to South Wales. The projected length of this road, which
will link London with Newport, is 135 miles. The 6-mile and 5^-mile
bypasses at Maidenhead and Slough respectively are in use and the several
sections under construction include the section from Chiswick to Langley
(13 miles) and a £9 million bridge over the Severn.
M 5—Birmingham to Bristol. Of this 117-mile motorway reaching to East
Brent (20 miles beyond Bristol), the first 26 miles running south from
Birmingham were opened in July 1962. There will be a connection with the
M 4 north of Bristol. The 21^-mile Ross Spur (M 50), opened in i960, links
the M 5 with the existing road system leading from Ross-on-Wye
(Herefordshire) to South Wales.
M 6—Birmingham to Carlisle. The projected length of this road, which
will run from Dunston (north of Birmingham) to Carlisle (Cumberland)
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Motorways and
Principal Trunk
37°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other Roads
Bridges and Tunnels
Research
ROAD
TRANSPORT
is 172 miles. Sections completed total 98 miles and include the 8^-mile
Preston bypass, the first section of motorway, opened in 1958. A system of
motorway links will connect this road at its southern end with the M 1 and
M 5; work on the latter link started in 1963.
In Scotland about 73 miles of motorways are planned over the next five
years. They include motorways between Glasgow and Edinburgh, Edinburgh
and Stirling and for a 16-mile section, south of Glasgow, of the Glasgow-
Carlisle route. Work started in 1963 on the first section (over 5 miles) of the
Glasgow to Edinburgh motorway.
Notable schemes for improving existing trunk roads include those for the
Great North Road (Ai) between London and Newcastle, of which 162! miles
of dual carriageway, several sections built to motorway standards, are already
open and a ten-mile bypass of Darlington is under construction. Improvements
on the A40 route, linking London with Gloucester and South Wales via
Oxford, include a 13^-mile bypass around High Wycombe, in Buckingham¬
shire, built to motorway standards.
In Scotland, the trunk roads in the central belt and to Carlisle, where
industrial traffic is greatest, are to be improved to provide dual carriage¬
ways.
The largest bridge building programme in Britain for over a century is in
progress. The £2-3 million Medway Bridge, which is part of M 2 and is the
largest pre-stressed concrete structure of its kind in the world, was completed
in 1963 and the new suspension bridge across the Firth of Forth, the main
span of which is the largest of its kind in Europe, was opened in 1964. The
Severn Bridge, whose main span is nearly as long as that of the Forth Bridge,
is due for completion in 1966, and work started on a bridge across the Firth
of Tay in 1963.
The second Blackwall Tunnel (under the Thames), which is expected to
cost j£6-5 million, is due for completion in 1965 and work on the £12-6 million
Tyne Tunnel between Wallsend (Northumberland) and Jarrow (Durham)
has been in progress since 1961; it is expected to be opened in 1967* The
first Whiteinch Tunnel (under the Clyde) was completed in 1963 and the
second in 1964 and the £11 million Dartford-Purfleet tunnel (under the
Thames) was opened to traffic towards the end of 1963.
Research on roads is carried out at the Road Research Laboratory (see 212).
Its aims are to find more economical ways of designing, constructing and
maintaining roads and of facilitating the flow of traffic on them and to reduce
road accidents. The layout of roads, their traffic, the safety features of road
vehicles and the behaviour of road users are investigated, and new methods,
materials and processes are developed for building roads and providing them
with a smooth, safe and durable surface. The Laboratory has a Tropical
Section, which undertakes research and advice on road problems overseas.
In May 1964 there were io-8 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great
Britain’s roads. Of these, i-3 million were goods vehicles and 79,300 were
public road passenger vehicles (i.e. buses, trolleybuses and taxicabs).
The first world war greatly stimulated the development of motor vehicles,
and road transport began to make itself felt as a serious competitor of the
railways. The first step towards Government regulation of public road
transport was the passing of the London Traffic Act of 1924, which gave the
Minister of Transport power to control the number of buses and their
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Licensing
Organisation of
Road Haulage
State-owned
Services
371
journeys in London; this was followed, in 1933, by the setting up of the
London Passenger Transport Board (see p.375).
The Road Traffic Act, i93°> ended the licensing of public service vehicles
(i.e. buses and coaches) by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas,
of which there are now eleven, covering the whole country and each under
the control of three traffic commissioners (except for the London metropolitan
area, which has one) appointed by the Minister. The commissioners regulate,
by means of a licensing system, all public road passenger transport services,
and they sanction routes and time-tables in order to secure proper co-ordina¬
tion of services and eliminate unnecessary competition; they may also control
fares. Competing operators and local authorities are entitled to raise objections
concerning applications to the commissioners for new licences or the renewal
of existing licences and to appeal to the Minister of Transport against the
commissioners’ decisions.
The Road and Rail Traffic Act, 1933, based upon the recommendations of
the Royal Commission and of an experts’ report (the Salter Report) of 1932,
established a system of licensing for road haulage vehicles, which is still in
operation, designed to restrict vehicle operations to proved needs and to
eliminate wasteful competition. A licence has to be secured from the licensing
authority (the chairman of the appropriate body of traffic commissioners)
before a goods vehicle can be used on the road. There are three types of
licence: the ‘A’ licence for general public haulage; the ‘B’ licence for public
haulage limited to certain goods or certain areas and covering also the
carriage of the licensee’s own goods; and the ‘C’ licence for the carriage by
traders solely of their own goods. Applications for ‘A’ and ‘B’ licences are
examined by the licensing authorities to see if they are necessary in view of
existing transport services, and competitors may raise objections. There is
a right of appeal to the Transport Tribunal against the decision of the
licensing authorities. The ‘C’ licence is granted on application, as of right.
All goods vehicle operators are bound by regulations concerning the fitness and
loading of vehicles, the movements of large vehicles likely to obstruct traffic,
the keeping of records, and driving hours and rest periods of their employees.
The main licensing provisions contained in the Road Traffic Act, 1930, and
the Road and Rail Traffic Act, 1933, as subsequently amended, were con¬
solidated in the Road Traffic Act, i960.
Under the Transport Act, 1947, the BTC took over ‘A’ and ‘B’ hauliers
predominantly engaged on long-distance haulage; vehicles operating under
‘C’ licences and those used for carrying certain specialised traffic were not
affected. After the change of Government in 1951, the Transport Act of
1953 required the BTC to dispose of the bulk of its road haulage undertaking.
In 1956 this process was halted by the Transport (Disposal of Road Haulage
Property) Act, which enabled the Commission to retain under its control
more vehicles than were permitted under the 1953 Act. Altogether, the
Commission disposed of 20,000 vehicles.
From September 1956 British Road Services (BRS), were a division of the
Commission, and conducted their business through the medium of five
companies which together owned about 16,000 vehicles: British Road Services
Ltd. (general haulage); BRS (Pickfords) Ltd. (special traffic and some
contracts); BRS (Contracts) Ltd.; BRS (Parcels) Ltd.; and BRS (Meat
Haulage) Ltd. All the companies’ vehicles are subject to the licensing system.
Following the coming into force of the Transport Act, 1962, these organisa¬
tions have been operating since January 1963 as companies incorporated
372
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Size of the Industry
Public
Passenger
Transport
by Road
Road Safety
under the Companies Act, with their own boards. They are grouped together
under the Transport Holding Company, responsible to the Minister of
Transport.
The number of licensed vehicles in the road goods transport industry rose
from i-i million in 1955 to 1-5 million in 1963. The percentages with ‘C’
licences were 85-1 in 1955 anc^ 86-6 in 1963 (1,278,000 vehicles). Of the
other 192,000 vehicles, with ‘A’ and ‘B’ licences, about 13,800 are operated
by British Road Services and the rest are operated by some 63,000 hauliers.
There are only a few operators with large fleets of vehicles in any of the
licence categories. 4C’ licence vehicles include a large number of small
vehicles used locally in the delivery of groceries and other goods. Other vehicles
in this class are engaged in long-distance carriage of traders’ own goods. A
sample survey made by the Traders Road Transport Association in 195^
indicated that ‘C’ licence operators with fleets of over 100 vehicles were
probably fewer than 3 per cent of the total number of operators, but accounted
for over half the ‘C’ licence vehicles in use in the country.
In October 1963 the Minister of Transport appointed an independent
committee of inquiry (the Geddes Committee) to examine the licensing system
for road haulage and to make recommendations. Its report is expected in 1965.
With the exception of the London transport system which is operated by the
London Transport Board, road passenger transport in Great Britain is run
by about 5,000 operators, 95 of them being local authorities owning and
operating urban bus and trolleybus services. About 4,700 are independent
operators of coaches and of these, 3,600 have not more than 5 vehicles. Most of
the remainder operate both bus and coach services and belong to three main
groups—Tilling, Scottish Omnibuses and British Electric Traction. The
British Electric Traction Group is a private concern but substantial share¬
holdings in many of its companies, without any controlling interest, are held
by the Transport Holding Company, who own the Tilling and Scottish
Omnibus groups outright.
At the beginning of 1964 there were 257 concerns operating fleets of over 24
vehicles, 88 of which were local authorities, the largest being the Birmingham
Corporation, with 1,642 buses and coaches. Glasgow had 159 trolleybuses and
1,415 buses and coaches; Manchester had 1,343 buses and 56 trolleybuses.
During 1963 Birmingham transport carried 407 million passengers, Glasgow,
444 million and Manchester, 353 million.
Britain has the highest density of road traffic in the world. In 1963 nearly
7,000 people were killed on the roads and 350,000 injured. This compares
with over 7,000 persons killed and 230,000 injured in 1934, when there was
one-quarter of the present number of motor vehicles on the roads—an
indication that the problems have, to some extent, been held in check by
road safety measures introduced since 1930. Since 1946 the volume of traffic
has roughly trebled: but road accident casualties have only doubled. The fatal
accident rate in Britain is better than that in most other European countries,
but slightly worse than in the United States and Canada. Road accident
statistics are compiled and published by the Ministry of Transport and
Scottish Development Department from reports made by the police.
Modern roads, designed for present day traffic and segregating pedestrians
from vehicles, are safer than the roads they replace and surveys have shown
they result in a marked fall in casualties. The more important measures
directed primarily towards road safety include speed limits of 30 and 40 m.p.h.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
373
in and around built-up areas; the provision of pedestrian crossings—some
illuminated by flashing beacons and marked with conspicuous white stripes
(‘zebra’ crossings); and the system of road markings and traffic signs (to be
replaced by greatly improved signs over the next few years).
The safety of vehicles, both in design and use, is controlled by regulations;
a system of vehicle testing, which applies at present to vehicles five or more
years old, is being gradually extended. Heavy goods vehicles are subject to a
separate procedure of spot checks.
All drivers of motor vehicles, including motor cycles, motor scooters and
powered pedal cycles, unless they have either held a full British licence or
passed the driving test in the last ten years, are required to pass the test before
being granted a full licence to drive1. Until they pass the test they must obtain a
‘provisional’ licence which necessitates their displaying ‘L’ (Learner) plates
on their vehicle, and in all cases where vehicles are constructed to carry
passengers, other than pillion passengers, learner drivers must be accompanied
by a qualified driver (a person who holds a current driving licence for the
same type of vehicle as that driven by the learner). A learner driver of a motor
cycle is restricted, until he passes the driving test, to a machine not exceeding
250 c.c.
The traffic law is contained in the Road Traffic Acts, which are enforced by
the police and the courts. A person convicted of any of the 26 most serious
offences is liable to be disqualified from driving for a period. The standard
of conduct for all road users—pedestrians and drivers—and a summary of the
requirements of the law is set out in easily understandable form in the
Highway Code. A failure to observe the code does not of itself render a person
liable to criminal proceedings but may be taken into account in any such
proceedings. Free copies of the code are issued to all learner drivers and to
motorists visiting Britain from abroad.
National campaigns to persuade people to take greater care on the roads
are conducted by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, acting
as the Government’s agent and with the participation of the local authorities.
The police and education authorities also help by arranging courses of
instruction, especially courses for children.
Relief of Congestion The Road Traffic and Roads Improvement Act, i960, permits the employment
of traffic wardens (with strictly limited powers), and provides for fixed
penalties (the ‘ticket’ system) for parking offences. Other measures in the
Act, designed to reduce traffic congestion, include the granting of greater
powers of action to the Minister of Transport within London and to local
traffic authorities in other areas. Several extensive schemes for the improve¬
ment of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion are being undertaken:
these include ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads from cities; and
the designation of certain stretches of trunk roads as ‘clearways’, on which
waiting on the carriageway is (with certain exceptions) prohibited. In London
and several other large towns, such as Manchester and Newcastle upon
Tyne, street parking in certain areas is permitted only for limited periods
and on payment at parking meters, and increased off-street parking facilities
are being provided.
Increasing use is being made of traffic management to promote the smoother
and more rapid flow of traffic. In i960 a Traffic Management Unit was set
up in London by the Minister of Transport, and traffic authorities elsewhere
have since adopted many of the measures introduced in London. The main
1 For overseas visitors’ licences, see Appendix.
374
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INLAND
WATERWAYS
The System
measures are comprehensive control of street parking and comprehensive
one-way working systems. Others include the banning of turns, particularly
right turns, peak hour clearways and ‘tidal flow’ arrangements.
In June 1964 the Smeed Committee, appointed by the Minister of Transport
in 1962 to study the technical possibilities of road pricing, reported that it
considered it was possible, by means of various mechanical devices, to charge
road-vehicles according to the extent to which they use congested areas. In
June, also, the Minister announced the setting up of a group which would
study how the design of vehicles (size, power, fumes and manoeuvrability)
could make them more suitable for use in towns.
In 1761 James Brindley completed the Bridgewater Canal to take coal from
the collieries owned by the Duke of Bridgewater at Worsley to Manchester.
This marked the beginning of canal building in modern Britain; and canals
played an important part in promoting the industrial and commercial
expansion in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. As railway
competition developed, about one-third of the canal mileage passed to the
control of the railways. During the first world wTar Government control of
railways included railway-owned canals and, under the Transport Act, 1947,
most of the country’s canals passed from Government control, which had
been re-established in the second world war, to that of the British Transport
Commission in January 1948. From 1955 the canals were managed separately
by the waterways division of the Commission, known as British Waterways;
under the Transport Act, 1962, control has been vested in the British Water¬
ways Board since 1st January, 1963.
There are about 2,500 miles of navigable inland waterways in Great Britain,
some 2,000 miles of which belong to the British Waterways Board; the
remainder is mainly still in the hands of local authorities or private companies.
About 1,000 miles of the Board’s canals are narrow waterways which can
generally be used only by boats not exceeding 7 feet in width, capable of
carrying a load varying from 25 to 30 tons; the remainder are broad waterways
and canalised rivers which can be used by craft of up to 400 tons capacity.
The canals in Scotland are all broad waterways. Of the 2,000 miles of inland
waterways under the control of the British Waterways Board, 500 miles are
closed to navigation or abandoned and a further 600 miles (in 1962) were
no longer used for commercial navigation. Of these ‘disused’ canals some
are unnavigable, either wholly or in part.
For certain operational purposes, such as maintenance engineering, sales
and estates work, the canals of England and Wales are administered from two
regional centres, one at Gloucester and the other at Leeds. In Scotland the
canals other than the Caledonian are, for engineering purposes, under the
control of an area engineer. The Caledonian Canal is run by a manager.
In 1963 total traffic on British Waterways amounted to 9-1 million tons,
of which 3-9 million tons were coal, 2-2 million tons liquids in bulk and
3 million tons general cargo. The total traffic is stated in ton-miles in Table 25.
Some 90 per cent of the total traffic is carried on 325 miles of broad water¬
ways, which are mainly canalised rivers.
Although the British Waterways Board is the largest single carrying
operator, most of the traffic is handled by independent carriers or by traders
in their own craft. The Board at the end of 1963 owned 15 tugs and 861
carrying craft, with a carrying capacity of 36,850 tons, including 108 power-
driven craft with a carrying capacity of 6,000 tons.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Development
LONDON
TRANSPORT
The London
Transport
System
375
L nder the control of the BTC, the commercial organisation was strengthened;
it improved dredging methods and equipment, brought better types of craft
into service, established a research organisation and undertook various
development works. Following the report, issued in 1955, by a specially
appointed Board of Survey, a comprehensive development plan was begun
in 1956. Under this plan, nearly £6 million was invested in the improvement
of navigation and the provision of modern equipment on the seven major
waterways that carry most of the traffic—the Aire and Calder Navigation,
the oheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation, the Trent Navigation, the
river Lee, the river Severn, including the Gloucester and Sharpness Canal,
(.he river Weaver, and the Grand Union Canal (on the stretch below
Berkhamsted). As a result the British Waterways Board now controls about
300 miles of first-class waterways linking important industrial districts with
ports; further investments in improved facilities are being made.
The total revenue of the British Waterways Board in 1963 amounted to
LA'! million, of which only j£o-8 million arose from carrying activities. The
sale of water is an important source of revenue and has trebled since 1948.
British Waterv/ays encourages pleasure boating and receipts from this source
are rising but as yet constitute only just over 2 per cent of total revenue.
British Waterways does not usually own fishing rights and income from this
source is very small.
London is, with Tokyo and New York, one of the world’s three largest cities.
The area known as Greater London, within a radius of about 15 miles from
Charing Cross, contains over 8£ million people.
London’s passenger transport system, in its modern sense, began in 1829
when the first omnibus, horse-drawn, appeared on the London streets. The
first regular tram service, also horse-drawn, began in 1870. In 1863 the first
underground steam railway, the Metropolitan, was built by digging a great
trench for the line and roofing it over. In 1870 the world’s first tube railway,
the Tower Subway, was constructed under the river Thames; it was cable-
operated and ran for only a few months. In 1890 the first electric tube railway
in the world was opened, the City and South London line, and this was
followed in 1900 by the opening of the Central London Railway and shortly
afterwards by the electrification of the steam-operated underground lines.
Meanwhile, horse-drawn buses and trams were being replaced by motor
buses and electric trams.
Until 1933 there were many separate undertakings providing passenger
transport facilities in London, but in that year these were all vested in a single
public corporation, the London Passenger Transport Board. In 1948, with
the establishment of the British Transport Commission, the London Trans¬
port Executive took over control as an agency of the Commission.
Under the Transport Act, 1962, as in the case of the other BTC under¬
takings, the London Transport Executive has been replaced by a financially
independent board, known as the London Transport Board.
The London Transport undertaking operates all road and rail passenger
transport services in the London area with the exception of the London lines
of British Railways and the taxicabs. (Some 6,000 taxicabs that ply for hire
in the streets are privately operated by companies or owner-drivers and are
licensed annually by the metropolitan police.) London Transport’s operations
extend beyond Greater London to cover an area of 2,000 square miles (known
as the London Passenger Transport Area) with a radius of about 25 miles
N
37^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PUBLIC
TRANSPORT
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
from. Charing Cross and with a population of some 10 million. Between 1955
and 1963 the number of passenger journeys made annually on the London
Transport system fell from 4,079 million to 3,103 million, largely owing to
increased private motoring and changes in leisure-time habits and also some
shifting of population away from the centre of London.
London Transport’s railway network stretches 18 miles from north to south
and 32 miles from east to west. The total length of the railway over which
London Transport trains operate is 244 miles, of which 90 miles are under¬
ground, including the longest tube tunnel in the world, ijl miles long.
London Transport trains serve 273 stations. London Transport’s buses and
coaches travel over more than 3>IO° miles roads. To carry traffic over all
this area, in December 1963 London Transport owned 4,317 railway cars
and 8,435 buses and coaches. The total staff employed was 74,000.
Improvements carried out by London Transport since the war have
included complete renewal of the bus and coach fleet, replacement of trams
and trollybuses by diesel buses, extension and modernisation of parts of the
Underground system and renewal of half the railway rolling stock fleet.
In 1962, work was started on the building of a new 10^-mile tube railway
between Victoria Station and Walthamstow, in north-east London. It is
estimated that the work will cost at least £56 million and completion is
expected in 1968.
Passenger transport in Belfast is provided by the Belfast Corporation and
private hauliers are engaged in freight transport in the cities of Belfast and
Londonderry. All other public road passenger and freight services and all
rail services in Northern Ireland are provided by the Ulster Transport
Authority, a public body which was established under the Transport Act
(Northern Ireland), 1948.
The road passenger section of the authority’s undertaking operates a wide
network of omnibus services and an extensive programme of coach tours.
The road freight section provides a comprehensive service for the carriage
of merchandise of all descriptions (including heavy indivisible loads and
livestock) and can supply vehicles under contract for the exclusive use of
traders. A chain of hotels is also owned and operated by the authority.
In the year ended 30th September, 1963* nearly 92 million passengers,
over 2-7 million tons of merchandise and over one million head of livestock
were carried by road and rail services run by the Ulster Transport Authority.
There were 300 miles of permanent way, 60 locomotives and 160 diesel rail
cars and trailers. The route mileage of regular omnibus services was 2,700
miles and there were 1,200 omnibuses and coaches and 2,400 goods motor
vehicles in use. The gross revenue of the Authority was j£io-6 million.
As a result of losses in public transport (mainly on railways) the Government
of Northern Ireland announced a policy for the reorganisation of public
transport which involves (a) a planned run-down of railways; (b) the intro¬
duction of a licensing system for road freight which would allow private
hauliers, under licence, to provide freight services throughout Northern
Ireland; (c) the establishment of a Northern Ireland Transport Commission
to take over the assets of the Ulster Transport Authority and to operate the
Authority’s railways, workshops and hotels; and (d) the establishment of
publicly owned undertakings to provide public road passenger and road
freight services.
Proposals for the withdrawal of certain passenger rail services and all freight
rail services are under consideration by the Northern Ireland Transport
loads
Commercial
Organisation
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 377
Tribunal, and it is expected that legislation for the introduction of a road
freight licensing system will be put before the Northern Ireland Parliament
before the end of 1964. Legislation for the establishment of the statutory
undertakings will be introduced in 1965.
On 31st March, 1964, there were 13,859 miles of public roads in Northern
Ireland, comprising 382 miles of trunk roads, 956 miles of Class I roads,
1,733 miles of Class II roads, 2,865 miles of Class III roads and 7,923 miles
of unclassified roads.
The Ministry of Commerce is directly responsible for the trunk road
system and bears the entire cost of maintenance and reconstruction work on
these roads. In addition to major reconstruction schemes on trunk roads, a
total of about 100 miles of motorway are planned by the early 1970s.
The Ministry of Home Affairs administers the Road Fund (the proceeds
of motor vehicle taxation, driving licence fees, etc.), from which grants are
paid to the local authorities (county, county borough, borough and urban
district councils) who are responsible for the other roads. The rates of grant
range from 90 per cent for major improvement works on Class I roads to
25 per cent for maintenance work on unclassified roads.
Gross expenditure on all roads in the financial year to 31st March, 1963,
was £10-8 million. Expenditure in the five-year period 1964-69 is expected
to be about £75 million, compared with about £46 million in the five-year
period to 1963.
CIVIL AVIATION
British airmen were among the first to carry mails (at the time of the
Coronation of King George V in 1911) and among the first to operate regular
mail and passenger services, which were inaugurated on 25th August, 1919,
when a daily passenger service was opened between London (Hounslow)
and Paris (Le Bourget). The year 1919 was also marked by notable pioneer
flights, including the crossing of the Atlantic by John Alcock and Arthur
Whitten Brown in June (both were later knighted for their achievement) and
the first flight between England and Australia by Captain (later Sir) Ross
Smith and his crew.
In April 1924 four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited, which received a Government grant of ^1 million spread over the
next ten years. As a substantial shareholder the Government was represented
on the board of directors.
Imperial Airways Limited pioneered the commercial development of
intercontinental air routes (including the organisation of ground services),
following up, in many cases, the exploratory work of the Royal Air Force.
By 1929 there was a through service from England to India. In 1931 the first
service was established to Central Africa. The first mail service to Australia
started in December 1934, followed by a passenger service in 1935. During
a part of 1939 Imperial Airways operated an experimental transatlantic
service for mail.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation, a public corporation, was
established by the British Overseas Airways Act, 1939, and took over the
undertakings of Imperial Airways Limited and British Airways Limited
in 1940. British European Airways was established under the Civil Aviation
Act, 1946, as a separate public corporation to cover the United Kingdom
378
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Role of the
Government
Scheduled Services:
Government Policy
The Air Transport
Licensing Board
{ATLB)
The
Corporations:
Powers and
Constitutions
Finance
and Europe. In addition to the two large corporations, there were in August
1964 about 30 independent air transport operators, some of them being
grouped, so forming 12 principal companies in all.
Responsibility for the general development and expansion of United Kingdom
civil aviation is vested in the Ministry of Aviation. The Ministry supervises
the development and production of civil aircraft and undertakes an extensive
programme of research and development to meet civil as well as Service
needs. It is also responsible for air safety and in this capacity is advised by
the Air Registration Board (see p. 384).
Up to 1949 Government policy was that independent operators should under¬
take charter work and the corporations should operate scheduled services.
Starting in 1949, independent operators were permitted to operate certain
scheduled services as ‘associates’ of the corporations. From 1952 ^de¬
pendent companies became eligible to develop new routes and new types of
scheduled services. The Air Transport Advisory Council (ATAC), set up by
the Civil Aviation Act, 1946, advised the Minister whether permission for
these services could be given without materially diverting traffic from existing
services. Under the Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act, i960, an Air Transport
Licensing Board was set up in place of the ATAC, and from 30th March,
1961, the independent operators became entitled to apply for permission to
operate scheduled services on an equal basis with the corporations.
The ATLB consists of six to ten members appointed by the Minister of
Aviation. The Board is responsible for granting licences to both the corpora¬
tions and the independent operators for the operation of air services. In
granting licences the Board takes into account an operator’s experience,
financial resources, equipment, organisation and staffing arrangements, and
the adequacy of existing services. There is provision for appeals to the
Minister from decisions of the Board. In the period from its inception to
31st March, 1964, the Board received about 4,250 applications for licences
for air services of various kinds, including charters and holiday tours.
The existing powers and constitutions of BOikC and BEA are laid down by
the Air Corporations Act, 1949 (though the Corporations’ monopoly of
scheduled services was repealed by the i960 Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act,
as noted above). Each corporation consists of 5 to 11 members, including
the chairman. The merging of the two corporations has been considered on
several occasions but the conclusion has been that, at any rate at present,
the balance of advantage lies in keeping them as separate entities. However,
to promote greater collaboration, the chairman of each board is now also a
part-time member of the other.
Under the Air Corporations Act, 1962, each corporation may, with the
consent of the Minister of Aviation and the approval of the Treasury, borrow
by raising temporary loans or by means of interest-bearing, redeemable
loans from the Exchequer. The borrowing limits under the Act are £300
million for BO AC and £125 million for BEA, these sums being intended to ,
provide for the corporations’ capital requirements. In addition, the Act
enabled them within these overall limits, to finance from borrowings losses
on revenue account of up to j£ioo million (BOAC) and j£io million (BEA)
accruing before 31st March, 1964; under a further Act of 1964, BOAC’s
limit was raised to £125 million and the time limit for both Corporations
was extended to 31st March, 1966.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
379
Ministerial Control
jrowtii of
Ur Services
British
Overseas
\irways
Corporation
BOAC)
Operations
Financial Results
Although the Minister of Aviation has certain statutory powers of direction
over the corporations, including power to give general directions as to the
exercise of their functions on matters affecting the national interest, these
powers are very seldom used. The corporations function as commercial
undertakings with autonomy in matters of day-to-day management. However,
as their activities may have an impact on matters of national policy or inter¬
national relations, and as the Minister is responsible for answering for the
corporations in Parliament, there is in practice close co-operation, consultation
and exchange of information between them and the Ministry. It is also the
practice of the corporations to seek the approval of the Minister and the
Treasury for orders of aircraft, which account for the bulk of their capital
expenditure, and for investments in foreign airlines, which commonly involve
foreign currency and may have political implications. Under the 1949 Act
the corporations are also required to render annual reports of their activities
and statements of account, and the Minister lays these before Parliament.
A selection of operating and financial statistics for the two corporations
(including their associates) and the independent companies is shown in
Table 26. Total capacity ton-miles offered on all services more than doubled
between March 1956 and March 1961 and a further increase took place in the
following three years. In 1955, 2-5 million passengers entered or left the United
Kingdom by air, compared with 5-7 million who arrived or departed by sea;
in 1962 there were for the first time more air than sea passengers, while in
1963 the corresponding figures had risen to 8-5 million by air and 7-7 million
by sea.
BOAC is engaged on long-haul airline operations.Its scheduled services link
Britain with Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, Africa and
North and South America, and it also provides a complete round the world
service. It works in close co-operation with airlines of several other Common¬
wealth countries; it also has financial interests in six companies operating
local and regional services in the Far and Middle East, in areas adjacent to
BOAC’s main routes. BOAC-Cunard Ltd., a joint venture formed by BOAC
and the Cunard Steamship Company in 1962, operates services between
Britain and parts of North and South America and the Caribbean.
Table 26 shows that the capacity offered on its own scheduled services by
BOAC reached 898 million capacity-ton-miles at the end of March 1964,
having risen by 57-3 per cent in the last three years. Nearly three-fifths was
on the western routes to North and South America. The overall load factor in
1963-64 was 47-6 per cent: the break-even load factor (the figures at which
operating costs are covered) was again lower. Almost the whole of the
Corporation’s fleet consists of pure jets. In addition to Boeing joys (20 in
March 1964) and Comet 4s (19), in April 1964, BOAC introduced into
service on its West African routes the VC 10, a 600 mph long-haul jet. At
present 12 VC 10s and 17 Super VCios (a version with a range up to 4,000
miles due to come into service in 1965) are on order.
Despite increasing revenue from operations, BOAC’s annual accounts have
shown deficits since i957—58. The accumulated deficit of the Corporation at
the end of the 1962-63 financial year amounted to £80 million, and a White
Paper1 analysed the factors leading to these losses. Over £38 million was
1 The Financial Problems of the British Overseas Airways Corporation. HMSO,
November 1963.
380
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British
European
Airways (BEA)
Operations
Financial Results
The
Independent
Airline
Companies
attributable to the sums required for additional amortisation provisions, for
the most part in 1961-62, because of the much reduced operational life of
certain types of aircraft; a further £34 million represented interest paid
on capital; and ^ 15 million arose from losses of associated companies, mainly
since 1955-56. Measures have been taken to strengthen the management of
the Corporation, and plans are being worked out which, it is expected, will
eventually produce better financial results. In 1962-63 (the latest year for
which figures are available) there was an overall deficit of £12-2 million, of
which £6-4 million was attributable to payment of interest on capital and
£1-2 million to losses of associated companies. Some ^65 million of BO AC’s
gross revenue was earned in foreign currencies, of which £26 million came
from the sterling area and £24 million from the dollar area.
BEA operates a network of services serving some 80 places in Britain, Europe,
North Africa and the Middle East. Its services in Britain include a number
which cannot be operated on a commercial basis, but which meet a vital
social need; these include services to the Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
BEA maintains a close working relationship with BOAC, whose aircraft, by
agreement, use a number of European stopping points. BEA also co-operates
with other airlines in order to create ‘through travel’ facilities. It has a
financial interest in several associated companies, the majority of which
collaborate with BEA in providing a network of services.
Table 26 shows that between 1956 and 1964 BEA’s capacity offered, and
passenger-miles and freight ton-miles flown, trebled. For the year ended
31st March, 1964, the respective increases were 14-7 per cent, 16-9 per cent
and 18-9 per cent. In the same year some 5-6 million passengers were carried,
an increase of 13-9 per cent over the previous year; and the load factor, which
had risen slightly until 1961 but subsequently had fallen away, began to rise
again.
In March 1964 Comets and Vanguards operated over 80 per cent of BEA’s
continental traffic. April 1964 saw the introduction of the Trident, a three-
engine 600 mph jet designed for medium-haul routes: 24 of these aircraft are
on order. Two 25-passenger Sikorsky helicopters were acquired in 1964 and
a service (from Land’s End to the Isles of Scilly) started in May 1964.
In 1963 BEA disposed of the last of its fleet of Viscount jois, which in 1953
had inaugurated the world’s first gas-turbine airline service.
From 1954-55 to 1960-61 BEA earned a net profit. In the next two years,
during which it introduced four new types of aircraft at an additional cost of
£6 million, it incurred overall losses of ^1-4 million. In the following year,
i.e. to 31st March, 1964, the Corporation made a record profit of £3 million.
The costs of introducing the Trident into service (about £10 million over
the next two years) are expected to result in a temporary reduction in profits.
Of the 30 independent air transport companies, 13 are members of the
British Independent Air Transport Association. Among the largest are
British United Airways Ltd., and British Eagle International Airlines Ltd.
In addition, there are over 30 operators engaged in miscellaneous activities,
such as crop spraying and air photography and survey work. Table 26 shows
that the capacity offered by the independent transport companies on non-
scheduled services (comprising inclusive holiday tours and charter and
contract services) has been greatly in excess of that offered on scheduled
services. Until 1961 the development of scheduled services by independent
j TABLE 26
Airline
1 Corporations and
^DEPENDENT
Companies :
| Operating and
Revenue Statistics
transport and communications
3Si
Year
ending
31st
March
BO AC
All services
Scheduled services
BEA
All services
International services
(scheduled and
non-scheduled)
Domestic services
(scheduled and
non-scheduled)
Independent
Companies
Scheduled services
International
Domestic
Non-scheduled
services
Capacity
ton-
miles
offered"
millions
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
1956
1961
1964
Load
ton-
miles
sold*
millions
252
667
1,017
244
577
898
124
237
376
93
178
278
31
60
100
32
52
90
5
14
34
118
169
204
Overall
revenue
load
factor”
per cent
150
322
428
79
155
226
59
115
163
20
40
63
18
34
54
20
Pass¬
enger-
miles
soldd
millions
61-3
55-7
47-6
63-2
65- 2
60-1
63- 3
64- 8
58-7
63-0
66- 5
63-4
55-5
64-9
60-0
59-9
59-4
58-8
Freight
ton-
miles
sold®
millions
1,049
2,818
3,516
999
2,650
3,180
709
1,393
2,007
508
990
1,355
201
404
638
88
184
292
36
93
213
1,353
Traffic
revenue
£ million
30-2
47-1
85-2
7-5
16-6
22-8
6-7
13-7
19-0
0-8
2-8
3-9
9-4
16-5
27-6
0-2
0-3
1-7
17-0
42-4
88-0
n.a.
41-4
79-5
n.a.
20-9
40-7
58-3
Sources: Annual Reports of BO AC, BEA and British Independent Air
Transport Association: Ministry of Aviation.
» Usable capacity available (in short tons of 2,000 lb.) on each commercial flight
multiplied by the route mileage of that flight
6 Load carried (in short tons), including passengers, multiplied by distance carried
in miles.
« Load ton-miles sold, expressed as percentage of capacity ton-miles offered.
d Sum of miles flown by each passenger.
* Excluding mail,
n.a. = not available.
382 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
firms was controlled in the interest of the corporations (see p. 378) and the
scheduled service activities of these companies were concentrated mainly on
secondary routes and the provision of special types of service, such as vehicle
ferry services from the United Kingdom to Europe, and all-freight services
to Europe and Africa. Since 1961, however, the independent companies and
the corporations have been able to apply to the Air Transport Licensing
Board for licences for the development of their networks of scheduled as well
as other services.
Much charter business is arranged through the air section of the Baltic
Exchange, the London market for shipping space (see p. 355). The Air-
brokers’ Association, formed in 1949, operates in London a world market for
chartering aircraft to carry cargo and passengers.
United
Kingdom
Trade by Air
Private Flying
Aerodromes
The proportion of Britain’s overseas trade carried by aircraft is steadily
increasing. In 1956, 1-7 per cent of imports and 2-9 per cent of exports (by
value) were carried by air. In 1963 these percentages were 5-4 per cent and
6-8 per cent respectively, and the total value of exports, imports and re¬
exports by air was £583 million. The chief export items were expensive
machinery and parts, aircraft and vehicle parts, and electrical and electronic
products; furs and skins accounted for about a third of the total value of
re-exports by air.
At the end of 1963 the estimated number of aircraft on the United Kingdom
register used for business and private purposes was about 600, while approxi¬
mately 450 were owned by clubs, groups and training schools. Private pilot’s
licences were held by about 7,800 people.
The Minister of Aviation is authorised to establish and maintain civil aero¬
dromes; local authorities may do so subject to his approval; there are also
privately owned aerodromes. All aerodromes not operated by the Government
which are used for commercial operations are subject to the Minister’s
licensing, inspection and regulation.
There are approximately 120 civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom and,
in addition, about 54 Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those
under civil control include 21 directly controlled by the Ministry, 3 in the
Channel Islands and 1 in the Isle of Man administered by the local island
governments, and 30 aerodromes licensed for public use, of which 21 are
owned by municipalities. Customs facilities are provided at 9 of the Ministry’s
aerodromes and at 19 others.
The main airports used by international scheduled services in 1964 were:
for European services: London (Heathrow and Gatwick);
for North Atlantic services: London (Heathrow);
for Middle East, African and Far East services: London (Heathrow and
Gatwick).
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal aerodromes continue
to increase. In 1963 all United Kingdom civil aerodromes handled 16-2
million passengers. Of this total, London (Heathrow) Airport dealt with
8-2 million, and London (Gatwick), a million. Outside the London area,
Manchester (Ringway) handled 1-2 million; Glasgow (Renfrew), a million;
Belfast (Nutt’s Corner), 662,000; and Southend 461,000. The three airports
in the Channel Islands together handled 1 -2 million passengers. The number
Development
Air Safety
Aircraft Research
Flight Safety
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 383
of movements of aircraft engaged on commercial transport operations in
1963 was 458,000 for all aerodromes.
London (Heathrow) Airport, already the largest and busiest airport in
Western Europe, will be strained to capacity within the next few years owing
both to the increasing number of passengers and to the greater number of
large new jet aircraft which many international airlines are bringing into
service. Domestic and European short-haul services are handled at the
passenger building in the central terminal opened in 1955. Work on an
additional building for short-haul services began in 1964 and is expected to
take two years. A £3 million terminal was completed in 1962 for long-distance
passengers. Travelling time from Central London to Heathrow will be appreci¬
ably shortened when a section of the M.4 motorway (see p. 368) is opened at
the end of 1964. Freight traffic is expected to increase considerably during
the next few years, and plans are being prepared for a new freight terminal in
the south-west corner of the airport. The airport at Gatwick, 25 miles south
of London, was opened in June 1958 as the second airport for the London
area and further development is being undertaken by enlarging the terminal
buildings and aprons and adding a second and third passenger pier. The
second pier was completed in the summer of 1963. A £2-5 million extension
which will more than double the size of the terminal buildings and add a
third passenger pier should be ready by the summer of 1965. Plans have
been made to extend the 7,000-foot runway to enable it to handle the larger
aircraft likely to come into use for short- and medium-haul services as well as
the largest jet airliners diverted from Heathrow. A second runway proposed
for Gatwick will not add greatly to the airport’s capacity, owing to lack of
air space for an extra approach area, but is required as a reserve for both
Heathrow and Gatwick. The two airports are becoming increasingly inter¬
dependent. Built alongside the main London to Brighton railway, London
(Gatwick) Airport is the first in the world to contain road, rail and air trans¬
port in one unit. A privately owned helicopter terminal (or ‘heliport’) was
opened in London, on the south bank of the Thames, in April 1959.
The Government has designated Stansted Aerodrome, 33 miles north-east
of London, as the site of the third London airport. It will come into service
by the early 1970s, when it is expected that Heathrow and Gatwick will have
reached capacity as a result of the growth of traffic.
Prestwick, in Scotland, has been developed to accommodate large jet
aircraft and a new passenger terminal and freight area were brought into use
in 1964. The runways at Ringway Airport, Manchester, have been lengthened
and a new terminal building was completed in 1962. Work started during
1963 at Abbotsinch, Glasgow, on a new airport which should be complete
and ready for the transfer of services from Renfrew in 1966.
In the autumn of 1963 Belfast’s services were transferred from Nutt’s Corner
to a new civil terminal built on the former RAF aerodrome at Aldergrove.
The role of the Government in promoting air safety lies in research and in
setting up and supervising standards for both aircraft and personnel.
Research on aircraft design and construction is done at the Royal Aircraft
Establishments at Farnborough and Bedford, which belong to the Ministry
of Aviation and are exceptionally well equipped with testing facilities.
The Ministry of Aviation also determines the policy and legislative require¬
ments for the safe operation of civil aircraft, analyses accidents and incidents
and initiates preventive measures and research in the field of flight safety.
384
The Air Registration
Board
Air Operators'
Certificates
Flight Crew
Qualifications
Training
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Technical
Provisions
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
All aircraft registered in the United Kingdom must have a valid certificate
of airworthiness issued (or rendered valid) by the Ministry of Aviation on
the recommendation of the Air Registration Board. This Board was set up
in 1937 and consists of 18 members, six of whom are independent, the others
being representatives of constructors, operators and insurers of aircraft.
No aircraft built in Britain is granted a certificate of airworthiness unless it
has been constructed in accordance with British Civil Airworthiness Require¬
ments, a code compiled and frequently reviewed by the Board. Continued
airworthiness is ensured by regular inspection and by requiring aircraft to be
maintained in accordance with a schedule approved by the Board.
Every operator of aircraft above a certain size used for public transport must
possess an Air Operator’s Certificate issued by the Director of Aviation
Safety (who is appointed by the Minister of Aviation) when satisfied by
inspectors that all safety precautions are constantly taken by the operator.
Each member of a flight crew must hold the appropriate licence granted or
rendered valid by the Minister. Operators are required to ensure that pilots
employed by them have adequate knowledge of routes, and Ministry inspectors
check the standards maintained by the operators, which must be adequate
for purposes of the Air Operator’s Certificate.
In order to replace the supply of well-trained pilots for civil airlines from the
Royal Air Force, which has declined in recent years, the College of Air
Training was set up at Hamble in i960. It is sponsored and financed by the
Government and the two Airways Corporations. Over 70 cadets had graduated
through the two-year course by October 1963. (Ultimately over 100 trained
pilots a year will graduate from the College.) As it can supply only about half
the pilots needed, the Government may approve independent colleges, whose
standards are adequate for the training of professional pilots. So far only
Airwork Services Training, Perth, has been approved.
Responsibility for policy, planning and execution of both civil and military
air traffic control over the United Kingdom and the surrounding seas rests
with the national Air Traffic Control Services Organisation, under the joint
control of the Minister of Aviation and the Secretary of State for Defence.
This organisation has an integrated policy and planning staff drawn from both
ministries.
In 1950 the then Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation introduced a
system of airways covering the main traffic routes with controlled zones
around the major airports. During 1957 and 1958 a revised and extended
airways system was brought into use. There are three main air traffic control
centres: at London (Heathrow) Airport for southern England, at Preston for
the north of England and Wales, and at Prestwick for Scotland and the
Atlantic Ocean to 30° W.
A variety of radar installations and equipment provide the means by which
the system can accept the increasingly heavy load of air traffic. Britain
was the first country to use radar for the control of civil air traffic. The
radar approach system known as Ground Controlled Approach (GCA)
is now in use at all major airports in the United Kingdom, in addition
to the Instrument Landing System (ILS). During the next few years
virtually the whole of the airspace over the United Kingdom above 5,000
feet will be brought under surveillance by the latest types of radar equipment,
which will provide data to be used in two new Air Traffic Control Centres,
located at West Drayton (near London) and Preston, Lancashire. A subsidiary
Eurocontrol
Organisation
Finance
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 385
centre will be located at Prestwick to deal with traffic over Scotland. Extensive
use will be made in these centres of automatic data-processing and other
advanced electronic techniques.
The Ministry of Aviation has provided a number of radio navigational aids
to help aircraft to remain safely within the controlled airspace and to make
accurate estimates of their time of arrival. In addition, the Ministry supports
the Decca Air and Marine Navigator System now operating over a wide area
of the United Kingdom and northern Europe, which can be used, by arrange¬
ment with the Decca Company, by any aircraft fitted with the appropriate
receiving equipment.
Research is in progress into new landing aids for use in bad weather. A
unit of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, at Bedford, in' co-operation with
industry, has successfully developed a fully automatic landing system, making
Britain the pioneer in all-weather landing. The system is now coming into
use with the Royal Air Force and is being further developed to the standards
necessary for use by civil aircraft, including the VC 10 and Trident.
To cope with the new problems caused by high-flying, high-speed jet aircraft,
a European international agency, Eurocontrol, has been formed by Britain,
France, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, to provide
air traffic control at the higher flight levels for civil aircraft and for military
aircraft operating according to civil procedures.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office, founded in 1657, provides the postal and public tele¬
communications services of the United Kingdom. Although formally a
Government department it is in effect a nationalised industry.
The political head of the Post Office is the Postmaster General (see p. 57).
Immediately under him is the General Directorate consisting of the Director
General, three Deputy Directors General and the Engineer-in-Chief. They
are supported by a considerable staff, organised functionally, in the task of
framing plans for the Post Office as a whole and supervising its affairs generally.
For most operational purposes Britain is divided into nine geographical
regions, each under a Director (two in London) with his own supporting
staff. Responsible to them, and forming the third tier of the organisation, are
450 head postmasters and 57 telephone managers who directly control
operations in the field. In March 1964 the Post Office had 399,000 employees
and 25,000 post offices.
Among the means by which the Post Office keeps in touch with public
opinion are a central Advisory Council and 195 local advisory committees.
The Post Office Act, 1961, recognised the commercial character of the Post
Office by separating its finances from the Exchequer and giving the Postmaster
General sole responsibility for them. Post Office expenditure is generally
subject neither to Parliamentary control by Estimate nor to Treasury control.
Income is determined by tariffs which the Postmaster General fixes, subject
only to negative resolution of Parliament. The Post Office makes its own
investment plans, subject only to the same need for broad Government
approval as applies to other nationalised industries. Like them, it is expected
to aim at an adequate return on its capital and to contribute suitably to the
financing of its investment. Its present financial target is an average return on
net assets of 8 per cent over the period 1963-64 to 1967-68.
386
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 27 gives recent figures of income, profit and capital. Nearly all the
capital is invested in telecommunications, which are drawing rapidly ahead
of the postal services in size and profitability. Among nationalised industries,
in size of income the Post Office as a whole ranks after coal and electricity
supply, and in rate of growth it is second only to the latter.
Postal Services The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from
the time when horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modern
airmail transport. There was a great expansion in the postal services in the
eighteenth century with the introduction of mail-coaches in 1784. In the first
half of the nineteenth century the Post Office was quick to take advantage
of Britain’s early lead in engineering and railway development and the
first dispatch of mails by train was made in 1830 between Liverpool and
Manchester.
TABLE 27
Post Office.
Selected
Financial and
Operating
Statistics
Millions
Years ending 31st March
Financial Statistics
Combined Income . .
Profit + or Loss —
Postal Income
Profit + or Loss —
Telecommunications Income
Profit + or Loss —
Expenditure on fixed assets
Net Value of fixed assets . .
Operating Statistics
Postal Services
Correspondence, Inland and Irish Republic
Correspondence, Overseas
Parcels, Inland and Irish Republic
Parcels, Overseas
1956
£308-7
+ £2-3
£152-9
- £1-5
£155-9
+ £3-8
£88
£533
1961
£468-
+ £24-
£223-
+ £5'
£245'
+ £18'
£105
£870
9,277
473
221
16
10,127
473
235
13
1964
£604-7
+ £30-7
£262-0
- £7-8
£342-7
+ £38-5
£164
£1,144
10,523
477
217
13
Telegraph Services
Inland and Irish Republic
Overseas Telegrams
Inland Telex Calls . .
Overseas Telex Calls
22
21
2
1
14
20
5
3
12
20
13
7
Telephone Services
Exchange Connections
Inland Calls
Overseas Calls
4
4,198
4
5
4,722
7
6
5,724
10
Counter Services
National Insurance Pensions, etc., paid
Savings Bank Transactions
Postal Orders Issued
All Services
Total transactions with public
£623
£892
£204
£965
£854
£438
£1,318
£962
£548
£4,358
£6,074
£6,480
Source: Post Office Annual Reports and Accounts.
Counter
Services
Telegraph
Services
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 387
The inauguration of the penny post (the uniform charge for any inland
distance being prepaid by means of postage stamps, which originated in
Britain) in 1840 was followed by a rapid extension of the scope of the postal
services. The registered post, ensuring additional safety for valuable mail,
was introduced in 1841. The money order system, which had operated as a
private venture from 1792 to 1838, was supplemented in 1881 by the issue
of postal orders for fixed amounts. Letterboxes had been instituted in London
in 1855 to facilitate the increased postal traffic, and in 1883 the parcel post
was introduced. By the end of the nineteenth century a regular delivery of
letters was assured to every house in Britain. In 1919 the Post Office inaugura¬
ted its own motor transport fleet (now 37,000 vehicles) and the first mail was
carried by air in Britain in 1911.
Table 27 gives statistics of items of inland and overseas mail carried. Each
year about 7,000 tons of mail are carried by air within the United Kingdom.
Out of the 490 million items of overseas correspondence carried in 1963-64,
61 per cent were carried by air, compared with 51 per cent in 1955-56. The
air parcel service now operates to all countries in Europe except Rumania
and to over 180 countries outside Europe.
To cope with ever increasing work the Post Office has embarked upon a
large-scale programme of mechanisation and modernisation. In 1963-64
about 50 new post offices, including 20 sorting offices, were completed, and
about 40 new postal buildings started. Many sorting offices have been equipped
with chain conveyors for moving bags of mail. A new type of parcel-sorting
equipment, the tilted belt machine, has been developed and installed at
Preston and Worcester: up to 1,800 and 3,600 parcels per hour can be dealt
with respectively in these offices. A more sophisticated version has been in¬
stalled at Leeds. Letter segregating and facing machines have also been
designed by the Post Office. The segregating machine separates the packets
from the letters and the long envelopes from the short ones; the letter facing
machine is designed to arrange the letters in stacks, with all the addresses
facing the same way and the stamps in the same corner of the stack. In early
1962 a production model segregator and three facing machines were installed
in the London South East District Office; later a segregator and facing
machines were brought into service at Liverpool and in 1963 in Glasgow.
The Post Office is working towards making letter sorting completely auto¬
matic and is experimenting with a system by which letters can be marked with
phosphorescent dots corresponding to the address and then sorted auto¬
matically at all stages.
At the post office counter, besides making use of its postal and telegraph
facilities, the citizen can draw his pension and his family allowance, buy a
licence for his gun, dog, sound radio or television receiving set, renew his
car licence and buy national insurance stamps. Post Offices also offer a wide
range of facilities for savings and investments (see p. 405). In much of the
work at its counters the Post Office acts as agent for other Government
departments or local authorities. Largely as a result 01 the widening scope of
the social services and the increase in personal incomes, the volume of work
at post office counters has been increasing. The total value of transactions and
the value of some important items are shown in Table 27.
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of
the Postmaster General in 1870. Teleprinter-working for the transmission
of inland telegrams was introduced generally in 1928 and conversion to the
388
Telex Service
Telephone
Services
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
present automatic switching system was completed in mid-1954. It is now
one of the most up-to-date systems in the world and gives direct connection
between any of the 500 larger telegraph offices. The overseas telegraph
services were shared until 195° between the Post Office and Cable and
Wireless Ltd. This company was brought into public ownership in 1947.
The Post Office, which acquired the British services, operates all overseas
telegraph services from the United Kingdom, except those offered by foreign
telegraph companies. Cable and Wireless Ltd. continues to operate its cable
and wireless services in many dependencies and foreign countries.
Telegraph services to overseas countries are operated from Electra House in
London, the world’s largest overseas telegraph office, and from nine other
London and provincial area telegraph offices. Direct connection via the Centex
system between these British offices and the larger towns in Belgium, France,
Germany, Holland, Luxembourg and Italy minimises delivery delay. In
addition, the Post Office is well to the fore in the development of telegraph
message relay techniques for services beyond Europe.
The Telex Service (opened in England in 1932) combines the speed of the
telephone with the accuracy of the printed word. Calls may be made direct
between the rapidly increasing number of telex users in the United Kingdom
(about 14,000 by the end of 1964) and also to some 200,000 subscribers spread
throughout the world. To send a message, the subscriber types it on the
keyboard of his teleprinter: it is then reproduced simultaneously on both the
sending and receiving subscribers’ installations. For call charging purposes
Britain is divided into 50 charging areas, each with its own telex centre. The
International Telex Exchange (first opened in London in 1936) provides a
teleprinter service to over 100 countries abroad. The service is available day
and night except for a few routes outside Europe, and messages may be
transmitted to a subscriber even though his teleprinter is unattended, for
attention when his office reopens. Some 10 per cent of overseas telex calls
originating in Britain are still handled by operators but a new British-designed
switchboard enables them to be connected on request instead of having to be
booked in advance. The inland telex traffic is growing annually by about 25
per cent and overseas traffic by about 15 per cent, and the Post Office is
planning for a system of at least 30,000 United Kingdom subscribers by
I97°-
When the Post Office bought the property of the National Telephone Com¬
pany in 1912 it became the owner of almost the whole telephone service in
the country. Hull Corporation was the only municipality to exercise its option
of operating its own service under licence from the Postmaster General; this
service and the service in the Channel Islands, also operated under licence,
are connected to the Post Office trunk network. At the end of March 1964
there were 6,015 local telephone exchanges and about 9-4 million telephones
in Britain.
In March 1964, 88 per cent of the 5-6 million telephones (exchange
connections) in the United Kingdom were connected with automatic exchanges
and less than a tenth of the exchanges remained to be changed to automatic
working. Trunk dialling by subscribers began in Bristol in December 1958;
by March 1964 the facility had been extended to 688 exchanges, serving 43 per
cent of all subscribers; by 1970 it will be available on over 90 per cent of all
telephones. The introduction of the new group routing and charging equip¬
ment brings the advantages of quicker service, automatic accounting and
cheap long distance calls of short duration, and constitutes the most radical
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
389
reform of the telephone service since the Post Office assumed national
responsibility for it.
Telephones transmitting messages through loudspeakers instead of through
instruments held by hand were made available to the public in 1961. An
electronic telephone exchange, the first of its kind in the world, was brought
into experimental use in 1962 at Highgate Wood, in London. Three more
electronic exchanges, each of a different and advanced type, opened in 1964.
International subscriber dialling between London and Paris was inaugurated
in March 1963, and extended to the rest of France, Belgium, Switzerland, the
German Federal Republic and the Netherlands in 1964. Some of the larger
towns in Britain were also brought into the network in 1964. It is planned to
extend the service to Italy, Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
Operator-connected calls are handled at the London Continental Exchange,
from which over 1,180 direct telephone circuits give service to all European
countries except Albania. These circuits are also used to send and receive
pictures, and special circuits are used for broadcast transmissions.
A radio tower, 580 feet high, is being erected in London to provide more
microwave radio links for carrying long-distance telephone and television
circuits. This was expected to be partly in operation late in 1964.
Special Telephone There are several specialised services available by telephone, including the
Services ‘999’ emergency dialling service (used for some 450,000 calls in 1963)
enabling subscribers to be connected as quickly as possible, and free of charge,
to the police, ambulance or fire brigade services; the automatic time service;
and a telephone weather forecast service available in 16 centres. In London
a telephone information service provides details in English, French, Spanish
and German of important events being held in and around the capital on the
day of the call and a similar service in English in Edinburgh exists during the
summer months. In Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester and Bristol there
is a daily cooking recipe service. A test match cricket score service operates
at 47 centres during the cricket season and a road weather service is
provided in collaboration with the Automobile Association at 11 centres from
1 st October to 30th April each year.
A public radiotelephone service, introduced in 1959, enables the users of
vehicles fitted with suitable radio equipment to make calls to, or receive
them from, any telephone in the United Kingdom network. The area of this
service was initially restricted to South Lancashire and parts of Cheshire
but a service to cover the Greater London area was opened in 1964.
Private In March 1964 there were 93,000 private circuit stations not connected with
Telecom- the public exchange networks. These circuits are rented for private use for
munications telephone conversations, teleprinter connections, photo-telegraphy, television,
Services music, or for the transmission of signals which represent data for computers
or operate other devices.
Radio In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post
Gommunica- Office has 11 coast radio stations in the United Kingdom. These stations
tions with Ships provide radiotelegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea
at Sea at ranges of up to some 500 and 300 miles respectively. There is also the
long-distance radiotelegraph station, Portishead-Radio, which communicates
with ships in all parts of the world.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with
safety of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radio¬
telegraph and radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or
39°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Transoceanic
Cables
Satellite
Communica¬
tions
aircraft and take immediate action to obtain assistance for any vessel in
distress. During 1963-64 the stations handled 677 urgent and SOS calls
from ships and aircraft.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange
radiotelegrams with ships and connect radiotelephone calls between telephone
subscribers ashore and suitably equipped ships; they also broadcast naviga¬
tional warnings and weather bulletins.
The stations also operate a free medical advice service whereby the Master
of a ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropriate medical
authorities on the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard
ship. During 1963-64 the stations dealt with 365 medical inquiries in this
service.
The first transatlantic telephone cable, to the United States and Canada, was
laid in 1956 and its high quality, speed and reliability opened up a new era in
the world of communications. The Post Office, in co-operation with Cable
and Wireless Ltd., is taking part in the extension of the Commonwealth
submarine cable links. The first of these (Cantat), which links Britain with
Canada, was laid and opened in 1961; the second link, between Australia and
New Zealand, started working in 1962 and the trans-Pacific link between
Canada and New Zealand (Compac) towards the end of 1963; these links
provide a 16,000 mile all-Commonwealth connection between London and
Sydney. A second cable to the United States from Britain came into use in
1963. A further route to Canada was established by the linking of the Scotice
cable (Scotiand-Iceland) with the Icecan cable (Iceland-Canada) towards the
end of 1962 but at present this transatlantic routing is used only for special
services. The transatlantic cables supply 90 public telephone circuits from
Britain to the United States, 26 to Canada, 74 circuits linking the United
States and Canada with Europe, and a number of telegraph channels.
Many more circuits between Britain and Europe will be provided by six
new cables to be laid across the North Sea by 1967.
Research on the use for long distance communications of satellites, with a
probable capacity of 1,000 circuits, is being done in co-operation with the
United States and in consultation with Commonwealth countries.
In 1962 a satellite communications earth station was brought into operation
at Goonhilly Downs, in Cornwall, and it participated in the first television
transmissions via the Telstar satellite; it subsequently worked with Relay and
other satellites. For these demonstrations and experiments an 85-ft. diameter,
870-ton fully steerable parabolic aerial was employed. In 1965 work will start
on another large steerable aerial on the same site, to enable the earth station
to take part in the first phase of commercial telephony transmissions with
communication satellites.
14
FI
391
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities (i.e. the central
Government and local authorities) finance their activities—how their expendi¬
ture is decided upon and how their revenue is obtained.
Money administered by public authorities1 can be roughly divided into
two categories:
1. The funds of the central Government, raised mainly by taxation, but
also in part by borrowing, and paid into and out of the Exchequer2 in
accordance with the proposals of the Government, as approved by
Parliament (principally the House of Commons).
There are also funds administered for special purposes by central
Government departments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts
which do not come from the Exchequer. The most important one is
the National Insurance Fund, administered by the Minister of Pensions
and National Insurance and used for the payment of benefits under the
National Insurance Scheme.
2. The funds of local authorities, obtained partly from rates (local taxes
on dwelling houses and other real estate) and income from property
and trading receipts, partly from grants and loans from the Exchequer,
and partly from loans raised in the open market (see p. 75).
The following broad account of Government finance is concerned mainly
with the Exchequer and only incidentally with local government and other
public funds. For a fuller account of the nature and operation of the Exchequer
and its Accounts and certain suggested reforms, see the White Paper Reform
of the Exchequer Accounts (Cmnd. 2014), published in May 1963.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law,
parliamentary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the
principle that taxation by the Crown required parliamentary consent was
gradually evolved. The principle was established, at the end of the constitu¬
tional struggles of the Stuart period, by the Bill of Rights, 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once
the King was granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free
to spend it as he chose. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House
of Commons gradually developed the modern system of controlling expendi¬
ture through the device of Appropriation which was embodied in the
Exchequer and Audit Departments Act, 1866.
From the very early days of Parliament it had been established that such
financial control as Parliament possessed should be exercised by the House of
Commons. This control became effective, as regards taxation, in the seven-
1 For an account of public finance in Northern Ireland and its relationship to that
of the United Kingdom, see p. 401.
2 The term ‘Exchequer’ took its name from the ‘chess-board’, or table with chequered
cloth, round which the King’s financial officials sat for accounting purposes in the
twelfth century.
392
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ESTIMATES AND
EXPENDITURE
Glassification of
Expenditure
Authorisation
of Expenditure
teenth century, but as regards expenditure it was not effective until the
nineteenth century. The controlling power of the House of Commons is
acknowledged today in the Speech from the Throne at the opening of a new
session of Parliament, which is addressed to both Houses but contains a
special paragraph on expenditure addressed to the Commons alone.
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no power
to modify financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions; thus,
to minimise the chance of rejection, the practice was started in 1861 of
embodying the main financial provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill.
Since the passing of the Parliament Act, 1911, however, the assent of the
House of Lords is no longer needed for a Bill certified by the Speaker to be
a Money Bill (see p. 40).
Today, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all
expenditure by the central Government itself and for the raising of revenue
by taxation or borrowing. All Government revenue, other than sums received
by Government departments in the course of their normal activities (known
as appropriations-in-aid), is paid into the Government account with the
Bank of England—known as the Exchequer Account or the Consolidated
Fund. With certain exceptions (the main one, as previously stated, being
National Insurance benefits), all payments by the Government come out of
this account.
The following sections outline the machinery by which expenditure and
revenue are authorised and controlled, the purposes on which public money
is spent and the sources from which revenue is obtained.
Central Government expenditure falls into two main groups:
1. Expenditure which is specifically authorised by Acts of Parliament other
than annual Appropriation Acts. This expenditure includes the loans
made by the Government (shown ‘below the line’1 in the Exchequer
accounts) to nationalised industries, local authorities and other public
and private concerns for which the Treasury has specific statutory
authority to borrow. It also includes the Consolidated Fund services,
which are ‘above the line’ in the Exchequer accounts. These services,
which represent a permanent charge on the Consolidated Fund, include
the interest, sinking funds and cost of management of the National
Debt, the financial provision made for members of the royal family,
and salaries and pensions of judges and certain high officers whose
independence of the Government is thought to be better guaranteed by
permanent grant than by annual vote.
2. All other Government expenditure, which is authorised by annual
Appropriation Acts and which includes expenditure on defence, on
the social services and on the general administration of the country.
These are called Supply Services because the House of Commons, when
voting money, is granting to the Crown ‘such aids or supplies as are
required to satisfy . . . the pecuniary necessities of the Government’.
It should be noted that some of this expenditure may also depend on
legislation, such as the National Health Service Acts, which relates to
a specific object of expenditure.
The Estimates for these Supply Services are considered by the House of
Commons in Committee of Supply (that is, in Committee of the whole House
1 See footnote on p. 395
FINANCE
393
Scrutiny of
Expenditure
The Treasury
with the Chairman of Ways and Means, instead of the Speaker, in the Chair).
The committee usually discusses general questions of policy relevant to the
Estimates, though any Estimate may be examined in detail if members wish
and if time allows (see p. 43).
Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginning on 1st April
are submitted to the Treasury by each department in the preceding December.
Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called ‘Votes’ which
are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of Commons
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed
in the Appropriation Act; this Act appropriates the money to specific Votes.
Within each Vote, ‘virement’, that is, the spending of money on one subhead
instead of on another, is permissible so far as Parliament is concerned, but
only with Treasury consent. The Service departments may spend money on
one Vote instead of another, but only with Treasury sanction which, in turn,
requires the retrospective authorisation of Parliament. Departments are free
to distribute expenditure within subheads as they please subject to T. reasury
approval of the type of expenditure involved.
An insufficient Estimate, or a new service not covered by the Vote, or
virement of a magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should
be brought to the attention of Parliament, requires a Supplementary Estimate.
The Treasury exercises the same power of scrutiny over this as over the
ordinary Estimates.
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller
and Auditor General, and by the Public Accounts and Estimates Committees
of the House of Commons.
The power of the Treasury to control expenditure derives from the res¬
ponsibility of the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the financial policy of the
Government. , ^ ^
A central function of the Treasury is to present the Civil Estimates to the
House of Commons. In considering the Estimates submitted by departments,
the Treasury has to look at the proposals for expenditure in relation to
prospective national resources and to weigh the advantages of administrative
proposals against the monetary and economic cost, taking into account
current Government policy; to decide the relative merits of expenditure
proposed by different departments; and to eliminate any overlapping,
uneconomic or wasteful expenditure where this has escaped the net of depart¬
mental financial control. Quite apart from the scrutiny of Estimates, through¬
out the year the Treasury keeps a close control over such matters as rates
of pay and the aggregate size of the staff in all Government departments, in
addition to exercising a general supervision over all departmental expenditure.
The Treasury also lays down general rules of financial and accounting
procedure for departments and prescribes the principles on which depart¬
mental contracts shall be made and the limits within which losses may be
In 1061 the Plowden Committee on the Control of Public Expenditure
recommended in their Report (Cmnd. 1432) that regular surveys should be
made of public expenditure as a whole over a period of years ahead and in
relation to prospective resources, and that decisions involving future expendi¬
ture should be taken in the light of these surveys. Surveys therefore, are now
made annually and have become an established part of the Government s
machinery for the appraisal and control of expenditure. In the White Paper,
Public Expenditure in 1963-64 and 1967-68 {Cmnd. 2235), were published for
394
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Comptroller and
Auditor General
The Public Accounts
Committee
The Estimates
Committee
the first time (in December 1963) the results of the Government’s annual
survey. It showed an estimate of total public expenditure in 1963-64 and an
approximate calculation of the prospective level of public expenditure in
1967-68, at constant prices, on the basis of the Government’s current policies
and programmes.
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is
exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor General, who holds a permanent
appointment with the status of an officer of the House of Commons. Since
1866 he has had two functions: as Comptroller of the Exchequer he controls
receipts and issues of public money to and from the Exchequer Account;
and as Auditor General he audits departmental accounts and submits his
report on the Appropriation Accounts and other accounts, as required by
statute, to Parliament. His statutory function is to ensure that all expenditure
is properly incurred, e.g., that no payments are made which go beyond any
relevant statutory authority, and that Treasury sanction has been obtained
wherever necessary. In addition, however, he has been encouraged by
successive Committees of Public Accounts (see the next paragraph) to
examine departmental expenditure with a view to drawing attention to any
cases of apparent waste or extravagance.
The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by
the Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a select committee
called the Public Accounts Committee. This was first set up in 1861, on the
motion of Mr. Gladstone, for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was
properly incurred in accordance with the purpose for which it was voted and
with any relevant Acts of Parliament. The terms of reference of the committee
are to examine the accounts and these terms have been widely interpreted by
successive committees which have investigated whether full value has been
obtained for the sums spent by departments and have examined cases in which
the administration appears to have been faulty or negligent. The committee
has therefore become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and
inefficiency. It embodies its findings in reports which may be debated in
the House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the Treasury
in consultation with departments and put into effect, so far as they are
accepted, according to Treasury instructions. A reply to each report is
submitted by the Treasury to the committee of the following session and
where the recommendations have been unacceptable to the Treasury the
committee may either accept the objections or return to the charge in sub¬
sequent reports.
This committee was originally set up in 1912 and has been reappointed
annually except during the war years. In i960 it was made a select committee
set up each session under standing orders. The committee’s functions are
to examine the Estimates, to report how, if at all, the policy implied in the
Estimates can be carried out more economically and to consider the principal
variations between the Estimates of the current year and those of the previous
year and the form in which the Estimates should be presented. Usually,
the committee selects each year a few Votes, or aspects of Government-
voted services, for review.
Through the medium of seven sub-committees, the committee carries out
extensive investigations into the departments under consideration. In practice,
the Estimates for the current year are not affected, but the committee’s
recommendations produce changes in future Estimates and strengthen
Treasury control. In i960 a sub-committee was set up to examine the spring
the budget
Budget Policy
FINANCE
395
supplementary estimates and the principal variations between the estimates
presented and those of the previous year. Additional parliamentary time has
been allocated for discussion of the reports of the Estimates and the Public
Accounts Committees.
‘Budget’ is an old word meaning a bag containing papers or accounts. The
use of the word in public finance originated in the expression ‘The Chancellor
of the Exchequer opened his Budget’, which was applied in Parliament to
the annual speech of the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining his proposals
for balancing revenue and expenditure. _
The Budget speech is the main occasion of the year for reviewing the
Exchequer finances and the economic state of the nation, and its forma
basis is the Chancellor’s proposals for raising money by taxation. By the
time the Budget is introduced (usually in April) the Estimates of expenditure
under various headings will have been presented to Parliament and published,
and the expected total of Government expenditure for the year will be known.
The Chancellor estimates the yield of the revenue on the basis of existing
taxation and proposes such changes in taxation as he considers desirable on
economic grounds. These proposals are later embodied in detail m a Finance
Bill. The interval between the Budget Statement and the Royal Assent to
the Finance Bill (usually given in July) is covered by the Provisional Collection
of Taxes Act, 1913, whereby changes in income tax and customs and excise
duties1 have immediate statutory effect if adopted by Resolution of the House
of Commons. . ^ • 1
The Budget speech also gives figures relating to certain payments ma y
of a capital nature for which the Government has statutory power to borrow
and which are accordingly excluded from that part of Exchequer expenditure
which is met from revenue. These items and others are set out in the part
of the Exchequer accounts which lies below the line . ini:e I9 1 ^
Paper has been issued before the Budget giving details of below the line
expenditure.
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money
for Government expenditure. From an early stage, however it was appreciated
that taxation would affect the distribution of income and property and t e
level of expenditure on particular goods and services. At a Uuer perio
was realised that taxation also affected the nations total expenditure ai
therefore the general level of economic activity. Since the second world war.
Budgets have been consciously designed in greater or lesser degree to bring
the total demand for goods and services into balance with the supplies w ic
could be made available. c ,.1
Direct taxation on income and property affects the distnbution of weak
because the rates vary according to the size of income “d pmpwty the
proportion of a high income taken in tax being much greater than the propor
LnPof a small one; at the same time, the services provided by the Government
(whether in cash or kind) are generally available to all, irrespective oi wea
but in some cases they are specially designed to benefit peopie with Imve
incomes. Indirect taxes, or taxes on expenditure (see pp. 398^). d“ not
the distribution of income; their main purpose has always been the raising
1 In iqc7 the Act was extended to include purchase tax. , ■ ,
and (3) payments for which the Treasury has power to borrow.
396
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sources of
Revenue
Income Tax,
Surtax, and
Profits Tax
of revenue, but by discouraging or encouraging consumption of particular
goods they can be used to influence the allocation of resources and the
pattern of trade.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure and, therefore, the
total demand for goods and services in the following way: if there is an
increase in Government expenditure without an increase in taxation then
total demand for goods and services will tend to rise; the same thing will
happen if there is a decrease in taxation without a decrease in Government
spending. In this way the Budget can be used to counter unemployment.
On the other hand, if there is an increase in taxation without an increase
in Government expenditure or a decrease in Government expenditure without
a decrease in taxation then the total demand for goods and services will
tend to fall. In this way the Budget can be used to counter inflation or deflation.
For example, the aim of the Budget of April 1959, which provided for some
important reductions in taxation, was to give a further stimulus to economic
activity. The i960 Budget was designed to consolidate and fortify the progress
of the economy, and that of 1961 to counter inflation and encourage exports.
The 1962 Budget’s aim was to keep the economic position in balance. The
purpose of the 1963 and 1964 Budgets was to contribute towards achieving
the target of a 4 per cent growth rate in the national economy, as recommended
by the National Economic Development Council (see p. 252): in 1963 by
giving a stimulus to demand and in 1964 by restraining consumption.
Money to meet ‘Ordinary’ (mainly current) Budget expenditure of the
central Government is in normal years derived from taxation. Taxes can be
divided into two groups, direct and indirect, which correspond roughly to
the duties collected by the Board of Inland Revenue and by the Board of
Customs and Excise. The most important inland revenue duties—income tax
(including surtax), profits tax and estate duty (death duty)—are levied directly
on the income or property of those who, in general, have to bear them.
Income tax on individual (though not on corporate) incomes and estate duty
are progressive taxes, that is, larger incomes and estates bear a proportionately
higher rate of tax. Stamp duties, although not a direct tax, are also collected
by the Board of Inland Revenue. Taxes on motor vehicles are collected
by the local taxation authorities, which are the county or county borough
councils in England and Wales and the corresponding councils in Scotland;
the proceeds are paid by the local authorities into the Exchequer.
Income tax is imposed at a standard rate for the year of assessment beginning
on 6th April. The standard rate for the year 1964-65 is 7s. 9d. in the £
(38-75 per cent). The tax imposed on an individual is graduated by means
of personal allowances and reliefs, by reduced rates of tax on the first sections
of taxable income,1 and by the surtax.2 In the case of a married couple the
incomes of husband and wife are aggregated and are treated as one income,
1 The balance of income remaining after deduction of the personal allowances and
reliefs is taxable income. For 1964-65 the reduced rates are: 4s. od. in the £ on the
first £100; and 6s. od. in the £ on the next £200. The remainder is charged at the
standard rate.
2 The surtax, which is essentially an income tax at higher rates, is charged on personal
incomes exceeding £2,000 a year after deducting certain personal allowances in excess
of the single person’s basic allowance. In addition, the same earned income relief as
for income tax and a special earnings allowance (not exceeding £2,000) are deductible
from earned income only. Surtax is imposed at rates which increase progressively
until (for 1964-65) on investment income above £15,000 a year, income tax and surtax
combined amount to 17s. gd. in the £.
FINANCE
397
THE
UNITED KINGbOM BUDGET 1964-65
(based on April 1964 Budget estimates)
REVENUE
Receipts per £ from different sources
TAXES ON INCOME AND CAPITAL IQs. 8d.
Tobacco £958 million
Alcohol £551 million
Television and Betting £39 million
Purchase Tax £605 million
Oil and Motor Duties
Oil (including: petrol), £621 million
Motor, £180 million
Stamp Duties, Import Duties (except on
Alcohol, Tobacco, Oil), etc., £252 million
EXPENDITURE
Outlay per £ on different items
CONSOLIDATED FUND SERVICES! 2s. 3d.
I nterest on, and Management
of, the National Debt
£(i60 million
Other £179 million
SUPPLY SERVICES; 17s. 7d.
Miscellaneous (including receipts from the
servicing of certain loans, and broadcast
licences), £286 million
Support of External Policy
Defence, £2,126 million
Civil operations overseas (including aid).
£199 million
Economic Services
Roads and Transport, £340 million.
Employment. Industry and Trade, £105 million,
Industrial Research and
Research Councils, £125 million. Agriculture
(mainly agricultural support subsidies),
£373 million
Social & Community Services
General Grants to local authorities (used
mainly for education services, local health
and welfare services, fire services and
some other social services). £698 million
Equalisation and Rate-deficiency grants
to local authorities, £189 million
Housing and Environmental Services,
£127 million
Central Education Services (grants to
universities and colleges, and miscellaneous
central grants). £229 million
Health (including National Health Service,
Welfare foods and school meals and milk),
£796 million
Children’s Services, £272 million
Personal Benefits and Assistance (including
National Assistance, war pensions and family
allowances and Government contributions to
National Insurance Funds), £584 million
Other Services (Law and Order, and Arts).
£148 million
Administration and
Miscellaneous Charges
Civil Service, etc. £238 million
SURPLUS 2d.
, v .. ooio.-ioa r»f imiyps which are authorised under Acts of Parliament
tConaolidaleil Fund expeniiture3^e^°8®^8“^ yParliament
‘Supply Services are those which are financed by annual Votes by Parliament.
39^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Estate Duty
Indirect Taxes
but higher allowances are given than for a single person. Earned income bears
less tax than other income as certain fractional deductions (‘earned income
relief’) are allowable.
A single person earning j£i,ooo a year pays £179 in income tax, while a
married couple with the same earned income pay -£132; if the couple have
two children under the age of 11, their tax falls to £51; when the children
are between the ages of 11 and 16, the tax is only ^36; if the children are
over 16 and receiving full-time education, only ^21 is paid. The range of
tax payable by a single person varies from, for example, £40 on an earned
income of £500 a year to £1,427 on an earned income of £5,000; if the income
is unearned, tax liability on £500 will be £52, and on £5,000 will be £2,321.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a PAYE (‘Pay-as-
you-earn’) scheme, under which tax is deducted at source, thus enabling
them to keep up to date on tax payments.
Companies are liable to income tax at the standard rate of tax on their total
income irrespective of its amount and to a profits tax at the rate of 15 per cent.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in the
United Kingdom and on all income arising abroad of persons (including
companies) resident in the United Kingdom. The main exceptions are that
interest on certain United Kingdom Government securities belonging to
persons not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom is exempt; income
from certain classes of possessions abroad is chargeable not on the amount of
income arising but on the amount of income remitted to the United Kingdom;
and the trading income of specified overseas trade corporations1 is not
charged so long as it remains undistributed. The United Kingdom has entered
into agreements with many countries providing for relief from double
taxation; where such agreements are not in force unilateral relief is allowed.2
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of property (whether legally settled or
not) which passes or is deemed to pass at death. Thus, it is not limited to
property owned by the deceased. It may, for example, extend to trust funds
to the income of which the deceased wras entitled during his lifetime, and to
gifts made by the deceased within five years of his death (one year in the case
of a gift for public or charitable purposes). Estates with a net capital value of
£5,000 or less are exempt from duty, but on estates of a higher value there
is a progressive duty ranging from 1 per cent to 80 per cent.
Indirect taxes or taxes on expenditure are levied on commodities or services.
They are called indirect because the importer, manufacturer, wholesaler, or
provider of commodities or services pays them first and then adjusts his
prices to his customers accordingly.
Customs and Excise duties form the largest group of indirect taxes. Customs
duties are levied on imported goods, and excise duties on goods produced,
and services provided, at home. The purchase tax, wrhich is also collected
by the Board of Customs and Excise, applies equally, and at the same rate,
to home-produced and to imported goods.
The system of customs duties is twofold in its purpose: it has the function
of providing a measure of protection for British industries or preference for
products imported from Commonwealth countries overseas and it has also
the function, in association with the excise system, of providing revenue.
1 Broadly speaking, these are companies, v/hich, though managed and controlled in
the United Kingdom, carry on all their trading activities overseas.
2 The information in this paragraph is not legally authoritative. For this purpose
reference should be made to the relevant Statutory Instruments. Inquiries should be
addressed to the Secretary, Board of Inland Revenue, Somerset House, London, W.C.2.
FINANCE
399
TABLE 28
Estimates and
Outturn for
1963-64
and Estimates
for 1964-65
After Budget
changes
The major part of the revenue collected by the Board of Customs and Excise
accrues from the duties on tobacco, hydrocarbon oils and alcoholic drinks
and from the purchase tax. There are other smaller revenue duties, for instance,
on betting and matches. The protective customs duties cover a wide range of
goods but the revenue from them accounts for about 5 per cent only of the
total yield of indirect taxation.
Purchase tax is charged on a wide range of goods, nearly all of them con¬
sumer goods, at three rates, 10 per cent, 15 per cent and 25 per cent of the
wholesale value. Articles subject to revenue duties of customs and excise aie
in general exempt from this tax; other goods free of purchase tax include
food (other than confectionery, soft drinks and ice cream), fuel, books and
newspapers, young children’s clothing and footwear, certain non-proprietary
drugs and medicines, some household appliances and textiles. Since 1961
the Chancellor of the Exchequer has had power to vary by order the rate of
purchase tax and of the other main customs and excise duties (except the
protective duties) by up to 10 per cent in either direction. In the 1964 Finance
Act this power was amended so as to allow one or more of the five groups o
indirect taxes, that is, tobacco, alcohol, oil, purchase tax and the minoi
revenue duties, to be excluded from its use. Provision was also made for the
surcharges or rebates to be applied at different percentages for different
groups. This power is intended to be a regulator of the economy and requires
annual renewal. £ million
Revenue
Inland
Revenue
Customs and
Excise
Motor Duties . ,
Total Tax
Revenue
Other Revenue
Total
Revenue
Deficit
1963-64
Total Receipts
Net Payments
Budget
Est.
Outturn
3,729
2,732
160
6,621
218
6,839
90
6,929
595
597
1,192
1964-65
Est.
3,712
2,766
171
6,649
241
6,890
6,890
609
551
1,160
Expenditure
Above the Line
4,038
2,951
180
7,169
286
Consolidated
Fund Services
Supply:
Defence
Budget ..
Civil
Total Supply
Total
7,455 Expenditure
Surplus
7,455
1963-64
Budget
Est.
Below the Line
702
858
1,560
Total
Payments ..
Outturn
790
1,838
4,301
6,139
6,929
6,929
1,192
817
1964-65
Est.
6,000
6,817
73
6,890
1,160
839
1,792 1,999
4,208 4,550
6,549
7,388
67
7,455
1,560
Surplus/deficit above the line
Net payments below the line. .
Borrowing requirement
-90
597
687
73
551
478
67
858
791
Source: Financial Statement 1964-65.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
400
THE EXCHEQUER
ACCOUNTS
1964-65
In the Budget of April 1964, total expenditure above the line for the financial
year ending 31st March, 1965, was estimated to reach £7,388 million, while
the estimate for total revenue (after allowing for taxation changes) was
£7,455 million, giving a surplus of £67 million. ‘Below the line’ total payments
were estimated at £1,560 million, while total receipts were estimated at
£702 million. After taking into account the surplus above the line there was
an estimated deficit of £791 million to be met by borrowing.
Table 28 shows the Budget estimates for 1964-65 in comparison with the
outturn (Exchequer receipts and issues) for the previous year and Table 29
gives a general functional analysis of the estimates.
TABLE 29
General
Functional
Analysis of the
Estimates 1962-63
to 1964—65
Summary
Support ofExternalPolicy:
Defence . .
External relations
Economic Services:
Roads and transport
Employment, industry
and trade
Industrial research and
research councils
Agriculture, fisheries and
forestry
Community Services:
Housing and environ¬
mental services
Arts  
Law and order . .
Social Services:
Education
Health and welfare
Children’s services
Benefits and assistance. .
Local Authority Grants
not Allocated to Speci¬
fic Services:
Non-specific grants to
local authorities
Administration, &c.:
Financial administration
and common services . .
Miscellaneous services
Supply Services .
As in
Appropriation
Accounts
1962-63
Outturn
%of
£m. total
1,859
173
109
8
115
247
521
32-7
3-0
318 5-6
69 1-2
100 1-8
365 6-4
1- 9
0-2
2- 0
161 2-8
679 12-0
4-3
9-2
725 12-8
208
22
3-7
0-4
5,679 100
1963-64
Budget
Estimates
As in
Financial
Statement
%of
£m. total
1,982
193
86
258
567
211
21
32-3
3-1
336 5-5
1-4
112 1-8
417 6-8
116 1*9
8 0-1
128 2-1
189 3-1
721 11-8
4-2
9-2
794 12-9
1963-64
Total
Estimates
Including
Supple-
mentaries
3-5
0-3
£m.
1,995
202
93
198
746
261
575
6,139 100
%of
total
31-8
3-2
350 5-6
1-5
112 1-8
420 6-7
116 1-8
8 0-1
130 2-1
3- 1
11-9
4- 2
9-2
821 13-1
227
22
3-6
0-3
6,276 100
1964-65
Estimates
As
presented to
Parliament
2,126
199
127
9
139
272
584
%of
total
32-5
3-0
340 5-2
105 1-6
125 1-9
373 5-7
1- 9
0-1
2- 1
229 3-5
796 12-2
4-2
8-9
887 13-6
244 3-7
-6 -01
6,549 100
Source: Memorandum by the Financial Secretary to the Treasury on the Estimates 1964-65.
CAPITAL
PAYMENTS AND
RECEIPTS
The National
Debt
FINANCE T
Capital expenditure dealt with in the part of the Budget statement which
lies ‘below the line’ consists chiefly of loans to the nationalised industries
and local authorities. The remainder consists of loans to other public bodies,
such as the New Towns Development Corporations, loans under the Export
Guarantees Acts, and loans for overseas assistance. If, on balance, there is a
deficit, it is met from the proceeds of Government borrowing or from the
surplus, if any, in revenue and expenditure, i.e. ‘above the line’; while if there
were a surplus it would go to reduce the National Debt.
Apart from the use of surpluses, repayments and extra-budgetary funds
such as the National Insurance Fund, Exchequer payments ‘below the line
are financed by direct borrowing from the public either through the Nationa
Savings Movement (see p. 405) or by borrowing on the market by means ot
new issues of securities. New issues of Government securities are made from
time to time for the purpose of refinancing maturing issues (conversion issues)
or to raise new money (issues for cash). Since 1956, capital requirements o
the nationalised industries have been met in full by the Exchequer, whi e
those of the local authorities are met partly by the Exchequer through the
Public Works Loan Board (see p. 77) and partly by the local authorities
borrowing direct from the public in the form of mortgages or stock issues.
So far, borrowing on a large scale has been undertaken only to finance deficits
during or immediately after a war. The National Debt rose from £651 million
in 1014 to /7,435 million at the end of the first world war, and from fcVTS1
million in f^to £33,637 miliion in I946. On the 31st March ,964, the
total National Debt was £30,224 million, of which £1,836 milhon
repayable in currencies other than sterling, mainly to the United States and
Canadian Governments. Of the £27,801 million of internal debt, £4,732
million was short-term debt, mainly in the form of 91-day Treasury bills
while the long-term loans included a variety of stocks, bonds loans, and
certificates carrying fixed rates of interest (ranging from 2f to 6 per cent)
and with fixed or indeterminate dates of repayment.
PUBLIC FINANCE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
'he general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main
matures, similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole, under
rhich public revenues, with a few minor exceptions, are paid into
Nchequer, from which no money can be withdrawn except on the authority
f Parliament. That authority is expressed in the case of Consolidated Fu
harges in permanent legislative form, and in the case of Supply Services by
nnual Appropriation Acts based on estimates prepared by departments and
anctioned by the Ministry of Finance. . , .
The major portion of taxation (customs duties and exclse du“es’
mrchase tax, income tax, surtax and profits tax) is .mposed by the Umted
kingdom Parliament over the whole country, and is paid, in the first instance,
nto the United Kingdom Exchequer. From the amount attribu able to
Northern Ireland, known as ‘Reserved' Revenue, there is deducted and
•etained by the United Kingdom Treasury, under the Government of Ireland
4ct 1920! the sum contributed by Northern Ireland towards Imperial
Services (called the ‘Imperial Contribution’), the cost of the adminis ration
of the Supreme Court, and other Reserved Services and the cost of collecting
ReservedRevenue. The balance, termed the ‘Residuary Share of Reserved
Taxes’ is paid over to the Exchequer of Northern Ireland and joins with the
proceeds of taxes levied and collected by the Government of Northern Ireland,
called ‘Transferred’ Taxes, and with other non-tax receipts of a miscellaneous
402
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Bank of
England
nature, to form the public income. Among items of Transferred Tax Revenue
are estate duties, stamp duties, pool betting duty, bookmakers’ licence duties,
various excise licence duties and motor vehicle duties.
A Joint Exchequer Board, representative of the Treasury and the Ministry
of Finance for Northern Ireland, constituted in accordance with the Govern¬
ment of Ireland Act, 1920, determines the amount of Reserved Revenue and
the cost of Reserved Services attributable to Northern Ireland for each year, the
amount of the Imperial Contribution, and such other questions affecting
the financial relations of the two Governments as may be referred to it.
In the Northern Ireland Budget for 1964-65 (year ending 31st March), total
revenues were forecast at £151-84 million and expenditure at £148-76
million. After allowing for the Imperial Contribution, provisionally estimated
at £3 million, there was a Budget surplus of £80,200.
The Public Debt of Northern Ireland, totalling £120 million on 31st
March, 1964, is fully covered by repayable advances and investments held
by the Ministry of Finance.
Outside the Exchequer system in Northern Ireland, various funds have
been established, in addition to statutory Reserve and Sinking Funds, for
specific purposes. In general, these funds follow the United Kingdom pattern,
the principal funds being those relating to National Insurance and Govern¬
ment loans. The latter constitutes a pool of capital money available mainly
for local and public authority borrowings; on 31st March, 1964, a sum of
approximately £109 million was outstanding against such borrowers.
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The British banking system is long established and well integrated. It
comprises a central bank; commercial banks which carry on the usual main
banking services; the United Kingdom offices of various banks whose main
business is in other countries; and various specialised banks and similar
financial institutions.1
The Bank of England is the central bank and its principal business is to act
as banker to the Government and to the other banks, as the agent of the
Government for important financial operations and as the central note¬
issuing authority; it also maintains relations with central banks overseas. It
was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal Charter as a corporate
body, and its entire capital stock was acquired by the Government under
the Bank of England Act, 1946.
As the central bank, the Bank of England is responsible for co-ordinating
the application of the Government’s monetary policy. One of the main instru¬
ments for this purpose is the Bank Rate—the minimum rate at which the
Bank of England will discount approved bills of exchange and a key factor in
the general pattern of interest rates.
As banker to the Government, the Bank of England holds the main
Government accounts and it acts as the Government’s agent for the issue and
registration of Government loans. It also operates, for the Treasury, the
administration of exchange control which has been in force since 1939.
The commercial banks maintain large balances with the Bank of England
and these balances form part of the banks’ cash reserves. In addition, under
1 For a detailed description of the British financial system see the Report of the
[Radcliffe] Committee on the Working of the Monetary System (Cmnd. 827), published
in August 1959.
FINANCE ^ J
an arrangement made with the London clearing banks and Scottish banks in
1958, the Bank of England might call on these banks for ‘special deposits’
which, not being freely disposable, did not rank as part of their liquid assets.
Deposits under this scheme, designed to restrict the liquidity of the banking
system should the need arise, were made with the Bank of England between
June i960 and December 1962.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
bank notes. Notes thus issued need a 100 per cent cover in gold and securities,
together with a limited amount of coin, the part covered by securities and
coin being the ‘Fiduciary Issue’, the level of which is subject to parliamentary
control. In practice very little gold is now held by the Issue Department of
the Bank of England, the bulk of the United Kingdom gold (and foreign
exchange) reserves being in a separate Government fund, known as the
Exchange Equalisation Account; this account was originally established in
ANALYSIS OF BANK ADVANCES 1961-64
Agriculture and Fishing
Engineering
Retail Trade
Finance
Personal and Professional
Other Manufacturing
Other
i?
1961
1962
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1932 for the purpose of checking undue fluctuations in the exchange value of
sterling, and is operated by the Bank of England as agent for the Treasury.
The provision of coin for circulation is the responsibility of a Government
department, the Royal Mint.
The The banks handling the major part of the domestic banking business in the
Commercial United Kingdom are limited liability companies which, in the main, are
Banks subject to the ordinary law relating to such companies.
Some of the main features of the United Kingdom commercial banks are:
1. A relatively small number of banks control a large number of branches.
United Kingdom members of the British Bankers’ Association include
11 London clearing banks,1 5 banks in Scotland and 3 in Northern
Ireland; they control some 13,000 branches and had total net deposits of
£8,700 million at the end of 1963.
2. The volume of cheques handled is very large and, in spite of a stamp
duty of 2d. on each cheque, many payments—and even relatively small
payments—are made by cheque. The average daily value of cheques,
drafts, bills and bankers’ effects cleared in 1963 through the London
and Provincial Clearing Houses was £994 million; and many cheques
do not, for various reasons, pass through clearing houses. In addition,
a growing volume of payments is effected through the credit transfer
scheme introduced in i960: the average daily value of the credit clearing
through the London Clearing House in 1963 was almost £23 million.
3. It is the practice of the London clearing banks to maintain a ratio of
about 8 per cent between cash reserves and total deposits (of which
rather more than a half are repayable on demand, the remainder being
mainly deposits at interest and subject to notice).
The banks make advances to customers partly in the form of overdrafts
and partly in the form of loans (with or without collateral security); in
either case, the advance is normally for a short term only unless renewed.
The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total deposits declined
from about 43 per cent in 1938 to about 17 per cent at the end of the
war, but gradually climbed back to settle down to a level of 26 to 30 per
cent for a number of years from 1951. After the withdrawal in 1958 of
official requests to the banks to restrict the level of their advances, the
percentage again moved up, and by July 1961, when the banks were
again asked to restrain their lending, was over 47 per cent. In May 1964
the ratio of advances to total deposits was over 50 per cent, well above
the 1938 level.2 The diagram on p. 403 shows the relative size of bank
advances outstanding in recent years to different sectors of the economy.
The increase in the volume of advances since 1958 has been accompanied
by innovations in bank lending practice, including the introduction of
schemes for personal loans repayable by fixed monthly instalments over
1 Three of these banks are members of the London Clearing House but have headquarters
outside London (at Liverpool and Manchester).
2 About 33 per cent of the banks’ deposits at this time were covered by cash and other
highly liquid securities, while 15 per cent were covered by British Government and
other long-term securities. Until 1963 it was a convention that at least 30 per cent of
deposits should be covered by cash and other liquid securities; in September 1963,
however, the clearing banks were informed by the Bank of England that they should aim
at achieving a liquidity ratio of not less than 28 per cent between then and April 1964
and subsequently the banks were told that they should continue to do this for the time
being.
FINANCE 4°5
periods up to two years, and facilities for limited service accounts at
low cost. Another development was the acquisition by many banks of
share capital in hire purchase finance companies.
4. Certain banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland have retained limited
rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount specified by
legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by Bank of England
notes and by coin.
United
Kingdom
Offices of Banks
Operating
Mainly
Overseas
The importance of London as a financial and trading centre and as the largest
city of the British Commonwealth has encouraged many banks whose main
business is in other Commonwealth countries and foreign countries to
maintain London offices1; in some cases, indeed, the institutions concerned
are United Kingdom companies and the London office is the head office.
These London offices form part of the complex structure engaged in the
financing of trade not only between Britain and other countries but also in
goods which are shipped direct between other countries.
Savings Banks
and the
National
Savings
Movement
The function of Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Savings Bank is
to provide readily available facilities for the investment of small savings. Both
these types of banks were already well established during the nineteenth
century. The growth of their business was, however, encouraged in the first
world war when the War Savings Committee was set up under Government
auspices to promote an official savings drive. A new type of long-term security
for the small investor was inaugurated at that time. This was the National
Savings Certificate, encashable at par at any time, with interest payable only
on encashment, but free of income tax. From this war-time drive originated
the present National Savings Movement, which encourages the widespread
investment of savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Sayings
Bank and in National Savings securities. The movement is led by the National
Savings Committee for England and Wales and similar committees for Scot¬
land and Northern Ireland.2 The committees are bodies of independent
persons representing regional savings organisations and various national
institutions connected with such matters as finance, industry and education.
They are assisted by a salaried staff of civil servants. Voluntary local savings
committees, often assisted or promoted by local authorities, co-ordinate the
work of voluntary local savings groups.
Three National Savings securities are now on sale: the National Savings
Certificate, the National Development Bond, and the Premium Savings Bond.
The National Development Bond was first issued in May 1964 (when it
replaced the Defence Bond). National Development Bonds are repayable at
par on one month’s notice; interest is half-yearly and is taxable. Premium
Savings Bonds, which were first issued in 1956, give investors (after an initial
period of three months and thereafter monthly) a chance to win prizes ranging
from /2=; to A,000 instead of receiving interest. At the end of June 1964,
Vi million was invested in this form of savings. Nearly all British Govern¬
ment securities are held on the Post Office Register and can also be bought or
sold at most post offices in the United Kingdom.
1 Twenty-nine overseas banks are members of the British Bankers’ Association.
2 The Northern Ireland Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration
of Ulster Savings but the furtherance and organisation of the savings movement in
Northern Ireland is the concern of a central voluntary committee, which is assisted
by county and local committees and district groups, all of a voluntary nature.
406
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Co-operative
Banks
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
The Merchant
Banks
Trustee Savings Banks are managed by boards of honorary trustees and
managers; the greater part of the funds deposited with them are ordinary
deposits which are withdrawable on demand or at short notice. These
deposits are invested with the National Debt Commissioners, and the
Government is responsible to the trustees for the repayment of the money so
invested, with accrued interest, as and when required. In certain circum¬
stances, Trustee Savings Banks also accept deposits of up to £3,000 for
special investment. These deposits, which may receive a higher rate of interest
than ordinary deposits, are invested by the Trustees under the supervision
of the National Debt Commissioners, but the Government is not responsible
to the trustees for the repayment of these investments. There are about
1,350 Trustee Offices controlled by 80 independent banks and depositors
number over 8| million. At the end of June 1964 deposits in the Ordinary
Departments of the Trustee Savings Banks totalled £1,001-3 million and
deposits of the Special Investment Departments totalled £826-3 million.
The Post Office Savings Bank, which celebrated its centenary in 1961, is
the largest organisation of its kind in the world. It has over 22 million
active accounts; in June 1964 total balances, which carry a Government
guarantee, amounted to £1,822-2 million, roughly £83 per depositor. Through
a centralised system of accounting, a depositor can pay in money or make a
withdrawal at any one of some 20,000 post offices throughout the country.
A person may have deposits in only one Trustee Savings Bank and his
holding in the ordinary department is limited to £5,000. He may also hold
up to £5,000 in the Post Office Savings Bank. The maximum amount of
National Savings Certificates which may be held by any one person is at
present £600 worth of the current (eleventh) issue, introduced in May 1963,
in addition to holdings of previous issues, and £1,000 worth of Premium
Savings Bonds. The limit on individual holdings of National Development
Bonds is £2,500. By June 1964 National Savings had reached a record total
of over £8,155 million, and covered over a quarter of the National Debt.
The Co-operative Wholesale Society formed a deposit and loan department
about the year 1870, and the right of a co-operative society to engage in
banking was legally defined in the Industrial and Provident Societies Act of
1876. The primary purpose of the Co-operative Wholesale Society Bank was
to serve the co-operative movement, whose financial centre it has become,
but the clients of the bank now include trade unions and other mutual societies,
local authorities and individual depositors. The bank’s headquarters are in
Manchester. The Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society, which has its
headquarters in Glasgow, has similarly engaged in banking since 1948.
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of
many special financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities,
which are supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are
mainly provided through the merchant banks, the discount market, finance
corporations, hire-purchase finance companies, the Stock Exchange, investment
trusts, building societies and the insurance market. The firms engaged in such
activities are in the main highly specialised, e.g., discount and other finance
houses, stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers.
The merchant banks have helped to give London an international reputation
as a world financial centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. They
are of two kinds, and are known as accepting houses and issuing houses,
be Discount
[arket
'inance
Corporations
FINANCE 4°7
according to whether they specialise predominantly in the work of acceptance
credit1 or in transactions involving the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf
of their customers. They participate in the issue of long and short-term loans
to governments of, or concerns in, overseas countries in sterling (where
permitted by exchange control regulations) or in other currencies which have
been deposited with them; this latter type of transaction has increased con¬
siderably in recent years. They are also engaged in the work of the gold and
foreign exchange markets, and they have many other functions in connection
with the financing of trade, investment management, and the insurance
world.
The main business of the discount market consists of trading in and holding
commercial bills of exchange, United Kingdom Government Treasury bills
and other short-term securities. In recent years commercial bills have become
a small proportion of the discount market’s business, while dealings in
short-term bonds and Treasury bills have increased considerably. Tenders
for Treasury bills are invited by the Government each week and the firms
which comprise the discount market acquire the bulk of their Treasury bills
in this way. They finance the purchase of the bills and securities they hold,
chiefly by loans from the banks; about half of these loans come from the
London clearing banks, and most of the remainder from other United
Kingdom and overseas banks. In the main these loans and deposits may be
called in at any time.
The commercial banks do not, in the ordinary way, buy Treasury bills
at the weekly tenders except on behalf of customers, but they purchase, from
the discount market, bills which have been taken up by the market and held
until they become of a maturity required by the banks.
The Bank of England acts as lender of last resort to the twelve members of
the London discount market. The clearing banks do not borrow money
directly from the Bank of England; if they need to add to their cash resources
they call in part of their loans to the discount market. If, as a result, any
particular discount house is unable to cover its needs for cash elsewhere, it is
obliged to borrow from the Bank of England, normally at bank rate. Since the
beginning of 1963 the Bank of England has reaffirmed its right to charge a
rate higher than bank rate, in order to allow more flexibility in its control of
short-term interest rates.
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited and the
Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited, were set up in
1945 to assist in dealing with the problems of post-war reconstruction and
development. Although the Government displayed considerable interest in
their formation, the corporations themselves are ordinary limited companies
with no official representation on their boards and having no recourse to
public funds. Another finance corporation, the Commonwealth Development
Finance Company Limited, was established in 1953 assist development
projects in the Commonwealth. Among other financial corporations of note
are the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Limited, and the Scottish Agri¬
cultural Securities Corporation Limited.
1 Acceptance credit has been defined as fundamentally a three-month operation
financing exports from and imports to Britain and to other markets The expression
is derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are accepted
or guaranteed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be
discounted for cash by a discount house.
O
408
Finance
Corporation for
Industry Limited
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The FCI was formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of
£200,000 and upwards) for the re-equipment and development of major
industries in the national interest with a view to promoting efficiency and
thereby assisting in the maintenance and increase of employment.
The FCI has an authorised and issued capital of £25 million and may
borrow up to four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of
£125 million. The share capital is held as follows: 40 per cent by insurance
companies, 30 per cent by investment trust companies and 30 per cent by the
Bank of England. At 31st March, 1964, the capital called and paid up was 2 per
cent (£500,000); the Bank of England paid £5 million in advance of call in
I95^_59* The liability of the shareholders in respect of the uncalled capital
represents security to the banks providing loans for the corporation’s working
capital.
The enterprises assisted by the FCI are concerned with a variety of products,
such as steel, oil, chemicals, shipping, diesel engines, and electrical com¬
ponents.
Industrial and
The ICFC has a smaller issued capital than that of the FCI and has as its
Commercial Finance main object the provision of credit and finance by means of loan and share
Corporation Limited capital for industrial and commercial concerns in Great Britain, particularly
in cases where the existing facilities provided by banking institutions and the
Stock Exchange are not readily or easily available.
The authorised and issued share capital of the ICFC is £20 million paid up
in full and a line of credit of £8-25 million, both provided principally by the
London clearing banks and the Scottish banks in proportion to their size,
with a token participation by the Bank of England. In addition, public
debenture issues have been made to a total of £30 million since July 1959-
The current resources of the ICFC, including reserves shown in the balance
sheet, therefore total more than £66 million.
The corporation’s function is to provide finance in sums ranging between
£5,000 and £200,000 or more for small and medium-sized concerns. It has
been associated with more than 1,300 companies in the financing of their long¬
term development and has established branches in several large provincial
cities.
Commonwealth
Development
Finance Company
Limited
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company was set up in 1953 as
a new channel for the investment of private capital in Commonwealth
development schemes. Its authorised share capital is £30 million, of wdiich
about 14! million ‘A’ ordinary shares of £1 (2s. paid) are held by industrial,
shipping, mining and banking interests in the United Kingdom, and n|
million ‘B’ ordinary shares of £1 (10s. paid) are held by the Bank of England
and certain central banks in the Commonwealth. Commitments entered into
from its inception in 1953 up to the end of March 1964 amounted to the
sterling equivalent of approximately £28 million.
Agricultural
Mortgage
Corporations
The primary function of the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Ltd.,
established in 1928, is to grant long-term loans against first mortgages on
agricultural lands and buildings in England and Wales. The share capital
was subscribed by the Bank of England and other banks, but the funds are
mainly derived from public issues of debentures, of which about £53 million
was outstanding in March 1964.
The Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Limited was established
in 1933 and fulfils broadly similar functions in Scotland. Its share capital
is subscribed by three Scottish banks.
FINANCE
409
rhe Stock
Exchanges
Investment
Trusts and
Unit Trusts
There are 22 stock exchanges in the British Isles, of which 14 are in England
and Wales, five are in Scotland, one in Northern Ireland and two in the Irish
Republic. The London Stock Exchange is, however, by far the most important
and is one of the world’s two foremost free markets in securities. A Joint
Committee on the Co-ordination of Stock Exchanges was set up in May 1962
to consider the best method of co-ordinating the stock exchanges, and the
merging of four Scottish stock exchanges took place in January 1964.
The stock exchanges provide a means by which a holder of quoted stocks
or shares (all important securities are quoted) can, if he wishes, find a buyer
for his securities; they are also a most important element in the raising of new
capital by Government and commercial borrowers. Some 9,200 securities
are quoted on the London Stock Exchange; at the end of March 1964 these
had a total market value of -£59,800 million, of which over two-thirds
represented equity capital.
The stock exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains
are made between members reflect the interaction of supply of and demand
for the securities concerned. All the stock exchanges operate under strict
rules of conduct which they formulate themselves.
In recent years there has been a constantly rising demand for ordinary
(equity) shares, partly in expectation that such shares will maintain their real
value or grow in value in periods of rising prices. Insurance companies and
pension funds now invest a larger proportion of their assets in these shares
than formerly, and the Trustee Investments Act of 1961 permits trustees,
under certain conditions, to invest up to half the funds they hold in trust in
equity shares.
The ownership of Stock Exchange securities in the United Kingdom is
much more widespread than formerly: it is estimated that there are about
3 million shareholders and that their shareholdings are widely distributed.
The largest public company in Britain has over 300,000 shareholders and
there are several others with more than 25,000.
Through investment trusts and unit trusts, investors may spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management.
The ordinary type of investment trust is constituted as a public company,
registered under the Companies Acts with limited liability; its business is
to invest its capital in a range of stocks and shares. Like other companies,
it may issue several types of stocks or shares and may retain part of its profits
to build up reserves. Investment trusts grew to importance in the latter half
of the nineteenth century and have been prominent in directing capital
towards overseas investment.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the securities. Normally, the managers
sell units to the public and invest the proceeds in a fairly wide range of
Stock Exchange securities. The costs of running the trust are defrayed partly
by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit, and partly by a
semi-annual service charge which is taken usually out of the income of the
trust. The level of both charges is controlled by the Board of Trade, whose
authorisation is required before units can be offered to the public, this is
only granted if the Trust Deed is satisfactory to them.
The first British unit trust was formed in 1931 and by 1939 there were
98 trusts, with assets estimated at £80 million. This medium of saving
suffered a decline after the war, owing mainly to Government restrictions
on new capital issues, but has grown considerably since 1957' ^ the end of
410
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
June 1964 there were 1-2 million unit holdings in 90 authorised unit trusts,
having total funds valued at £414 million.
The Insurance
Market
TABLE 30
Insurance
Companies—
Gross Premium
Income 1962
Although a certain amount of insurance is provided by Friendly Societies and
Trade Unions, most insurance services in Britain are in the hands of either
mutual or joint stock companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
Table 30 shows the distribution of business in terms of gross premium
income in 1962, the latest year for which figures are available.
£ million
Lifea
Marine
Other
general
business
Total
Companies incorporated in the U.K. . .
Lloyd’s underwriters . .
876
86
147
941
209
1,903
356
Total
876
233
1,150
2,259
Source: Board of Trade.
a Including Industrial Life assurance, which is a type of life assurance in which the
premiums are collected at frequent intervals of two months or less by house to house
collection. It is conducted by both friendly societies (called collecting societies) and
companies, the former accounting for a gross premium income of £42 million in 1962
and the latter for a further £182 million.
Insurance
Companies
Lloyd's
There are over 350 insurance companies incorporated in the United Kingdom
but most of the business is in the hands of about 100 companies. Most
British insurers write several of the main classes of business although some
specialise in one class, particularly in life assurance where about 40 companies
write only that type of business. A few specialise in re-insurance.
In addition over 100 overseas companies carry on business (and even more
companies are represented) in the United Kingdom, thus emphasising the
international nature of the market. The natural centre of the market is in
London, but some of the large companies have their administrative head¬
quarters elsewhere.
In 1962 the total insurance funds of the British insurance companies and
collecting societies amounted to £8,900 million; of this, £6,000 million was
ordinary life funds, £1,500 million was industrial life funds and £1,400
million general non-life funds. With the growth of group pension schemes
the rate of accumulation of life funds is increasing greatly.
There is no government control over the investment policy of insurance
funds and these represent one of the most important sources of funds for
investment in commerce and industry. More than a third of the total assets
of British insurance companies are invested in equity shares and debentures,
and this proportion is gradually increasing.
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of underwriters in London. The name
‘Lloyd’s’ is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established in the late
seventeenth century, where merchants with maritime and other interests
gathered to transact business. By the middle of the eighteenth century,
Lloyd’s coffee house had become the principal centre of underwriting business
and of intelligence about shipping movements. Although in its earlier history
the activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the conduct of marine insurance
FINANCE
Insurance Brokers
International
Insurance Services
Building
Societies
411
business, during the last sixty years there has also been built up at Lloyd’s
a very considerable world-wide market for the transaction of other classes
of insurance business, except life assurance of which the amount transacted
at Lloyd’s is negligible. In addition to its insurance activities, Lloyd’s main¬
tains a world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping
intelligence.
Lloyd’s is now governed by a series of special Acts of Parliament starting
in 1871; the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are
administered by the Committee of Lloyd’s, which does not itself transact
insurance business.
The interests of a holder of a Lloyd’s policy are safeguarded in the following
ways: (1) every Lloyd’s underwriter is liable for his underwriting debts to
the full extent of his means and is required to lodge security by way of a
deposit with the Committee of Lloyd’s; (2) the whole of the premiums
received by an underwriter must be placed in a trust fund to be used exclusively
for the payment of his underwriting liabilities and expenses, and only
ascertained profits can be released to the underwriter and then only with
the consent of the trustees; and (3) every underwriter must submit his
accounts to an annual audit.
The usual practice of underwriters today is to form themselves into groups
known as syndicates which generally specialise in particular branches of
insurance. The underwriters forming the syndicate appoint an agent who is
empowered to accept risks on their behalf and to control all matters concerned
with the syndicate’s business. If the insurance is for a relatively large amount,
several syndicates may participate, but each underwriter is individually
liable only for the proportion of the risk accepted on his behalf.
Underwriters may not accept business directly from the public, but must
transact through Lloyd’s brokers in London, who must be connected with
Lloyd’s, either as members or subscribers.
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on
behalf of the insured; brokers are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and
a valuable part of the company market. Many brokers specialise in re-insurance
business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between
companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as London repre¬
sentatives of the latter.
Over two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine insurance business comes
from abroad, partly by direct placing in London and partly from branches
and agencies established in over 100 countries. The basic principle of this
international business is that resources capable of meeting any potential loss
are instantly available for use in any part of the world.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the very
substantial assets of the companies, in addition to substantial reserves of
uncalled capital and the whole of the deposits, underwriting trust funds and
personal fortunes of Lloyd’s underwriters.
The principal function of building societies is to supply long-term loans on
the security of private dwelling-houses purchased for owner occupation,
though loans are occasionally made on the security of commercial and
industrial premises and farms. The funds of building societies are derived
mainly from the general public who invest in shares or deposits. The amount
of share capital is not fixed; shares, which have a fixed value, are not dealt
with on the Stock Exchange but may be withdrawn in cash if notice is given.
412
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Building Societies Acts, 1874 to 1962, prescribe the general way in
which societies must conduct their business. The Chief Registrar of Friendly
Societies has discretionary powers to stop a society either advertising or
accepting money from investors if he considers that the way in which the
society’s business is conducted is jeopardising investors’ money. The rapid
expansion of building society activity in the twentieth century has been
accompanied by a concentration of most of the business in the hands of a
few very large societies. At the end of 1963, 662 societies were in operation,
with total assets of £4,331 million. Eight of the largest societies, however,
each with assets of over £100 million, account for more than half the total
funds. The amount advanced on mortgage in 1963 was £849 million, a
record total.
PATTERN OF
TRADE
Value and
Volume
15
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
413
OVERSEAS TRADE
Although relatively small in area and accounting for less than 2 per cent of
the world’s population, the United Kingdom is the world’s third largest
trading nation, conducting nearly 10 per cent of international trade.
In the nineteenth century Britain attained a pre-eminent position in
international trade. At the end of the century Britain’s share of exports of
manufactures entering into world trade was about 33 per cent. Its share of
world imports of all goods was somewhat larger than that of world exports,
as imports into Britain were paid for both by exports of goods and by interest
on overseas investments and net receipts from shipping and a variety of
financial services. As other countries followed Britain in becoming ful y
industrialised, it was natural that Britain’s share of world exports of manu¬
factures should fall. Even before 1914 this supremacy was being increasingly
challenged by other nations, including Germany and the United States,
and although Britain’s imports and exports increased in absolute terms over
the years, its share of the world total tended to decline. By 1937 Britain s
share in world exports of manufactures, measured by value, had fallen to
20 per cent compared with 22 per cent in 1929 and 32 per cent in 1914. In
the years immediately following the second world war, Britain s share rose
again and in 1950 was 26 per cent; but by 1963 it had fallen to about 15 per
cent.
For over a century international trade has been of vital importance to
Britain’s economy. Britain relies upon imports for half its total consumption
of foodstuffs and nearly all the raw materials needed for its industries, its
exports of goods and services together represent over a fifth of the gross
national product. It is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aircraft, metal
manufactures, electrical apparatus, chemicals and textiles. It is the world s
largest market for foodstuffs, and among the largest for metals, cotton, wool,
petroleum and many other products. _
For some hundreds of years Britain has also been an important centre of
entrepot trade, the importance of which, however, in relation to total United
Kingdom trade, has declined in the last half-century.
Changes in value, volume, composition and geographical distribution of
imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
The value of imports (c.i.f.) passed the £2,000 million mark in 1948 and,
with rapidly rising prices of raw materials, totalled £3, 92 mi ion m 1951.
Because of the tendency in subsequent years for import prices to fall, the
1951 level was not reached again until i957- Since then, imports have recorded
peak levels of £4,541 million in i960 and £4,820 million in 1963. The increase
in exports has been at a steadier rate. The 1948 total of £1,579 i™11™ (f-O-b.
had increased to £2,566 million by 1951, and thereafter increased in most
years, but with marked expansion in i955 and 1959- ^ 1963 exports reached
a new record of £4,080 million, an increase of 8 per cent over 1962. This
4I4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
was one of the biggest annual increases in recent years and the fifth successive
year in which the previous total was surpassed.
Between 1954 and 1963 the volume of exports rose by nearly 32 per cent
and that of imports by nearly 47 per cent. In the same period the terms of
trade, i.e. the ratio between the general level of export prices and that of
import prices, moved in Britain’s favour. In 1963, however, there was a small
adverse movement for the first time since 1955.
The value and volume of exports and imports in selected years from 1954
to 1963 are shown in Table 31.
TABLE 31
Imports and
Exports :
Annual Figures
Commodity
Composition
Imports
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1963
Value {£ million)
Imports c.i.f.a . .
Exports of U.K. produce and
manufactures, f.o.b.6
Re-exports f.o.b.6
Volume Index Nos. (1961 = 100)
Imports
Exports
Price Index Nos. (1961 = 100)
Imports
Exports. .
Terms of Trade0 (1961 = 100) . .
3,359
2,650
98
73
82
104
91
87
3,862
3,143
144
81
92
110
95
87
3,748
3,176
141
84
90
103
99
96
4,541
3,555
141
102
98
102
100
97
4,492
3,792
158
103
102
99
101
102
4,820
4,080
154
107
108
103
104
101
Source: Report on Overseas Trade.
a ‘Cost-insurance-freight’, i.e. including shipping, insurance and other expenses
incurred in the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in the United
Kingdom. Most of these expenses represented earnings by United Kingdom firms.
4 ‘Free-on-board’, i.e. the cost of the goods to the purchaser abroad, all costs and
charges accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting vessel
having been paid by the seller.
c The ratio of export to import price index numbers: a fall indicates an adverse
movement.
The expansion of domestic agriculture has reduced Britain’s dependence on
imported food supplies and the proportion of imported foodstuffs to total
imports has not been above 40 per cent since before 1954. Imports of food¬
stuffs in 1963 (representing 35 per cent of total imports by value) nevertheless
reached a peak total of £1,678 million, mainly because of increases in the
prices of sugar and butter. There has been a similar downward trend in the
proportion accounted for by basic materials—from 30 per cent in 1954 to
21 per cent in 1963, but in both cases the rate of change has been slow in
recent years. Industrial production has tended to increase faster than the
consumption of imported raw materials. This is partly because there has been
a growing economy in materials’ consumption per unit of output, partly
because of a gradual switch from the production of goods with a high material
content (e.g., textiles) to those with a relatively low material content
(e.g., engineering products), and also because of increasing use of substitutes
and synthetic materials.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Imports of crude petroleum and lubricants are by far the biggest single
item by value among Britain’s imports: they accounted for 12 per cent
(£561 million) of the total value of imports in 1963, compared with per
cent in 1948 and 10 per cent in 1954.
Imports of manufactured goods into Britain have been growing much more
rapidly than imports as a whole in recent years. Imports of semi-manufactures
have also been increasing steadily and in 1963 amounted to almost half the
total value of industrial materials imported, compared with one-third in 1954.
Imports by value of semi-manufactured and manufactured goods amounted
to £917-i million and £651 million respectively in 1963, accounting for 19 per
cent and 13-5 per cent of Britain’s total imports, compared with 15 per cent
and 5-2 per cent in 1954.
More than five-sixths of Britain’s exports consist of manufactured goods.
By far the most important group are engineering products, which in 1963
accounted for 46 per cent of the total, compared with 38 per cent in 1954.
Within this group, exports of many types of machinery, electrical equipment,
road vehicles, tractors and scientific instruments have expanded markedly
over this period. The share represented by chemicals grew steadily until i960,
when it represented 9 per cent of total exports, but has shown little change
since then. The proportion accounted for by metals has fallen slightly in
recent years and was 11 per cent in 1963. Exports of textiles have fallen from
over 19 per cent of the total in 1948 to 13! per cent in 1954 and 7 per cent in
1963. Despite a considerable increase in exports of coal in 1963, they were
COMMODITY COMPOSITION OF IMPORTS AND EXPORTS IN 1963
(Percentages of total values)
Composition of Food, Drink and Composition of Engineering Products Exports
Xz-iko/././-. Imnnr+Q
Raw sugars) / 32-3
92 1
Cereals and / Tea/ Electrical
Scientific instruments 4 0
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
416
TABLE 32
United Kingdom
Exports and
Imports in 1963
by Main
Countries
Exports
United States and
dependencies
Australia . .
German Federal
Republic
South Africa
France
Canada
Sweden . .
Netherlands
Italy
Irish Republic
India
New Zealand
Value
GC mil¬
lion)
f.o.b.
344
236
213
196
181
173
169
168
164
149
137
115
% change on
1955 1962
+ 88
- 17
+ 177
+ 18
+ 155
+ 23
+ 78
+ 59
+ 184
+ 38
+ 5
- 17
+ 7
+ 34
+ 31
- 8
+ 10
+ 11
+ 18
+ 10
+ 17
+ 7
Imports
United States and
dependencies
Canada . .
Netherlands
German Federal
Republic
Australia . .
New Zealand
Denmark. .
Sweden . .
France
Irish Republic
India
Italy
Value
(£ mil¬
lion)
c.i.f.
500
368
209
208
206
174
165
163
154
152
141
110
% change on
1955 1962
+ 19
+ 7
+ 57
123
22
3
34
17
+
+
+ 13
+ 56
- 11
+ 99
+ 5
+ 6
+ 6
+ 8
+ 11
+ 3
+ 8
+ 4
+ 17
+ 9
+ 4
- 2
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
little more than 1 per cent of the total in contrast to their importance in the
pre-war period. Exports of petroleum products have been about 3 per cent
of the total in the last few years and exports of foodstuffs about 6 per cent.
Neither has shown much change in the past few years.
An analysis of the commodity composition of total imports and exports
and the composition of engineering exports and food imports is given in the
diagram on p. 415.
Geographical
Distribution
of Trade
The growth of trade between Britain and Western Europe has been a feature
of the area distribution of trade in recent years, but conversely there has been
a decline in the proportion of Britain’s exports going to primary producing
countries. In 1953, 27 per cent of exports went to Western Europe, but in
AREA PATTERN OF TRADE IN 1963
(Percentages of total values)
IMPORTS EXPORTS
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 41?
1962, for the first time, these exports began to exceed those to the sterling
area and by 1963 they formed 37 per cent of the total. The growth of exports
to the European Economic Community (EEC) has been particularly marked.
In 1963, 31 per cent of total imports came from Western Europe, with increases
from both the EEC and the European Free Trade Association (BETA).
Relatively, trade with other members of the Commonwealth and with the
sterling area as a whole has tended to decline. Exports to the sterling area rose
in the early 1950s, but there were some falls in later years and the 1957 total
was not regained until 1963. In 1963, 36 per cent of Britain s exports went to
the sterling area, compared with 47 per cent in i953‘ There has been a similar
fall in respect of imports. Canada, Australia, India and New Zealand, however,
are among Britain’s most important trading partners. The United States has
been both Britain’s largest single market and source of supply since 1957.
The proportion of total exports going to North America rose to a peak in
1959 but by 1963 had fallen to 13 per cent, only slightly more than in 1953.
Expanding oil consumption in Britain has given rise to a substantial expansion
of imports from the Middle East. Trade with Latin America had shown only
a small increase up to 1963, when exports fell by 12 per cent and imports
remained unchanged. The trade accounted for 3^ per cent of exports and 6
per cent of imports. Britain’s trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe has been growing over the past decade but is still small in relation to
trade with other parts of the world.
Re-Export
Trade
Invisible
Transactions
Re-exports are goods which are exported (1) in the condition in which they
are imported or (2) after having undergone minor operations—such as simple
blending, husking, repacking—which leaves them essentially unchanged.
Traditionally, the greater part of United Kingdom re-export trade is in raw
materials and foodstuffs, for example, wool, rubber, tea, non-ferrous metals
and fur-skins. In recent years a considerable re-export trade has developed
in machinery. Commodities imported from Commonwealth countries and sent
on to countries in Europe, particularly traditional re-exports such as tea and
wool, account for a considerable proportion of the total value.
In 1963 the value of re-exports was £154 million, £5 million below the peak
total reached in 1961, and the principal items were: fur-skins, rubber, raw
wool tea, non-ferrous metals, beverages, aeroplane engines and electrical
machinery. About half of the re-exports went to countries in Western
Europe. Re-exports of rubber, which tend to fluctuate widely from year
to year, fell from £18 million to £10 million in 1963.
lS previously mentioned, the United Kingdom has usually imported more
oods than it exports; until a few years ago the gap was normally covered by
et earnings from invisible transactions, but between 1958 and 1961 this
ource of foreign earnings declined sharply from £295 million to £120 mi ion.
"he invisible balance improved, however, in 1962 and fell only slight y in
963, when it was £165 million. . .
Invisible transactions are divided for statistical purposes into six main
roups: Government; transport (mainly shipping); interest, profits and
lividends; travel; other services; and private transfers. Some of these figures
re precise (for instance, for Government transactions), others are estimates,
["he diagram on p. 418 shows the breakdown of the figures from i960 to 1963.
Under the heading of Government current transactions, the main items
>n the debit side are rising military expenditure overseas and gifts, mainly
o less-developed countries. Shipping receipts come mostly from export
418
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITAIN’S INVISIBLE OVERSEAS TRANSACTIONS (net) 1960-63
freights and cross trades between other countries and also from passenger
traffic. Shipping payments, on the other hand, arise mainly on account of
foreign tramp shipping services. Shipping transactions produced a net credit
until 1959, fell sharply into deficit in i960 and 1961, but improved slightly
in 1962 and 1963. Net earnings from civil aviation in these latter two years
were enough to offset the shipping debits and produce a small favourable
balance on the transport account.
About three-fifths of Britain’s receipts under the heading interest, profits
and dividends come from investments in the sterling area. The recovery
in net earnings under this heading, which started in 1961 and was the out¬
standing feature of the invisibles account in 1962, continued in 1963 though on
a reduced scale. On the debit side, major items include interest paid on sterling
held by other countries (which thus fluctuates with changes in short-term
interest rates in Britain) and interest payments on long-term loans from Canada
and the United States. Receipts from travel have increased greatly since 1950,
reflecting the growing importance of the British tourist industry (see p. 419),
but expenditure on travel and tourism overseas has also expanded, and the
small net debit has changed little. Major components of other services include
payments and receipts in respect of insurance and films; expenditure of
United States and Canadian forces in Britain; net earnings of merchants; and
royalties, commissions, banking and other services.
?ourist Trade
CONDUCT
OF TRADE
Commercial
Policy
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 4X9
The tourist industry continues to be one of Britain’s largest earners of
foreign currency. In the six years 1958-1963, overseas visitors spent over
£1,000 million in this country. For 1963 alone these tourist receipts were
estimated at more than £210 million. United Kingdom residents on holiday,
or travelling for business or other purposes overseas, spent about £240 million
in the same year. The United Kingdom usually has a large net surplus on
earnings from tourism with North America and the overseas sterling area,
but a substantial net deficit with Western Europe. The total number
of visitors to the United Kingdom in 1963, excluding visitors from the
Irish Republic, was estimated at nearly 2,200,000—an increase of 10 per
cent over the 1962 figure, and more than twice the number of visitors in
1955-
Britain’s national tourist office is the British Travel and Holidays Association,
which derives the major part of its income from a Government grant-in-aid.
The Association undertakes publicity overseas aimed at attracting visitors to
Britain and works towards the improvement of hotel accommodation, catering,
transport, entertainment and other amenities for the tourist in Britain. It
maintains offices (see Appendix, p. 512) or agencies in 14 overseas countries.
The Association works in close collaboration with the Scottish Tourist Board
and the Welsh Tourist and Holidays Board (contributing to their information
and publicity services), as well as the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, which
is a statutory body receiving a grant from the Government of Northern
Ireland.
Britain’s prosperity depends on the prosperity of those who buy her exports
and theirs will depend on how they sell their exports elsewhere. Thus Britain
is a strong advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to trade and to this end
has taken a leading part in setting up such organisations as the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) (formerly the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation)
and the European Monetary Agreement (formerly the European Payments
Union). Britain has had a large share in these organisations’ activities,
especially those to free trade from the restrictions which grew up in the
second world war and post-war periods.
Duties on imports into Britain are divided into two broad categories—
revenue duties and protective duties. Revenue duties in the financial year
^53-64 were provisionally estimated to have yielded £2,603 million, by far
the greater part of which came from tobacco and hydrocarbon oils (petroleum
products). The yield from protective duties was estimated at £163 million, or
about 3 per cent of the value of all imports.
In the nineteenth century the United Kingdom was strongly attached to
the principle of free trade and at the beginning of the twentieth century the
only customs duties were those imposed for revenue purposes on a small
range of products. Certain protective duties were imposed during the first
world war (the McKenna Duties), in 1921 (for strategic reasons) and in 1925
(initially for revenue purposes) but it was not until 1932 that any serious
departure was made from the principle of free trade. Under the Import Duties
Act of that year, the United Kingdom imposed a duty of 10 per cent ad valorem
on all imported goods except those on a Free List (mainly important raw
materials and foodstuffs). It also provided for the imposition of additional
duties which were, in fact, imposed on a very wide range of products. These
420
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
measures provided a degree of protection for British industry and, at the same
time, a basis for negotiations with foreign countries already in possession of a
tariff structure. A series of bilateral trade negotiations between 1932 and 1939
led to some modification in the level of protection but in the next ten years,
because of Government purchase and import controls introduced during and
immediately after the second world war, the tariff lost much of its importance.
The substantial relaxation of quantitative import controls from 1949 onwards
re-established the tariff as the main instrument of protection.
In 1958 the Import Duties Act replaced the existing legislation relating to
the protective tariff (i.e. four main Acts and some 70 Finance Act provisions)
and brought it up to date in a single measure. Following the passing of the
Act, the tariff was recast into an internationally agreed form (the Brussels
Nomenclature), which came into use from 1st January, 1959. By the Customs
Duties (Dumping and Subsidies) Act, 1957, the Board of Trade is empowered
to impose duties on imported goods of any description which have been dumped
or subsidised and which are causing or threatening material injury to a
particular industry.
General Agree- The United Kingdom’s protective tariff has been considerably modified in
ment on Tariffs recent years as a result of a series of multilateral tariff negotiations held under
and Trade the auspices of the GATT, which seeks to increase the volume of world trade
by reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade, and by eliminating discrimina¬
tion in international commerce. Tariff reductions, and bindings against
increase, negotiated between countries under the GATT are applied equally
to all other GATT countries under the ‘most favoured nation’ clause.
Customs duties and preferences have been reduced, or bound against increase,
on goods which account for about half of Britain’s normal imports from other
countries which are parties to the GATT, in return for concessions by those
countries. In May 1964 GATT Ministers formally launched the new round
of tariff negotiations (the ‘Kennedy Round’) to which Britain has attached the
greatest importance. It is hoped that these negotiations will lead to a substantial
linear cut in tariffs (50 per cent has been adopted as a ‘working hypothesis’)
together with a reduction of non-tariff barriers and suitable arrangements for
agriculture. The previous series was completed in July 1962, after negotiations
lasting nearly two years; it consisted mainly of tariff reductions negotiated
between the members of the European Economic Community, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Most of the necessary changes in the
British tariffs were brought into effect on 31st October, 1962.
Commonwealth The principle of Imperial Preference had been introduced into the United
Preference Kingdom customs duties in 1919 and at the Ottawa Conference in 1932
agreements were concluded with independent Commonwealth countries,
providing for reciprocal preferential tariff treatment over a wide range of
goods. The Import Duties Act had already provided for the duty-free entry
of goods from the United Kingdom dependencies.
Broadly speaking, goods from Commonwealth countries can enter Britain
free of duty or at preferential rates of duty. A few foodstuffs, whatever the
country of origin, come in free of duty, but for most others imported from
non-Commonwealth sources there are duties, which are quite low except for
certain horticultural products.
Imports of most raw materials from all sources are free from protective
duties; the only exceptions are where duties are charged on foreign products
to give a margin of preference to Commonwealth suppliers. The full rates of
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
421
duty on semi-manufactures are mainly 15 per cent or less. The range of duties
on manufactured goods is much wider, ranging from 10 to 33 per cent ad
valorem, or higher on a few items. The preferential tariff arrangements have
encouraged some of the developing countries in the Commonwealth to build
up valuable outlets in Britain for the less complex types of manufacture. In
May 1964 at the United Nations Trade and Development Conference in
Geneva, Britain declared itself prepared to extend tariff preferences to all
the developing countries if other major industriahsed countries would do the
same, if the Commonwealth countries concerned would agree and could
obtain compensatory advantages in other markets, and provided that prefer¬
ences were not created by introducing new, or increasing existing, general
tariff rates.
European
7ree Trade
Association
Methods of
Trading
The moves towards establishing closer economic unity in Europe have a
direct and far-reaching influence on tariff policy. The British Government in
February 1957 put forward proposals aimed at associating the six countries
(see p. 417) of the European Economic Community (EEC) with other members
of OEEC, in a free trade area in Europe covering industrial products. The
negotiations proved unsuccessful and were suspended in November 1958*
In August 1961 the Government applied formally to join the EEC but negotia¬
tions were suspended in January 1963- Much time in the negotiations had been
given to safeguards for the essential interests of British agriculture and of
Commonwealth suppliers to the British market and the need to respect
Britain’s obligations to the other countries of the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA).
EFT A was set up under the Stockholm Convention of January i960 by
Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom, with the object of reducing trade barriers in Europe and promoting
co-operation between members of the then OEEC. Under the Comention,
customs tariffs on trade in industrial products between members of EFTA
were to be eliminated by stages over a ten-year period. Reductions of 50 per
cent, however, had already been made by 31st October, 1962, and under a
new time-table, agreed in May 1963, the dismantling of intra-EFTA tariffs
will be completed by the end of 1966, thus reducing the period to six and a
half years. At the end of 1963 tariffs had been reduced to 40 per cent of their
i960 levels and a further reduction to 30 per cent is due at the end of 1964.
An Agreement of Association between Finland and EFTA provides for the
extension of EFTA tariff concessions to Finland and for the dismantling of
Finnish tariffs on EFTA goods by the end of 1967*
The export trade and virtually all the import trade of the United Kingdom are
conducted by private firms.
Methods of export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the
industry, the product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export
trade especially of the smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through
export merchants in the United Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to
importers and consumers abroad through their own agents or resident
representatives in the countries concerned; in other cases, sales are made
through a firm’s own branch offices, distributing organisations or subsidiary
sales companies established in overseas markets.
Similarly, in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or
domestic trade buy directly from overseas suppliers, while smaller firms may
find it more convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export
422
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTROLS ON
TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
Exchange
Control
Overseas
Travel
Import and
Export Control
Import Licensing
houses, commission agents, and the representatives of overseas firms. Since
January 1957 overseas trading undertaken directly by the Government has
been confined to jute goods; the purpose of this is to protect employment
in Dundee, where the jute industry is concentrated and forms the mainstay
of employment.
Most of the restrictions imposed on the movement of goods and services
during and immediately after the second world war have been progressively
abolished. The following section gives a short account of the controls still
in force.
Exchange control is confined mainly to transactions between residents
of the United Kingdom and residents outside the sterling area and has been
greatly relaxed in the past few years. Since the end of 1958 residents of all
countries outside the sterling area have been able to settle transactions
between themselves in sterling. Sterling held by non-residents of the sterling
area on an external account is freely convertible into other currencies, includ¬
ing dollars. The only remaining important restrictions relate to the movement
of capital from the United Kingdom to non-sterling countries.
Exports of goods to destinations outside the sterling area are subject to
exchange control and, in general, have to be paid for within six months in an
acceptable currency or by sterling from an external account. Control is also
exercised over imports, to ensure that currency authorised for their payment
is in fact, used for that purpose.
Exchange control policy is the responsibility of the Treasury, but most of
the administration is, in practice, carried out by the Bank of England as agent
of the Treasury; and, in turn, the Bank of England has delegated to the
commercial banks a wide variety of powers to deal with applications.
Since November 1959 there has been no limit on the amount of foreign
currency that United Kingdom travellers may take abroad; a bank or
authorised travel agency may supply up to £50 in sterling notes and £250 in
foreign currency (including travellers’ cheques, etc.) for each journey abroad
for travel outside the scheduled territories (sterling area); and an amount
exceeding £250 may be authorised by the Bank of England on application
being made through the traveller’s bank. Reference is made to the Bank of
England as a protection against the unauthorised export of capital and not to
limit the amount available for travel. It is a condition of the issue of such
foreign currency facilities that they are used only for personal travel expenditure
abroad.
The Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act, 1939, empowers
the Board of Trade to make statutory orders prohibiting or regulating the
import or export of goods. The powers of both import and export control
derive from the same legislation, but the purpose and mechanism are quite
distinct.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and the
IMF, the United Kingdom Government has progressively removed quanti¬
tative restrictions from almost all imports from the countries of the free world.
The very short list of goods on which controls remain includes some items
of special difficulty and a few where restrictions are recognised internationally,
such as arms, ammunition and radioactive materials. They require a specific
import licence and quotas have been set up for most of them. Some quotas
Export Controls
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
TO OVERSEAS
TRADE
Information
and Advice to
Exporters
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
423
refer specifically to individual countries and are usually shared out among
exporters by the authorities of the countries concerned. Others are accorded
on an overall or global basis; these are generally allocated by the United
Kingdom authorities to United Kingdom importers, usually on the basis of
their share of the trade in the commodity in the past. Apart from these
quantitative controls, some further restrictions or prohibitions are applied
on health grounds (e.g., on animals, plants and drugs).
Except for the control necessary to ensure that exports to destinations
outside the sterling area are paid for in the proper manner, United Kingdom
exports are not, except in a very minor way, subject to any Government
control or direction. The few controls that are in operation are imposed to
supervise exports of military and strategic importance, to conserve materials,
such as metal scrap, which may be in inadequate supply, to assist exchange
control operations in preventing the export of capital in the form of valuable
goods and to prevent the export of works of art classed as national treasures,
such as paintings, manuscripts and antiques. Normally, individual licences
are required for specific consignments of goods subject to export licensing
control. Goods controlled for strategic reasons, not included in the category
of atomic energy materials and appliances, arms and ammunition, may e
exported to the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic and the United States
of America without licence.
The British Government assists exporters1 by its efforts to create conditions
favourable to the export trade and by providing credit insurance facilities and
information and advice about opportunities for trade in other countries.
Its general economic policy includes the use of fiscal, credit and other measures
to maintain a stable economy and to control excessive demand for goods and
services by the home market, and action through international negotiation
to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and payments.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the Board of Trade or
the commercial posts overseas. There are posts in all the principal cities and
trade centres abroad and they supply the Board of Trade with information
of every kind affecting trade with their territories.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial
conditions, pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities,
and generally assist the exporter to overcome any difficulties he encounters
in trade with the country in question, particularly those arising out o
governmental regulations. These officers investigate potential markets for
British products, advise about methods of trading with particular areas, and
seek out and pass on opportunities for export business and inquiries for
British goods. Assistance is also given to United Kingdom exporters in
appointing agents and locating potential importers. Froin records kept in
London brought up to date by reports from its overseas officers, the Expo
Services Brandi of the Board of Trade can provide informat.on concerning
any country on: .
(1) prospects for United Kingdom exports and requirements of particular
markets;
1 Export promotion is aiso a^d by the Scottish CounciUD^.opmcn, and Industry
cd Coffunerce^rovides a^Haison service with the Board of Trade Export Services Branch
and the overseas posts.
424
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Export Credit
Insurance
(2) governmental regulations affecting trade, including import restrictions
and tariffs and duties on particular commodities;
(3) methods of trading;
(4) local tastes and preferences in design; and
(5) the commercial standing of firms with which an exporter contemplates
business relations.
The Government’s official information services overseas help to promote
trade by publicising British industrial achievements and providing informa¬
tion on new developments in British industry.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department is an autonomous Government
department responsible to the Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and
Regional Development. ECGD carries on a commercial business, providing
insurance for exporters against the main risks in selling overseas. These
facilities have been progressively developed since the Department was first
formed in 1919. From very small beginnings the amount of business covered
by ECGD has grown to reach 25 per cent of the country’s export trade.
ECGD is obliged to carry on its business on a self-supporting basis, and
in no way does it provide subsidies to exporters, nor is it a charge on the
taxpayer.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer,
governmental action which blocks or delays transfer of payment to the
United Kingdom exporter, imposition of new import licensing restrictions
in the buyer’s country, war between the buyer’s country and the United
Kingdom, cancellation or non-renewal of a United Kingdom export licence,
or ‘any other cause of loss occurring outside the United Kingdom and not
within the control of the exporter or the buyer, and not normally insurable
with commercial insurers’. Cover may commence from the date of contract
or (at lower premiums) from the date of shipment.
The main types of export insurance policy are:
1. Comprehensive policies normally covering goods sold on terms of up to
six months’ credit. The exporter insures the whole of his trade, or the
whole of his trade with an agreed group of markets, for the twelve
months (or, in some cases, three years) covered by his policy. For certain
engineering goods this type of cover is extended to goods sold on credit
terms of up to five years.
2. Specific policies which cover capital goods sold on credit terms normally
not exceeding five years. Specific policies are negotiated for each
individual contract.
In April 1961 ECGD introduced financial guarantees for United Kingdom
banks providing finance on a long-term basis for overseas purchasers of large
capital goods and works, and in January 1962 the London Clearing Banks, the
Scottish Banks and a number of insurance companies agreed to provide finance
at fixed rates of interest for such loans, and also in respect of other export
financing on longer than three years’ credit which was secured by an ECGD
guarantee to the bank concerned. The value of export contracts financed
through such guarantees totalled more than £15 million in 1963-64. Cover is
also available for British concerns carrying out services (including con¬
struction projects) for overseas firms or, under certain conditions, entering
into an international consortium.
Frade Fairs
Exports
Councils
TRADE AND PAYMENTS ^ 3
The exporter or merchant is normally required to retain an interest in the
debt or risk involved and, consequently, guarantees are given up to a maximum
of between 85 and 95 per cent of loss. In February 1962 this was extended
to 100 per cent for transactions involving over three years’ credit which had
already operated satisfactorily for two years. Premium rates are assessed
separately for each country, and vary according to the risks and the terms of
payment.
An inquiry carried out by the Federation of British Industries (FBI) in 1957
showed that the large majority of British trade associations favoured t e
development of specialised fairs, concentrating on the products of a particular
industry or group of industries, rather than the general fair at which wide
ranges of products are exhibited. , ., .
Some 7.00 exhibitions, of which about 200 were trade fairs, were held m
1964, compared with 154 in i954- The number of trade fairs has more than
trebled in the last ten years. Some of the specialised fairs, such as the Motor
Show and the Radio and Television Show, attract large numbers of the public
as well as many trade buyers from home and overseas, and provide an important
means of advertising and selling British goods.
United Kingdom manufactures are shown at most of the large Internationa
trade fairs throughout the world. For example the United Kingdom is
usually well represented at the Milan, Hanover and Poznan Fairs. In addition,
between i9S4 and 1964, through a subsidiary company, British Overseas Fairs
Ltd the FBI organised British Trade Fairs in Baghdad, Copenhagen,
Helsinki Lisbon, New York, Stockholm, Zurich, Barcelona and Sydney. It is
organising a British Exhibition in Tokyo in 1965. British Trade Fairs were also
organised by Industrial and Trade Fairs Ltd., in Moscow in 1961 and Peking
in November 1964. United Kingdom manufacturers have been promm®n ah
the many important specialised international fairs which are held in North
America and Europe. . P r ,
Participation in trade fairs and ‘British Weeks’ overseas is a form of export
promotion for which the Government provides information, ■ ‘n
certain cases, free facilities. The amount allocated to the Board of Trade for
these purposes has risen from £60,000 in 1955-56 to £875,000 in 1964-65.
The formation of a British National Export Council sponsored by repre¬
sentatives of industry, trade, finance and organised labour mBrlUm was
announced in July 1964. The Council is an independent body but has the
support of the Government. Its formation followed the decision in Marc to
dissolve the Western Hemisphere Exports Council (WHEC), first set up in
1949 as the Dollar Exports Board and renamed in i960, and the need to re¬
organise the machinery for promoting exports to North and South America
A number of bodies operating in particular areas of the world are linked wit
the new Council. These include the Export Council for Europe, estaohshed in
1960, the Council for Middle East Trade, set up in 1963, and three new bodies
formed to continue and develop the work formerly carried out in Canada, the
United States and Latin America by the WHEC. Other new bodies may be
formed as the need arises. ^ rr * • n
The tasks of the new Council are to initiate and guide export efforts in all
markets; to advise upon the formation of bodies to foster British Expor s i
particular areas of the world; to provide a means of co-ordination between sue
bodies and the country’s export effort generally; and to provide the necessary
finance and services for this purpose.
426
FINANCING OF
INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
Commodity
Markets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In the nineteenth century, the rapid growth of British industry, commerce
and shipping under the stimulus of the industrial revolution made Britain
the market as well as the workshop of the world. It became the site for the
chief world markets in raw materials (see below), freight, insurance, and
precious metals. A sound commercial banking system and a flexible system
of central bank control have been built up, while specialised institutions such
as discount houses, merchant banks, accepting houses, the stock exchanges,
investment trusts and finance corporations have evolved to satisfy particular
needs for short-term or long-term finance. The facilities provided by merchant
banks and accepting houses, for example, have long been used to finance
shipments of goods not only to and from Britain, but also between overseas
countries themselves.
At the same time, the banks which were already engaged in financing trade
naturally developed to become channels for finance for longer-term ventures.
British capital was invested in overseas countries to assist their development,
increase their output and exports, and provide markets for manufactured
goods. Since the end of the war there has been a substantial volume of loans
floated in the London capital market by Commonwealth Governments (see
p. 430). A number of specialised institutions have also been established in
recent years to assist the provision of financial services for overseas countries
(see p. 432).
Britain is the traditional centre for marketing many of the world’s basic
commodities. Most of these markets were closed during the war but most,
if not all, have now reopened and many have fully regained—some even
surpassed—their previous position. Among the more important are the Baltic
Exchange (the market for shipping and air transport, grain, seeds and
vegetable oils), the London Commodity Exchange (cocoa, coffee, copra,
hides and skins, rubber and sugar), the London Wool Exchange, the London
Metal Exchange, the Liverpool Cotton Exchange and the Liverpool Corn
Exchange. These markets not only cater for the import of goods for home
consumption but do much business in effecting transactions between buyers
and sellers in other countries. In addition to these formal markets, there is
scarcely any product which cannot be traded through an intermediary in the
L^nited Kingdom. For example, London is the world’s most important
philatelic market and also the leading international centre for the sale of works
of art.
The Foreign Exchange Market is subject to United Kingdom exchange
control regulations governing the purchase and sale of foreign currencies in
the sterling area, but these regulations have been progressively relaxed in
recent years. The turnover of the market has increased materially since the
introduction in December 1958 of external convertibility for the principal
European currencies.
The market consists of about 130 authorised banks and nine firms of
brokers, all linked together by telephone in the United Kingdom, and by
telephone, telex and cable with overseas centres.
The London Gold Market, which had remained closed from the outbreak
of war in i939> was reopened in March 1954, under the general supervision
of the Bank of England. It has regained its pre-war position as the leading
centre for dealings in gold, handling the major part of the gold coming on to
the free markets of the world. All authorised banks may deal in gold but,
rhe Sterling
System
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 427
in practice, dealings are largely concentrated in the hands of the five members
of the gold market plus one or two others. Membership of the market confers
the right to be present at the daily price-fixing when the official London gold
price is settled.
An important development has been the setting up of a gold pool, initiated
in i960 to co-ordinate the gold operations in London of certain European
central banks and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The pool consists of
a selling consortium, which is not in operation all the time but may be invoked,
when conditions demand, to stabilise the market, and a buying syndicate.
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, several
countries tended not only to use sterling as their natural currency for inter¬
national transactions, but also to maintain central currency reserves _ in
Britain. When Britain abandoned the gold standard in 1931 these countries,
which came to be known as the ‘sterling bloc’ and later as the ‘sterling area’,
did likewise, and pegged their currency exchange rates to the pound sterling.
In 1939, after the outbreak of war, the pound sterling was no longer freely
convertible into other currencies and the sterling area became more formally
defined as a currency area for exchange control purposes. The United
Kingdom imposes no exchange control on transactions with residents of
other sterling area countries. . v -d
All the Commonwealth countries (except Canada), together with Burma,
Iceland, the Irish Republic, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, the Republic of South
Africa, South West Africa, the British protected States in the Persian Gulf
and Western Samoa are members of the sterling area. These countries contain
one-quarter of the world’s population and account for one-quarter of the
world’s trade. The main feature of the sterling area is that the greater part of
the overseas trade of member countries is financed in sterling; they keep
their foreign reserves largely in the form of sterling and generally maintain
a fixed relationship between their currencies and sterling. Member countries
for the most part sell their foreign currency earnings in London in exchange
for sterling and can purchase for sterling the foreign currency they require
They generally also sell gold in the London market for sterling. The United
Kingdom reserves of gold and foreign currencies are held in the Exchange
Equalisation Account, which buys and sells exchange in the market as appro¬
priate. All these currency arrangements are voluntary; there are no strict or
centralised rules of conduct.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Estimates of the United Kingdom’s balance of payments are published
quarterly and provide a summary of the most important transactions with
other countries, classified by type of transaction and by area.
The transactions fall into three main groups current account, long-term
capital account and monetary movements. The balance on current account is
composed of the balance of visible trade (i.e. the difference between mer¬
chandise imports and exports and re-exports) and the balance of invisibles.
On long-term capital account, the main groups of items are intergoyernmenta
loans (including amortisation) and other identified net long-term investment
abroad by United Kingdom residents, or in the United Kingdom by non¬
residents. The third heading, monetary movements, reflects in part the
United Kingdom’s position as an international banker. It includes identified
capital transactions not of a long-term character (e.g. changes in acceptances);
428
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
changes in overseas sterling holdings and changes in the United Kingdom
reserves of gold and convertible currencies.
Britain is a traditional net exporter of capital. To support this outflow and,
in particular, to give financial assistance to developing countries, it needs a
surplus on current account. The country tends to import more than it exports
but its trade deficit has usually been more than offset by the surplus earned
on invisible transactions. Britain’s invisible earnings are now running at a lower
level than some ten years ago, so that expanding its exports and narrowing
the gap between imports and exports are aims of ever-increasing importance.
Between 1945 and 1951 the balance of payments on current account
fluctuated widely. From 1952 to 1959 there were surpluses in each year
except 1955. In i960 there was a substantial deficit of £258 million, but in
the following year this was reduced to £10 million and in 1962 and 1963
there were surpluses once more.
The favourable balance on current account of £121 million in 1963 was made
up of a surplus of £269 million with the overseas sterling area and a deficit
of ^148 million with the non-sterling area. In almost every year from 1950
to 1959 the deficit on visible trade was more than balanced by invisible
earnings, but in i960, and again in 1961, the trade deficit rose and the
favourable net balance on invisibles fell to a level insufficient to provide a
current account surplus. In 1963, however, the balance on visible trade was
the most favourable since 1958 (when there was a surplus) and the improve¬
ment in net invisible earnings that took place in 1962 was maintained in 1963
(see p. 417).
Movements of capital, both short-term and long, may mean that changes
in balance on current account are not necessarily reflected in the reserves
TABLE 33
United Kingdom
General Balance
of Payments
£ million
1958
1960
1962
1963
(Pro¬
visional)
Visible Trade®
Imports (f.o.b.)
Exports and re-exports (f.o.b.)
Visible Trade balance . .
Invisible balance
Balance on current account
Balance on long-term capital account*
Total
Balancing itemc
Balance of monetary movements
(change in external position)*
3,360
3,407
+ 47
+ 295
+ 342
- 183
+ 159
+ 43
- 202
4,106
3,728
- 378
+ 120
- 258
- 187
4,059
3,991
- 68
4- 170
+ 102
- 89
445
+ 13
+ 255
+ 190
+ 86
- 99
4,318
4,274
- 44
+ 165
4- 121
- 147
- 26
- 129
4- 155
Source: Economic Trends, March 1964.
a The values of exports and imports shown in this table differ from those in the Trade
and Navigation Accounts used in Table 31 because of differences of coverage, valuation
and methods of recording.
6 An increase of assets is shown by a minus sign and a decrease by a plus sign. An
increase in liabilities is shown by a plus sign and a decrease by a minus sign.
e The balancing item is introduced to balance the account. It represents the net total
of errors and omissions in other items.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
429
of gold and convertible currencies. These rose by £31 million in 1961,
strengthened by borrowing from the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
but fell by £183 million in the following year and by a further ^53 million in
1963. At the end of 1963 they amounted to £949 million, of which £887
million was in gold. Britain’s net external liabilities in sterling amounted to
£3,689 million at the end of 1963. Two-thirds of these were towards countries
in the overseas sterling area. Table 83 summarises Britain’s balance of pay¬
ments from 1958 to 1963.
In addition to its reserves of gold and convertible currencies, Britain has
drawing rights on the IMF based on its quota, which was raised to £696
million in 1959. On three occasions recourse has been made to these facilities,
including a drawing of $i,5oomillion( £536million)inninedifferent currencies
in 1961. The final instalment in repayment of this drawing was made in August
1962. A stand-by arrangement with the IMF, authorising drawings up to
the equivalent of $1,000 million by the United Kingdom up to August
has since been twice renewed and now extends to August 1965.
Informal arrangements between the central banks of certain European
countries to hold each others’ currencies, together with the gold pool (see
p. 427), provide further means of safeguarding the position of sterling.
An additional line of reserves is provided by the dollar securities held by
the Exchange Equalisation Account, with a market value which has recently
fluctuated around $1,000 million.
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES
Official
External
Liabilities
Private
Investment
in Britain:
Incoming
In March 1964 the Bank of England brought together for the first time a
number of component items relating to Britain’s external assets and liabilities
at the end of 1962. The incompleteness or unavailability of statistics for
several important items had the effect of understating Britain’s external
assets more seriously than the corresponding external liabilities. But two
main features of Britain’s international capital position were clearly apparent.
One was the heavy net long-term indebtedness of the United Kingdom
Government to overseas governments. This amounted to £1,532 million,
composed of a net liability of £1,793 million to countries outside the sterling
area and a net claim of £260 million against overseas sterling area countries.
In marked contrast to this heavy official long-term debt stood the much
larger overseas assets of the private sector, which amounted in aggregate to
about £8,000 million. Roughly £3,400 million of these investments were in
overseas sterling countries and £4,600 million in countries outside the sterling
area. By comparison, the corresponding external liabilities of the private
sector were in aggregate about £2,800 million (due mainly to residents of
non-sterling countries).
Britain’s official long-term liabilities have mostly arisen from the second world
war and its aftermath. At the end of 1962, £1,930 million was still out¬
standing, of which the greater part (£1,791 million) was owed to the United
States and Canada. .
The largest item among official external long-term claims is British
Government aid (see p. 431)-
Overseas investors in Britain are allowed to repatriate the proceeds of the
sale of their direct investments, including any capital gains that may have
accrued, provided that the investment was made after ist January, 1950.
Earned profits and dividends can be transferred, irrespective of the amount;
transfers of this kind have never been restricted.
430
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Investment:
Outgoing
Overseas long-term investment in the private sector of the British economy
has increased substantially since the war. According to a survey by the
Board of Trade, it is estimated that overseas portfolio holdings of British
ordinary shares at the end of 1962 were of the order of £700 million, with
roughly a further £35 million in debentures and preferences shares. Overseas
direct investment in Britain of companies incorporated abroad (except banks,
oil and insurance companies) was about ^1,400 million, and the approximate
book value of the net assets of United States and European oil companies
was some £joo million.
By far the largest proportion of private investment by overseas countries
in Britain is made by United States firms. It has been estimated1 that the
total value of United States direct investments in Britain amounted to $3,805
million (£1,359 million) at the end of 1962, compared with $847 million
(£303 million) in 1951. About two-thirds of United States direct capital
holdings in Britain are in manufacturing, about one-fifth in petroleum, and
most of the remainder in distribution and other trade enterprises.
Private investment abroad may take several forms: portfolio investment,
including the raising of loans on the London capital market; or direct invest¬
ment by the establishment of subsidiary companies, by the ploughing back of
profits earned overseas and participation, jointly with domestic capital, in
enterprises overseas.
The United Kingdom imposes no restriction on investment in the sterling
area by United Kingdom residents and about two-thirds of Britain’s total
supply of private long-term capital abroad and half of its direct investment
goes to Commonwealth countries. Direct investment is frequently made from
a firm’s existing resources. However, borrowers outside the United Kingdom
must normally obtain the consent of the Treasury (which is advised by the
Capital Issues Committee) if the amount borrowed exceeds £50,000 in any
one year. Borrowing by Commonwealth and Colonial Governments in the
London capital market has fallen in recent years, but averaged about £50
million a year in the 1950s. The market’s facilities have been made available
to the members of EFTA. Finance is also made available by the Commonwealth
Development Finance Company (see p. 408).
Investment outside the sterling area is subject to Exchange Control
regulations and, broadly speaking, official exchange is only available for
direct investment projects which promise benefit to the United Kingdom
balance of payments in the short term. Direct investment projects which do
not satisfy this test may be financed by borrowing abroad or by using the
proceeds of the sale of foreign securities.
Britain’s private long-term capital assets abroad comprise, firstly, portfolio
investments which, at the end of 1962, had a total estimated market value of
some £3,000 million. Published statistics show that £1,200 million was in the
hands of financial institutions other than banks (of which assets are mainly
short-term), implying that £1,800 million belonged to private individuals
and companies.
Secondly, there are direct British investments abroad, for which figures
are published regularly by the Board of Trade, relating to all companies
except banks, oil and insurance companies. These indicate a book value of
about £3,500 million. The approximate book value of oil companies’ assets
at the end of 1962 was some £1,100 million. The total value of the overseas
1 United States Department of Commerce’slSurveylof Current Business, August 1963.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
431
Official
External
Assets
interest of British insurance companies is not known but, according to United
States official estimates, the value of direct investments by these companies,
at the end of i960, in the United States alone, amounted to about £350
million. The British insurance industry also operates extensively in other
foreign countries and throughout the Commonwealth. The annual survey by
the Board of Trade estimated that the flow of private direct investment abroad
by United Kingdom companies (excluding oil and insurance companies) was
about /212 million in 1963, a drop of 14 million compared with the previous
year; in 1962 a little more than one-half was in the sterling area, some 9 per
cent in North America and about 30 per cent in Western Europe. The figures
include long-term and short-term investment and reinvested profits.
Owing to the increase in recent years in British Government aid to developing
countries, inter-governmental loans form the largest item among o cia
external long-term claims. The total of such loans outstanding at the end of
1062 was £398 million and included £266 million in loans to governments of
overseas sterling area countries. Amounts owed by countries outside the
sterling area are mostly in respect of advances by the British Government in
the second world war. Other official lending includes investments of he
Commonwealth Development Corporation (see below) and the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
In addition, there are the official subscriptions to, and shareholdings in,
international financial organisations (see below) and the substantial Govern¬
ment portfolio of dollar securities. The British Government also owns real
estate overseas, such as embassy buildings and military installations.
UNITED
KINGDOM
GOVERNMENT
AID FOR
DEVELOPMENT
Commonwealth
Assistance and
similar Loans
Loans and gifts to the less-developed countries for economic development
technical assistance, budget support and emergency relief from the Umted
Kingdom Exchequer since 1951 have exceeded £1,350 million and
four years 1960-63 averaged over £i$o million a year (see Table 34). T
greater part of such assistance goes to developing countries in the
COThis0n^sistarice takes two forms: gifts and loans, and Paymf!^ f”
technical assistance arranged directly with the country receiving help (bilateral
assistance); and contributions to international bodies (multilateral assistan ).
The division of assistance is shown in Table 34. In 1963 bilateral assistance
totalled £138-9 million and multilateral assistance was £18-9 million. Bilater
technical assistance, in so far as it is quantitatively assessable, accounted fo
about /2V3 million, being nearly four times greater than it was in i960. About
half of Britain's governmental aid goes to Commonwealth countnes m Africa^
There are several public sources of finance from which United Kmgdo
funds are made available for overseas development. The following are the
principal forms of machinery through which funds are provided.
Under the Export Guarantees Acts, 1949-64, the Government has authority
to give economic assistance to overseas countries. Securities issued by the
borrowing country are acquired by the Export Credits Guarantee Department
(ECGD) and their purchase price used to pay for British expor s- e ’
most of which are those known as Commonwealth Assistance Loans, are
made through these powers to overseas Governments and bear interes
rates related to the notional rates for British Government borrowing
From 1949 to March 1964, sixty agreements with a total value of nearly
£375 million had been made, of which all but eight had been made since
432
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 34
Assistance by the
United Kingdom
Government for
Developing
Countries,
1960-63
£ million
1960
1961
1962
1963
Commonwealth countries (including
dependent territories)
Gifts
Loans
Technical assistance (mainly
grants)* ..
Other countries. .
Gifts
Loans
Technical assistance (mainly
gifts)*
Contributions to international organisa¬
tions ..
Total
111-2
43-7
62-1
5-4
13-0
7-5
4-5
1-0
25-3
149-5
144-5
126-3
47-7
80-8
16-0
10-9
44-4
61-6
20-3
16-8
8-5
1-6
0-9
6-5
7-8
7-5
1-4
7-2
161-9
150-3
119-1
39-4
57-8
21-9
19-9
6-6
12-0
1-4
18-9
157-8
Source: Financial Statistics, April 1964.
° The figures do not cover all technical assistance provided by the United Kingdom,
some of which cannot be assessed in quantitative terms.
Dependent
Territories
Technical
Assistance
mid-1958. The total includes nineteen loans to India amounting to about
£205-5 million, eight to Pakistan to a value of £53-3 million, six to Yugoslavia
totalling £23-6 million and three to Nigeria valued at £23-5 million. For the
more recent loans, repayment periods are up to 25 years and in most cases
there is a grace period before repayments begin. During 1963-64, fifteen
agreements, to the value of £56-9 million, were concluded.
The Colonial Development and Welfare Acts are the principal machinery for
providing assistance for development in British dependent territories: ^340
million has been made available for the period 1946-66. The 1959 and 1964
Acts enable Exchequer loans to be made, to a total of £105 million for the
years 1959-66, to finance development expenditure. By the end of the 1963-64
financial year £80 million had been made available.
The Commonwealth Development Corporation (CDC) (formerly the
Colonial Development Corporation), which is financed from Exchequer
funds, provides capital for development projects in Commonwealth countries.
Up to the end of 1963, the CDC had capital commitments totalling over £119
million, of which two-thirds were in Africa.
The CDC is empowered to undertake schemes in British dependent
territories and in independent Commonwealth countries in which it operated
before independence.
About one-seventh of Britain’s governmental aid contribution is directed to
technical co-operation efforts. Under the Colombo Plan for Co-operative
Economic Development in South and South-East Asia it is providing £5
million in the three years to 1966 for technical assistance, and over 5,200 people
have come to Britain for training under the plan. (The United Kingdom’s
total development assistance to the area from Exchequer funds up to 30th
June, 1963, amounted to £248 million.)
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
433
Technical assistance is an important element in the Special Commonwealth
Assistance Plan for Africa (SCAAP). British contributions include technical
services, educational and training facilities in Britain, the provision of
specialist advisers, and of teachers under the Commonwealth Educational
Co-operation Scheme. At the end of 1963 some 65,000 students from overseas
were studying in Britain, 40,000 from developing countries. Under the
Overseas Service Aid Scheme overseas governments can retain the services
of trained and experienced staff (at present numbering between 15,000 and
20,000) until they can be replaced by local people. _
Arrangements are also made for supplying technical assistance under the
Central Treaty Organisation (covering Pakistan, Iran and Turkey) and
through the Foundation for Material Assistance in Africa (FAMA).
nter-
;overnmental
)rganisations
Britain’s subscription to the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) and its two affiliated organisations, the International
Finance Corporation and the International Development Association (IDA)
is the second largest of any country. Britain’s contribution of £47 million to
IDA is to be increased by a further £35 million over the three years
I9For technical aid through the machinery of the United Nations Britain s
subscription in 1964 to the Expanded Programme of TQechm^ai. As®1S^nfc
amounted to $3-75 million and to the United Nations Special Fun $ • 5
million.
WHOLESALE
TRADES
NTERNAL TRADE
Che internal trade of the United Kingdom can be divided into two broad
ategories: trade in raw materials, capital goods and intermediate products
for example, vehicle components) and trade in consumer goods, involving
he network of distributive trades by which home produced or imported
roods reach the consumer. (The pattern of consumers’ expenditure is outlined
n Chapter 10, The National Economy.) _
There have been a number of official statistical inquiries into the distributive
trades. Most recently, during 1963 and 1964, the result of a full Census
3f Distribution for 1961 were published by the Board of Trade coven g
retail and (related) service trades in Britain (but not Northern Ireland). T
census was only the second of its kind undertaken in Britain; the first,
covering also the wholesale trades, related to 1950. A sample inquiry, however,
was conducted by the Board of Trade into the retail and service trades m
1957 and a full-scale inquiry into the wholesale trade for 1959- Sample
monthly and annual inquiries are also undertaken, covering a few aspects of
the distributive trades; for instance, turnover, stocks and capital expenditure.
Only a proportion of the trade in consumer goods passes through whole¬
salers: sales are also made to consumers through producers own selling
organisations (including their own retail outlets and mail order business)
and other sales are made directly by producers to retai ers. Wholesale channels
are particularly in evidence in the distribution of textiles agricultural produce
andPfoodstuffs. The inquiry made by the Board of Trade in ^pcet of 1959
showed that out of a total of 19,000 business units engaged in wholesale
distribution in Great Britain, over 3,000 dealt in clothing, footwear a
textiles 2,000 in grocery and provisions, 2,000 m vegetables and fruit, and
over 3,000 in other food and in drink. In addition, there were 8,000 dealers
434
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(wholesale or retail) in coal, builders’ materials, grain or agricultural supplies,
and 7,000 dealers in other industrial materials and machinery.
The value of stocks held by wholesalers and dealers at the end of 1963 is
estimated to have been nearly £1,000 million; expenditure on capital assets is
more than £100 million a year, about one-quarter of which is invested by
business units engaged in distributing petroleum products, most of them being
the distributing organisations of the major oil companies.
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according to the type of merchan¬
dise handled. Fresh fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to port
wholesalers who sell to inland wholesalers at the main distribution centres or,
in some cases, direct to retailers; fruit and vegetables, on the other hand,
may be sold by growers to commission agents who dispose of the produce
either to wholesalers or direct to retailers, or alternatively the grower may
deal only with wholesale firms.
London’s wholesale markets are of outstanding importance in the distri¬
bution of foodstuffs, particularly imported supplies. Covent Garden handles
about five million tons of fruit, vegetables and flowers each year; nearly 8,000
tons of meat pass through Smithfield market each week; Billingsgate is
the principal distributing centre in Britain for fish. Other markets in London
include those at Leadenhall (poultry) and Spitalfields (fruit and vegetables).
Two kinds of voluntary wholesale chains have developed in recent years.
Firstly, local retailers’ buying groups were formed and later (since 1954)
wholesaler-sponsored voluntary chains were set up. The latter are groups of
independent traders linked to a wholesaler or a group of wholesalers. Both
kinds benefit from the lower operating costs of large-scale trading without
losing their independence and both are of roughly equal importance. The
1961 Census of Distribution showed that about 27 per cent (or 40 per cent
in terms of turnover) of smaller grocers—mostly the medium-sized inde¬
pendents and small multiples with not more than nine branches—belonged
to these chains.
TABLE 35
Main Groups of
Retail Business
Co-operative
Societies
Depart¬
ment
Stores'1
Multiple
Traders
Independent
Businesses
Total
Number of
Establishments
1950
1957
1961
25,544
28,945
29,396
360
528
574
53,871
58,950
67,132
503,357
488,982
480,205
583,132
577,405
577,307
Turnover
£ million
1950
1957
1961
571
905
959
259
381
457
1,059
1,814
2,484
3,111
4,488
5,019
5,000
7,587
8,919
Percentage
Share of Trade
1950
1957
1961
11-4
11-9
10-8
5-2
5-0
5-1
21-2
23-9
27-9
62-2
59-2
56-3
100-0
100-0
100-0
Excluding stores owned by Co-operative Societies.
Source: Board of Trade.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
435
retail trade
Types of
Retail Shop
Multiples and
Large Establish¬
ments
Department Stores
Independent Shops
Retail shops in Britain are classified in Table 35 under four heads: (1) retail
co-operative societies (see p. 438); (2) department stores with a number of
departments selling different types of goods; (3) multiple traders, that 1
organisations, other than co-operative societies or department stores w
ten or more branches; and (4) independent retail businesses and branches of
small multiple stores (i.e. chains of stores with nine or fewer branches)
Market and street traders are also included in the table but the amount of
business done by these traders is usually very small. The table shows the
shares of the four main groups of retail business m 1961 compared wi
19A* very wide range is covered in the size of retailing establishments. On
the one hand there were ten shops (nine of them department stores) with
sales in 1961 exceeding £5 million or having takings of more than £2 000 an
hour; at the other extreme there were more than 70,000 establishments
taking less than £2,000 in a year. ^ ^
The 1961 census showed that, in comparison with 1957, a larger volume
trade has been handled by much the same number of shops and by almost
exactly the same number of people. A notable feature ^ ^
expansion of the large multiple firms; these showed a furth« incre^e
between 1061 and 1963 relative to other types of shops. The small inde
pendent shops, however, still account for nearly half of Britain s retail trade.
According to the Census of Distribution there were nearly 70,000 shops
owned by multiples (including multiple departmental stores) m 1961, having
a total turnover of £2,586 million. This form of organisation showed the
largest rise in numbers between 1957 and 1961 and their share in total sales
went up from 25 per cent to 29 per cent. In the food trades their turnove
increased by 42 per cent, compared with 11 per cent for independent retailers
and only 3 per cent for co-operative societies. Other large retailers (small
chains with from five to nine branches and other firms with 25 or more
persons engaged) appear to have about maintained their relative positio
from 1957 to 1961. Large traders of all kinds (including co-operative societies)
accounted for nearly 50 per cent of sales in food shops as a whole and for
60 per cent of the Lies of all clothing shops. The number of co-operative
stores increased slightly between i957 and 1961 but the* s^
trade dropped from 12 to 11 per cent. They account for a fifth of the turnover
of all grocers and a third of the turnover of all dairymen.
There were nearly 800 department stores in Britain in 1961, having a turnover
of nearly £550 million—about 6 per cent of the total turnover of all retai
establishments. Department stores were defined for the purposes of the 19
census as having 25 or more persons engaged in selling clothing and at least
four other major commodity groups. Women’s, girls’ and infants wear
haberdashery and other drapery was the most important category of goods
sold accounting for 40 per cent of turnover. A firm or a group of firms
frequently owns several department stores. Three groups of this kind owne
a quarter of all such stores in 1961; about 70 stores were owned by co-opera¬
tive societies. In 1961 there were 53 stores each with a turnover above £2
million, accounting for nearly 40 per cent of the turnover in this W of
business. Of the nine department stores, mentioned above, which had a
turnover of over £5 million, six were in the London area.
Smaller independent shops have been giving ground only slowly in the face
of increased competition from the larger undertakings The proprietors of
many of the smaller shops often have other means of livelihood. Average
436
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Present Trends
in Retail Trade
TABLE 36
Retail and
Service Trades in
1957 and 1961
Value of Retail
Sales
Prices
turnover per shop increased, though by less than for the retail trade as a
whole. None the less, allowing for a 4 per cent increase in prices, the average
small independent shop sold more goods in 1961 than in 1957.
Out of a total of about 577,000 establishments recorded by the 1961 Census
of Distribution, and shown in Table 36, grocery and other food retailing
groups numbered over 278,000 establishments, and the clothing and foot¬
wear group about 92,000.
Number of
Establishments
1957
1961
Turnover
1957
1961
Per¬
centage
change
in turn¬
over
Total Retail Trade . .
Grocers and provision
dealers
Other food retailers
Confectioners, tobacconists
newsagents
Clothing and footwear
Household goods ..
Other non-food retailers
General stores
Service Trades
Boot and shoe repairers
Hairdressers
Laundries, launderettes and
dry cleaners
577,405
150,552
124,602
77,437
94,448
65,323
61,360
3,683
14.458
34.458
577,307
149,548
128,910
70,662
92,426
73,319
58,692
3,750
11,154
40,152
4,573“
£ million
7,587
2,031
1,552
703
1,146
830
563
762
23
62
£ million
8,919
2,353
1,785
800
1,339
1,039
674
930
25
97
112
+ 18
+ 16
4- 15
+ 14
+ 17
+ 25
+ 20
+ 22
4- 12
4- 56
“ Number of organisations.
Source: Board of Trade.
In broad terms, the kinds of retail trade which have been expanding most
rapidly since 1957 are the household goods shops—especially radio and
television shops and do-it-yourself shops—and chemists and booksellers.
The share of foodstuffs in total retail trade has been roughly constant, though
off-licences (shops and other establishments selling beer, wines and spirits),
dairies and bread and flour confectioners have increased by more than the
average.
The 1961 census showed that the value of retail sales increased by 18 per cent
between 1957 and 1961. This was an average rate of increase of about 4 per
cent a year, compared with about 6 per cent a year between 1950 and 1957.
Allowing for a price rise of about 4 per cent, the increase in the volume of
retail sales over the four-year period was 13 per cent, or an average of 3 per
cent a year. Sales rose more rapidly in 1963 than in 1962: the Board of
Trade’s index shows that the value of sales in 1963 was 8 per cent higher
than in 1961, compared with a 3 per cent increase in 1962.
In Northern Ireland, it is estimated that the value of retail sales increased
by 4 per cent in 1963, compared with an increase of 3 per cent in 1962 and
5 per cent in 1961.
Retail prices, which had previously been rising for some years until 1958, were
relatively stable in 1959 and i960, but again moved upwards between 1961
and 1963.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
437
Development
in Methods
of Retailing
Supermarkets
Discount Houses
Automatic Vending
Machines
Mobile Shops
The development of self-service in retail establishments since 1950 has
probably helped the multiple stores and, to a lesser degree, the retail co¬
operatives to achieve a higher rate of expansion in sales. According to the
1061 Census of Distribution, self-service sales exceeded £525 million, two
and a half times the level of i957> and the average turnover in fully self-
service grocery shops was over ^55,000 compared with £13,000 m other
grocery shops. About 9,500 stores, of which 8,600 were grocers, were operated
wholly or partly on self-service lines towards the end of 1961, compared with
4 000 in 1957, less than 500 in 1950 and 10 in 1947. By the end of 1963 it is
estimated that there were probably over 13,000 and the number was growing
at a rate exceeding 100 a month. The share of different forms of organisation
in the total of self-service business changed considerably between 1957 and
1061 The share of co-operative societies in total turnover decreased from
61 per cent to 39 per cent, while that of larger multiples (with ten or more
branches) increased from 28 per cent to 42 per cent and that of independents
(with up to nine branches) increased from 11 per cent to 20 per cent,
quarter of all self-service grocers were in London and the south-east of
England.
Supermarkets may be defined as self-service shops with a minimum selling
area of 2,000 square feet and having three or more check-out points. There
were about 750 supermarkets in 1961, according to the Census of Distribution
of which 506 were owned by multiples, 203 by co-operative societies an
40 to qo by independents. It has been estimated that by the end of 1963 about
1400 had been opened. The number of really large self-service shops m
Britain however, is still relatively small: in 1961 only 108 supermarkets had
a selling area of 5,000 square feet or more and only ten exceeded 10,000
square feet.
An even more recent trend is the emergence of ‘discount houses , which
in essence are supermarkets often located outside established shopping areas,
and selling household goods (as well as groceries) at prices below those
normally prevailing. So far, because of resale price maintenance, only a ew
discount houses have been opened in Britain.
New forms of automatic vending machines have come to the fore since
1955, and an increasing number of coin operated machines are being mstahed
in factories and commercial premises as well as in normal retail outlets. The
range of goods sold is widening, with hot and cold beverages and prepared
foodstuffs among the most popular. Various estimates have been made of the
trade done through automatic machines; perhaps 200,000 machines are in
use, and total sales may be of the order of £20 million to £25 million a
year. Traders who owned and operated automatic vending machines, bm
were not otherwise engaged in retail trade, had sales of over £4 mi ion in
l()6l. ■ • • r
Some 11,700 mobile shops1 were reported in the Census of Distribution for
1961, with sales amounting to £93 million. Nearly a quarter o this turnover
was concentrated in Scotland (compared with a tenth of all retail sales).
Co-operative societies accounted for 39 per cent of sales through mobile
food shops, against 16 per cent in ordinary food shops. For the most part,
mobile shops were concerned with food sales; well over 40 per cent weie
travelling grocers, and over 25 per cent and 20 per cent respectively were
greengrocers and butchers. Only a very small proportion (about 6 per cent)
1 Excluding roundsmen and vans selling ice-cream.
438
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Stamp Trading
Mail Order
Sales and
Direct Selling
Retail
Co-operative
Societies
were non-food shops, and these specialised mainly in paraffin supplies and
hardware.
Stamp trading—the practice of giving stamps in proportion to the value of
goods sold, which may be exchanged later for a ‘free gift’—has expanded
rapidly in recent years. According to an unofficial estimate made in 1963,
there had been a 50 per cent increase in the number of persons collecting
trading stamps in the previous year: they are saved, on average, by about one
in every four persons in Britain, with a possibly higher proportion in the
London area. Between 40,000 and 50,000 retailers (of whom a third were
grocers) gave stamps in 1963, compared with between 30,000 and 35,000 in
1962. There are over 30 stamp trading companies in Britain; most of these,
however, are small and the two largest claim over 85 per cent of the
business.
Mail order trading has been one of the most rapidly growing forms of selling
in Britain in recent years, especially in the north of England. Mail order
sales through all channels reached £277 million in 1961. The 1961 Census of
Distribution showed that the sales of specialist retail mail order businesses
had risen from £126 million in 1957 to ^227 million in 1961, a rise of 80 per
cent. Mail order sales by large retailers amounted to £12 million, by manu¬
facturers to ^34 million and by wholesalers to £4 million.
Mail order houses operate through advertising in the press or through
recruiting agents who have at their disposal elaborate catalogues. General
mail order houses still largely dominate the trade, with sales of ^205 million.
About half of the goods sold by mail order are clothing and about a third are
household goods; sales of radio and electrical goods have increased con¬
siderably since 1957. The smaller mail order businesses generally specialise
in a single commodity, notably in the sale by post of seeds, plants and small
horticultural requisites.
An inquiry conducted by the Board of Trade showed that sales by manu¬
facturers direct to the public totalled £144 million in 1961, compared with
£70 million in 1950. Mail order sales accounted for 24 per cent of the former
total, sales to employees for 11 per cent, and charges for work done for 9 per
cent. Other direct sales, including sales by door-to-door salesmen, accounted
for the balance of 56 per cent. Included in these sales were items as various as
carpets, washing machines, brushes and soft drinks.
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary non-profit-making organisations
engaged in retail trade and controlled by their members, who are also their
customers. An operating surplus is returned periodically to members as a
dividend, and the amount distributed is proportionate to the value of the
member’s purchases.
Retail co-operatives also sell to the general public, but membership is open
to anyone paying a small deposit on a minimum share, which entitles the
member to an equal voice with other members in determining the policy of
the society. Investment by individual members is limited to ,£1,000 but the
rules of some societies fix lower limits. Only a low rate of interest is paid
on the shares.
At the end of 1962 there were 903 retail co-operative societies registered
under the Industrial and Provident Societies Act. Amalgamations are slowly
diminishing the number of societies, the total having fallen by 79 in three
years. More than a quarter of the total membership of the co-operatives
(12,893,000) was provided by the eight largest societies, each of which had a
Jervice Trades
Catering
Laundries
Motor Trades
Hairdressing
Shoe repairs
TRADE AND PAYMENTS t’AV
membership of more than 150,000. One, the London Co-operative Society
with just under 1 -3 million members and a turnover of £54 million in 1962, is
the largest retail co-operative in the world. Total sales of the retail co-operative
societies in 1962 reached £1,019 million (this figure includes certain activities
not covered by the Census of Distribution figure in Table 36); and of the total
trading surplus, £44 million, or about four-fifths, was allocated to dividends
on sales. . ,
Retail co-operative societies are free to purchase where they wish or to
produce their own goods, but in order to secure the advantages of large-scale
production and distribution, they have collectively established wholesale
and production societies.1 *
About 1 -3 million people are employed in Great Britain in industries providing
services directly to the public which are closely connected with the distributive
trades. The largest number are in the catering and hotel trades, employing
about 580,000, in the garage and motor repair trades there are over 390,000,
and in sport and other forms of entertainment, 180,000.
An inquiry undertaken by the Board of Trade relating to i960 showed
that there were 124,000 establishments primarily concerned with catering
with a total turnover in that year of £1,300 million. (Catering was defined to
cover public houses, canteens, and fish and chip shops, as well as hotels and
restaurants, etc.) Hotels and holiday camps (i.e. excluding boarding houses
and unlicensed hotels) had receipts of about £170 million, of which £70
million was from residential accommodation. Nearly half the total turnover
of the catering trades was from the sale of alcoholic drinks. Between i960
and 1963 the turnover of all caterers increased by 17 per cent: the increase was
spread throughout all branches of catering.
There are about 1,400 commercial laundries with an annual turnover of
about £67 million, of which some £45 million is domestic laundry (The
latter figure has tended to decline with the increasing popularity of coin-
operated washing machines and launderettes.) Dry cleaning firms in 1961
had a turnover of £40 million.
An inquiry undertaken by the Board of Trade for 1962 showed that there were
nearly 47,000 businesses in the motor trades in Britain, with nearly 58>000
establishments. Their total turnover amounted to £2,962 million, including
transactions between traders amounting to roughly £6oo-£8oo million.
Traders classified as new vehicle dealers had nearly 14,700 establishments
and accounted for two-thirds of the total turnover. Over 14,000 establishments
were classified as being primarily petrol stations, and 12,600 were also general
repairers. Sales of petrol and oil, etc., were made by all kinds of motor
traders.
Takings in hairdressing establishments have increased very rapidly—from
£38 million in 1950 to £62 million in 1957 and £97 million in 1961 Over
two-thirds of total receipts are from women. The number of establishments
(currently about 40,000) has also increased, though less rapidly.
Boot and shoe repairers (excluding repairs handled through footwear shops)
had takings of £25 million in 1961, representing a steady increase since 1950.
The share of multiple firms and co-operative societies in this trade increased
at the expense of independent establishments.
1 The two major wholesale societies are the Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited
and the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited.
P
440
Packaging
Hire-Purchase
Sales
Advertising
and Industrial
Information
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Institute of Packaging has estimated that British industry now spends
over £600 million annually on packaging, an increase of one-half during the
previous decade. The expansion of self-service shops and the growth of sales
in the form of branded and standardised products have been major factors
in the great changes which have taken place in packaging methods. These
developments are reflected in the marked increases in output of the industries
concerned—plastics, fibre-board, metal tubes, tin plate and glass containers.
Laminated aluminium foil, for example, is now employed extensively as a
wrapping material in the food industry. Aerosol dispensers, almost unknown
a few years ago, were being used at a rate of over 62 million in 1962, having
increased from about 28 million in 1959. Their principal uses are for insecticides
and air fresheners.
The rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such
as cars, furniture, washing machines, refrigerators and cookers, has been greatly
helped by instalment purchasing. The Board of Trade has powers to regulate
the terms of hire-purchase and credit sales agreements. The current terms
are: a minimum deposit of 10 per cent on durable consumer goods except
motor vehicles, for which 20 per cent is required, and usually a maximum
repayment period of three years. New legislation was passed in 1964 further
to protect the hirer of goods; it will come into force on 1st January, 1965.
Total hire-purchase debt outstanding rose by about £450 million to
£937 million during the period between October 1958 and April i960 when
controls were removed; it amounted to £1,042 million at the end of June 1964.
Of this, about two-thirds was owed to finance companies and the remainder
to household goods shops. By commodities, £397 million was owed on house¬
hold goods, £516 million on motor vehicles and caravans, £88 million on farm
and industrial equipment and the rest on other goods. There are a large number
of hire-purchase finance companies but a high proportion of the business is
done by a small number which operate on a national scale.
Hire-purchase in Northern Ireland directly financed by the major finance
houses operating from offices in Northern Ireland amounted in 1963 t° nearly
£12 million and at the end of 1963 the hire-purchase debt owed to them
amounted to over £12 million.
The expansion of productive capacity and consumption in Britain has been
accompanied by a steady upward trend in expenditure on advertising. About
£523 million is estimated to have been spent on all forms of advertising in
1963, £25 million more than in 1962. About £223 million was expended on
press advertising, well over half of it in the national and provincial press and
the rest in periodicals and magazines and in the technical trade press; and
£ 108 million (including tax) was spent on television advertising. The remainder
was divided between other media, such as posters, films, catalogues, window
displays, exhibitions, and free samples and gift schemes. Most of the advertis¬
ing is carried out by advertising agencies, which, in some cases, also provide
marketing, consumer research and other services; their representative
organisation is the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising. The trade associa¬
tion for the industry as a whole, including the agencies, owners of advertising
media, and all others concerned in advertising, is the Advertising Association.
The latter was responsible for the setting up in 1962 of the Advertising
Standards Authority, an independent body whose objective is the promotion
and enforcement of the highest standards of advertising.
Industry and commerce have in recent years paid increasing attention to
Public Relations
Consumer
Protection
The Consumer
Council
Consumer
Associations
The Molony
Report
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 441
improving public understanding of their work and objectives. Public relations
consultancy firms and the public relations departments of advertising agencies
provide general services, apart from the increasing employment by industrial
organisations and trade associations of staff specialists in public relations.
Their professional body, founded in 1948, is the Institute of Public Relations:
not only commerce and industry, but the professions, national associations,
central and local government are represented within the Institute.
Various legislative measures exist in the United Kingdom to protect the
consumer against specific abuses. Independent organisations have also sought
to establish voluntary minimum standards of quality. Weights and measures
legislation, one of the earliest forms of consumer protection, was brought
up to date and extended in scope by the Weights and Measures Act, 1963 >
it is strictly enforced by qualified inspectors. The Merchandise Marks Acts,
1887-1953, are designed to ensure that the marking of goods is both accurate
and honest. The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by the
Food and Drugs Acts, 1955, 1956, and 1958. The Consumer Protection Act,
1961, gives the Home Office power to make regulations to ensure the safe use
of any class of goods.
A Consumer Council, financed by a grant-in-aid from the Board of Trade,
was set up in 1963 to concern itself with and promote the consumer’s interests.
As a fully independent body it is free to make uninhibited criticism of Govern¬
ment departments and to bring pressure to bear on other bodies. It has
already made its views known on a number of subjects. As recommended by
the Molony Committee (see below), it works in close touch with the Citizens’
Advice Bureaux (see p. 132).
The British Standards Institution (see p. 270) has established a number of
standards for consumer goods, and the Council of Industrial Design (see
p. 227) helps to foster improvements in the design of consumer goods.
Advice to the public on the merits of consumer goods is provided by the
Consumers’ Association, a private body financed by the subscriptions of
members. It tests and reports on the quality of goods bought on the open
market and its findings are published in its monthly bulletin Which?, issued
to subscribers. In addition to the Consumers’ Association there are a number
of local independent consumer groups, which in 1963 formed themselves into
a national Federation of Consumer Groups. Assistance with certain aspects
of consumer guidance is also given by a number of other private bodies and by
certain Government departments. Special arrangements, in the form of con-
councils and consumer committees, have been made for the nationalised
industries. Individual trades and industries have also taken measures to raise
standards of quality.
A prospective purchaser of a second-hand car can obtain guidance as to
whether the car is the subject of a hire-purchase agreement. Virtually every
hire-purchase agreement on a car is registered with H.P. Information Ltd.,
a non-profit-making company whose members are car dealers or finance
companies concerned with car sales, and this company will answer inquiries
made through its members, the police, solicitors, the motoring associations,
or the Citizen’s Advice Bureaux.
The Molony Committee on Consumer Protection, set up by the President
of the Board of Trade in 1959 to consider and report whether changes in the
law and other measures were desirable for the further protection of the
consumer, presented its final report in July 1962. Some of its principal recom-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
442
mendations have now been implemented, namely those concerning the setting
up of a Consumer Council and most of the suggestions for the revision of
hire-purchase law. Other recommendations of the committee at present
under consideration include the consolidation and simplification of the
Merchandise Marks Acts, and amendment of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893.
Resale Price The practice of resale price maintenance and its enforcement by the cutting
Maintenance off of supplies is made unlawful under the Resale Prices Act, 1964, though
exemptions may be granted on certain grounds by the Restrictive Practices
Court (see p. 272).
443
16
LABOUR
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at the middle of June x9^4
was about 25 million, some 48 per cent of the total population, and inclu e
about 72 per cent of persons of normal working age (15 years to 59 Years
women, 15 years to 64 years for men). About 92 per cent of the men of working
age are today in or seeking gainful work. The remammg 8 per cent consts
mainly of those continuing their education, of the severely gabled and of
some persons of private means. The proportton of women of working age
in or Peeking gainful work is much lower, about 50 per cent, as ''n‘in>
housewives have no wish to take employment outside the home, or 1 t ey
have, are prevented by household duties from doing so. Bes.des those of
normal working age, there are probably over a million older men and
women still at work. The great majority of the working population work for
a wage or salary, but over i - 6 million are employers or self-employed.
The situation is markedly different in Northern Ireland where the mtioof
working to total population is about 40 per cent, and farmers and stall¬
holders working their own holdings account for about one-tenth °f the |
population. Northern Ireland, however, has under 3 per cent of the United
Kingdom population, so that the figures for Great Britain are broadly
reoresentative of the position in the United Kingdom.
During the present century, decreases in both birth and death ra es ia\e
had the effect of increasing the proportion of persons over the age o 45 years
in both the total population and the working population (see p. 9). Changes
in laws and customs have also had an effect. The school-leaving age has been
raised to 15 years and more young people aged 15 to 21 are engage in
dme education. The proportion of those over the normal working age who
are still working has declined (though the great increase in the number of
older persons has meant that the actual number who are working has increased)
The proportion of men aged 20 to 64 who are at work has remained very
high at ah ages. Among women, on the other hand there has been a stead)
increase dUIfng the century in the proportions employed m the age groups
15 to 59, but this has been offset by the raising of the mmimum working age
and by9a decrease in the proportion of women employed above the age o -
Therehas been an increase in the employment of married women, particular!)
m The proportion ^of "single women at work tends to decrease wffh age.
Over 95 per cent of women aged 20 to 30 are in, or see ing, emp y ,
compared with about 60 per cent in their late fifties; among married women
however the proportion at work which is nearly 40 per cent for women in
their early twenties, declines for the age-groups 25 to 34 but rises again
those aged between 35 and 50. An increasing proportion of women m the
middle gage groups are taking up employment (including part-time wor )
and more than half the women at work are married
Between 1950 and 1959 the total working population of Great Britain rose
by 5 ^er cent, from just under a3 million to just over a4 ™lhon. From
444
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 37
General
Manpower
Position in
Great Britain
Deployment of
Labour
mid-1959 to mid-1962 it increased very sharply, by more than 750,000, owing
to the larger number of school leavers and considerable immigration. Since
June 1962, however, the growth has been relatively slight. The Ministry
of Labour estimated in 1963 that the total labour force will increase by
nearly a million between 1963 and 1973. Much of this increase is expected to
come from the exceptionally large number of school-leavers in the earlier
part of the decade and the remainder mainly from the recruitment of labour
reserves, particularly older married women.
The broad changes in the manpower position in Great Britain between
mid-1948 and mid-1964 are shown in Table 37.
Thousands
End-
June 1948
End-
June 1959
Mid-
June 1964a
14,549
7,020
21,569
273
807
39
846
15,308
7,889
23,197
379
550
15
565
15,798
8,442
24,240
317
408
16
424
15,657
7,123
22,780
16,137
8,008
24,145
16,446
8,535
24,981
Source: Ministry of Labour.
Number in Civil Employment6:
Men
Women ..
Total
Registered Wholly Unemployed
H.M. Forces (including Women’s
Services):
Men
Women . .
Total
Total Working Population'
Men
Women . .
Total
a The mid-1964 figures are provisional.
b The civil employment figures include employers, those working on their own account
and temporarily stopped workers. Part-time workers are counted as full units.
e The working population figures include small numbers of ex-Service personnel on
leave after completing their service and not included in the other figures in this table.
About 40 per cent of those in civil employment are employed in the mining
and manufacturing industries and only about 4 per cent in agriculture and
fisheries, even during the harvest season. Over half of those in manufacturing
are in the metal, engineering and chemical groups of industries.
Most industries employ women as well as men, but there are jobs, such as
underground work in coal mines, for which it is illegal to employ women.
The industrial groups in which women are chiefly employed are in the
metal-using industries, in the manufacture of textiles and clothing, in the
food, drink and tobacco industries, and in the distributive trades and pro¬
fessional and miscellaneous services.
An analysis of the total number in civil employment by broad industrial
groups is given in Table 38.
The numbers given in Table 38 as working in an industry or service,
include those engaged on administrative, technical and clerical work, so that
the totals given for the production industries are greater than the numbers on
LABOUR
TABLE 38
Analysis of Civil
Employment in
Great Britain
Long-term
Changes
445
productive processes. In May ^63 the Ministry of Labour made the first of
an annual series of inquiries into the occupations of employees in manufactu
ins industries in Great Britain. The results showed that of the total number of
workers in firms withelevenor more employees,I9percentwereato.n^trat.ve
or clerical workers, 5 per cent technical workers, 25 per cent sfalled operatives,
°7 per ceM machinists or other semi-skilled workers, and 3 per cent were
engaged on transport or related duties, while the remaining 21 per cent were
employed on other, mainly unskilled, work. The metals group of industries
(e.g., engineering) employed about 34 per cent more skilled operatives, and
about three times as many technical and craft apprentices, as the rcma‘nl J
manufacturing industries (e.g., textiles). Machinists and other semi-skilled
workers were the most important single category in the latter group.
Thousands
Industry or Service
Agriculture and fisheries
Mining and quarrying   
Manufacturing industries:
Chemical and allied trades
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing and footwear
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures ..
Totals in manufacturing industries
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Professional, financial and miscel¬
laneous services
National Government Service
Local Government Service
Total in Civil Employment
End-
June
1948
old basis
1,178
876
441
3,944
931
649
750
1,422
8,137
1,450
321
1,787
2,484
3,954
682
700
End-
June 1959*
new basis
21,569
999
823
544
4,602
851
644
939
1,589
9,169
1,509
374
1,676
3,000
4,340
520
787
23,197
999
826
520
4,166
851
565
818
1,557
8,477
1,523
374
1,672
3,209
4,874
505
738
23,197
Mid-
June
19646
886
657
514
4,481
791
560
809
1,676
8,831
1,720
398
1,617
3,404
5,375
539
813
24,240
Source: Ministry of Labour.
introduced in 1958.
a a new standard industrial classification was
b The mid-1964 figures are provisional.
At the beginning of the twentieth century the occupied male population of
Great Britain still tended to be concentrated in five major groups of industries
and services: commerce and finance, agriculture, coalmining, building and
construction and engineering and shipbuilding. Wo“en w"e “‘S“
employed in commerce and finance, but otherwise tended to be concentrated
in four^other occupation groups: personal service (including domestic
clothing, textiles and professional work. During the past six y ye
concentration and segregation of male and female labour has pown jnuch
less marked as the result of a number of changes in the industrial and
44^ BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
occupational distribution of the population. The following appear to be among
the more important of these changes:
(1) A general and large increase in the number of persons occupied in
professional, administrative, technical and clerical work; the increase
in the number of women in clerical work has been particularly large
(nearly 200 per cent between 1921 and 1951).
(2) A decline in the proportion of the working population engaged in
manual labour.
(3) A decrease in the number of persons occupied in private domestic
service; the number of women so occupied fell by about a million
between 1901 and 1951.
(4) A large increase in the proportion of the working population employed
in professional, financial and scientific services and in personal services
other than private domestic service.
(5) An increase in the proportion of the working population employed in
the distributive trades.
(6) A large increase in the proportion employed by public authorities, as a
result of the taking of certain industries and services into public
ownership and also—up to 1951 but not since—of increases in employ¬
ment in national and local government service.
(7) A continuance, after 1911, of the decline in agricultural employment
which started in the second half of the nineteenth century. Recent
decreases are associated with rising productivity rather than declining
production.
(8) A very large increase (about 150 per cent since 1931) in the numbers
employed in the metals, engineering and vehicles group of industries
and the chemical group. Expansion has been most marked in those
sections of the industries which are concerned with relatively new or
technically advanced products.
(9) A decline in employment in certain large old-established industries,
notably coalmining, cotton textiles and shipbuilding.
A manpower research unit was set up in 1963, to study the future dis¬
tribution of manpower and the probable changes in occupational structure,
so as to provide a basis for implementing the Government’s proposals for
industrial training (see p. 473) and to supply information to the National
Economic Development Council (see p. 252).
Unemployment Since the war the general unemployment rate in Britain has been among the
lowest in the world—usually between 1 and 2 per cent. In June 1961 all the
regions of England had unemployment rates of 2 per cent or under, while
the majority of development districts (see p. 264) in England had rates of
under 4 per cent. In Scotland the rate was higher—2-8 per cent. Between
June 1961 and the spring of 1963 the underlying trend of unemployment was
steadily upward, partly owing to the sharp increase in the numbers available
for employment. During the severe weather in the early months of 1963
unemployment reached a much higher level (3-9 per cent in February),
particularly among construction workers. But there was subsequently a
fairly rapid recovery and by August 1964 unemployment had fallen to 1 - 6 per
cent. Unemployment was at that time highest in Scotland (3-4 per cent of the
region’s working population) and lowest in London and south-east England
(0-9 per cent).
LABOUR
447
Northern
Ireland
Unemployment in recent years has generally been a more serious problem
in those parts of the country which have the greatest dependence on shipbuild¬
ing, coalmining, and certain branches of the heavy engineering and metal
manufacturing industries. In consequence unemployment in parts of Scotland
and Wales, and in north-east England and Merseyside has tended to be higher
than in the Midlands and south-east England. (For remedial action taken,
see p. 264.) ,
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed but excluding certain unpaid helpers and the wholly unem¬
ployed, was about 545,000 in June 1963 (368,000 males and 177,000 females).
The number of insured employees was about 493,000. The largest pro¬
ductive industries are agriculture and engineering. Most of the agricultural
work in Northern Ireland is done by small farmers and their families without
hired help. The total manpower in agriculture, forestry and fisheries was
71,000 in mid-1963, according to the official estimates of the Ministry of
Labour and National Insurance of the Northern Ireland Government, and
was considerably larger according to other estimates, which include unpaid
helpers. The engineering industry employs about 51,000.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in
England, Wales or Scotland. In August 1964 it was about 6-2 per cent of
the insured employees and during the last to years has rarely fallen below
6 per cent. The Ministry of Commerce of the Northern Ireland Government
has wide powers (similar to those of the Board of Trade in development
districts in Great Britain) to assist the development and diversification of
industry. It is using these powers vigorously in an attempt to improve the
situation.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICES
The provision of employment services in Great Britain has been one of the
principal functions of the Ministry of Labour since its inception in 1916.
Northern Ireland has its own legislation in these matters which embodies the
main principles of the corresponding legislation in Great Britain, but owing
to the much smaller area of administration and the less favourable employment
situation, the facilities available are not so comprehensive in their scope as is
the case in Great Britain, and administrative arrangements are in some
respects on different lines. The responsible department is the Ministry of
Labour and National Insurance. .
The following account, therefore, of services in Great Britain applies in
general to Northern Ireland except where otherwise stated. The scope of the
services in Great Britain has gradually been extended to include the provision
of advice on employment and, in suitable cases, of vocational training. The
Employment and Training Act, 1948, provided a permanent legislative basis
for these wider services. The main services are provided through the country¬
wide network of some 1,000 local offices, which act as employment exchanges.
Local employment committees, composed of representatives of employers,
workers and other local interests, are attached to certain employment exchanges
as advisory bodies to secure for the department the full benefit of local
knowledge and the close co-operation of employers and workers. There is an
additional service designed to meet the needs of men and women who are
qualified for professional, administrative, managerial, executive and technical
and scientific posts at home and overseas and for those likely to qualify,
i.e. ex-regular officers of the armed forces and young men and women suitable
448
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
General
Employment
Services
for Adults
Government
Vocational
Training
for training. This service is operated in Great Britain through the Professional
and Executive Register, held at 38 of the larger exchanges.
All the offices referred to above accept on their registers both employed and
unemployed persons seeking employment. Their primary function is to
intioduce suitable persons seeking employment to employers requiring
employees, thus providing an efficient service to employers and job-seekers
and meeting the needs of the national economy.
The employment exchanges holding the Professional and Executive Register
are also ready to give information about the professions and allied occupations
to young men and women aged 18 years and over who have not already
established themselves in a profession or in the business world, and to older
people who wish to change their careers.
In certain densely populated areas where there are large groups of hospitals,
there are employment exchanges with officers specially trained to deal with
the employment problems of nurses, midwives and those in related occupations.
There are 27 of these offices. Outside the larger areas, nurses and their
employers are dealt with at the local employment exchange. Qualified nurses
are available to give advice and conduct interviews where necessary.
In view of the increasing number of older persons in the population the
Ministry recognises the need to promote the employment of older men and
women and seeks to persuade employers to consider older workers on their
merits without regard to their age; employment exchanges have instructions
to make special efforts to find employment for older persons. As part of its
plan for increasing the productivity of British industry, and in accordance
with the recommendations of the National Economic Development Council,
the Government has decided to foster expansion and improvement of industrial
training. The number of Government training centres is being substantially
increased and the whole framework of training in industry is being strengthened
under the provisions of the Industrial Training Act, 1964 (see p. 473)-
A special responsibility of the local employment officer is the recruitment of
suitable persons for training under the Government Vocational Training
Scheme. In Britain the main responsibility for vocational training for employ¬
ment below professional level, including apprenticeship training for the skilled
crafts and the training of factory workers in semi-skilled processes, rests on
the industries and trades concerned. The Government itself, however,
provides a limited amount of training to augment what industry is doing to
overcome shortages of skilled workers in key industries, as well as helping
persons in special need, such as the disabled, to fit themselves for suitable
employment. Training is provided for suitable persons over 18 years of age who
are unskilled or whose prospects of employment in their existing trade are poor.
Employed persons as well as the unemployed are accepted for training in
trades of importance to the national economy. Most of the training is provided
at Government Training Centres, which are situated within easy reach of the
main industrial centres of the country and between them offer courses in
about 40 different trades, with emphasis on trades in which there is a shortage
of skilled labour.
Under the expansion programme the number of centres is being increased
from 13 to 30 and additional places at existing centres are being provided.
When the programme is complete the centres will provide training for approxi¬
mately 10,000 persons annually. Courses vary in length according to the trade;
most of them last for six months. Schemes of training for particular trades
LABOUR
449
Training of
Apprentices
Special
Training
Services
have been drawn up in consultation with representatives of the employers and
workers concerned who, in some cases, also assist in the selection of persons
suitable for training.
For the disabled and for ex-Regular Service men and women and the un¬
employed with special resettlement problems, training in other trades is also
available under the scheme at technical and commercial colleges and private
training schools, or by means of individual courses at employers establish¬
ments. For severely disabled persons training is provided at four residentia
training colleges run by voluntary organisations with Government financial
assistance.
During training, trainees are paid good allowances to maintain themselves
and their dependants. During 1963, 4,920 people were trained under the
scheme and about 90 per cent of them were subsequently employed in the
trade for which they had been trained. _
The Ministry of Labour’s Regular Forces Resettlement Service helps
Regular officers and other ranks returning to civilian life to find suitable
employment. Nearly all those leaving the Services are successful in securing
satisfactory resettlement. The Ministry arranges special six-week business
training courses for Regulars and ex-Regulars (mainly ex-officers) at com¬
mercial and technical colleges; four-week courses in industrial supervision
are provided at the Ministry of Labour, Ebury Bridge House, London, for
non-technical Warrant Officers and Senior NCOs (or other Service equivalent
ranks). In addition to full courses for a civilian trade, refresher courses and
conversion courses required for ex-Service men and women can be arranged
under the Vocational Training Scheme.
To demonstrate the value of systematic methods of practical and theoretical
instruction, combined with day release for further education at technical
colleges, and to encourage industry to increase its intake of young people
into skilled occupations, the Ministry is providing, at Government Training
Centres, full-time training for a limited number of first year apprentices.
Instruction is now given in four trades: engineering, radio and electronics
servicing, electrical trades, and sheet and plate metal work. The employers
continue to pay the apprentices’ wages during the course and are responsible
for completion of the remaining years of apprenticeship. In Northern Ireland
the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance sponsors the training ot
additional apprentices by employers in the engineering industry, a condition
being that the sponsored apprentices are available for recruitment to new
industries.
The Ministry of Labour provides a service to industry through its scheme of
Training Within Industry for Supervisors. The four programmes of instruction
which comprise the TWI scheme are: job relations, the fostering of good
working relationships; job instruction, the technique of instructing or directing
staff; job methods, the steps taken in planning the best way of doing a job;
and job safety, which seeks to arouse safety consciousness and to train super¬
visors to detect dangers and deal with them.
The Ministry employs a staff of TWI officers, who train supervisors
directly and also train firms’ representatives to enable them to present 1 W
courses to supervisors in their own concerns. The Ministry is prepared to
extend these services to overseas branches of British firms. It is prepared also
to train suitable persons to develop the scheme in their own territories. 1 e
arrangements may be made by the government of the country concerned or
45°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Employment of
Workers from
Countries
other than
Commonwealth
Commonwealth
Citizens
(where appropriate) by the Department of Technical Co-operation and the
International Labour Organisation (ILO).
In addition, the Ministry’s Instructor Training Colleges at Letchworth,
Hertfordshire, and Hillington, Glasgow, provide two-week courses in teaching
methods for instructors responsible for the training of apprentices and other
workers. These courses have been developed by the Ministry to meet its own
requirements for the training of instructors engaged in training adults in
skilled occupations at Government Training Centres, and the syllabus has
been made available to employers in the United Kingdom and in overseas
countries.
Vocational training services at Government Training Centres, TWI courses,
and courses at the Ministry’s Instructor Training Colleges at Letchworth and
Hillington are available to trainees from overseas under approved schemes
(for instance, those of the ILO or the Colombo Plan).
Foreigners are admitted to the United Kingdom to take up employment with
a particular employer, provided they are in possession of a permit issued to
the prospective employer by the Ministry of Labour (the Ministry of Labour
and National Insurance for Northern Ireland if the proposed employment is
in Northern Ireland): about 50,000 such permits are issued each year. Of these,
about one-third are for domestic workers in hospitals, schools, other institutions
and private households, and nearly one-eighth for student employees.
Employment is limited to a maximum of one year in the first instance but may
be extended on application by the employer. In certain circumstances, per¬
mission may be given by the Home Office for foreigners who landed as visitors
or students to take employment approved by the Ministry of Labour.
Approval is subject to the same conditions and requirements as are applied
to the issue of permits to foreigners while still abroad.
Before a permit is issued, the Ministry of Labour must be satisfied that
there is a bona fide job, that no suitable British or foreign worker already
resident in Britain for a long period is available, and that the wages and con¬
ditions of employment are not less favourable than those enjoyed by British
workers. These conditions are waived for student employees who are admitted
for limited periods in order to improve their English and to gain a wider know¬
ledge of their occupations. A foreigner permitted to take employment in the
United Kingdom may not change his employment, unless his prospective em¬
ployer has obtained prior approval from the Ministry to employ the foreigner.
The permit system applies to individual foreigners, but the Ministry of
Labour has an arrangement for the admission on a ‘group’ basis of selected
Italian workers for employment in certain undermanned industries.
The United Kingdom, as a member of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, participates with 13 European countries in
the arrangements for assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain
employment in other member countries.
Commonwealth citizens from overseas are subject to control under the Com¬
monwealth Immigrants Act, 1962, which came into force on 1st July, 1962.
Except for those who were born in the United Kingdom or hold passports
issued by the United Kingdom Government, the control applies, broadly, to
all Commonwealth citizens. Such people, if they wish to come to Britain for
full-time employment, must first obtain a voucher issued by the Ministry of
Labour. Vouchers are issued without restriction to those who have obtained
jobs with named employers and to those who have certain special qualifications
or skills. Subject to a numerical limit laid down from time to time by the
LABOUR
451
Youth
Employment
Service
Disablement
Resettlement
Service
Government, vouchers are also issued to other Commonwealth citizens who
wish to come to Britain to seek employment. (Commonwealth citizens who
wish to work in Northern Ireland, and who are not ‘Northern Ireland
workers’,1 need special Northern Ireland employment permits, which are
issued only in respect of definite jobs.)
The Commonwealth Immigrants Act applies also to citizens of the Irish
Republic; but no control is imposed on persons travelling between Ireland
and Britain.
The Ministry of Labour is also responsible in Great Britain for two specialised
employment services: the Youth Employment Service and the Disablement
Resettlement Service.
The purpose of the Youth Employment Service is to help young people
at the stage of transition from school to work, up to the age of 18 years or
until they leave school if they stay beyond that age.
The service is under the general direction of the Central Youth Employment
Executive, which is composed of senior officers of the Ministry of Labour, the
Department of Education and Science and the Scottish Education Department.
This joint executive is appointed by the Minister of Labour, who is responsible
to Parliament for the Youth Employment Service as a whole. The Minister has
appointed a National Youth Employment Council and separate advisory
committees for Scotland and for Wales to advise him.
Locally the service is operated in most areas through Youth Employment
Offices established by local education authorities (in Scotland by education
authorities) in accordance with the schemes submitted by them to the Minister
of Labour and approved by him. In those areas where such schemes are not
in operation, the service is operated by the local office of the Ministry of
Labour.
The main functions of the service are to collect and disseminate information
on careers, provide talks in schools, give vocational guidance, find suitable
employment and keep contact with young workers to help them settle down.
A further function is to help employers to fill vacancies for young people.
Local Youth Employment Committees, made up of teachers, employers,
workers and other appropriate interests, assist the service in an advisory
capacity.
In Northern Ireland the functions of the youth employment service are
similar to those in Great Britain but its organisation is different. A new
unified service, for which the Minister of Labour and National Insurance
is responsible, started with the establishment in December 1961 of a
statutory board composed of representatives appointed by the education
committees of the counties and county boroughs, and persons appointed by
the Minister to represent the governors of voluntary grammar schools,
teachers, employers, workers, the universities and colleges, youth organisations
and the Churches’ Industrial Council. There are also local youth employment
committees, as in Great Britain.
The purpose of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts, 1944 and 1958, on
which all the work of the Ministry of Labour for disabled persons is based,
is ‘to make further and better provision for enabling persons handicapped
by disablement to secure employment or work on their own account’, and the
Disablement Resettlement Service is designed to help disabled persons to get
1 People qualified by birth and residence to work in Northern Ireland.
45 2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vocational
Guidance
Placing in Ordinary
Employment
Industrial
Rehabilitation
and keep suitable work. The service is available to all persons over school¬
leaving age who are substantially handicapped as a result of injury, disease
or congenital deformity in obtaining or keeping employment.
The Ministry of Labour is responsible for the administration of the service
and is assisted by the National Advisory Council on the Employment of the
Disabled, set up under the 1944 Act. At each of the Ministry’s local offices there
is a disablement resettlement officer, working under the direction of the
manager and in co-operation with other officers. Besides his contacts with
employers, this officer is in touch with all the hospitals in his area and visits
any patient who wishes to discuss the question of future employment. His
work involves close co-operation with doctors, local authorities and voluntary
welfare agencies.
The help given by the service falls under five main headings:
Vocational guidance is given at local offices by disablement resettlement
officers in consultation, as necessary, with the local disablement advisory
committees, hospital resettlement clinics and medical interviewing com¬
mittees, and also in the industrial rehabilitation units (see below).
Having regard to a disabled person’s qualifications and aptitude and to medical
guidance, and concentrating on what the person can do rather than on what
he cannot do, the disablement resettlement officer endeavours to find the
work most suited to each person, either immediately, or in appropriate cases
after a course of industrial rehabilitation or vocational training. To some
extent this is facilitated by the main provision of the Disabled Persons
(Employment) Act, 1944, namely, that all employers of 20 or more persons
are required to employ a quota (at present 3 per cent for all industries, except
shipping, in respect of the manning of ships) of registered disabled persons.
Registration is voluntary. The number of disabled persons registered on
20th April, 1964, was 655,878. On nth May, 1964, 54,070 registered disabled
were unemployed, 47,727 being considered capable of ordinary employment.
The remaining 6,343 were 80 severely disabled as to be classed as unlikely to
obtain ordinary employment, though in fact many so classed are found work
in open industry by careful selective placement.
Industrial rehabilitation1 is provided at seventeen units run by the Ministry
of Labour. These units offer to men and women an opportunity, when their
medical treatment is completed, to adjust themselves gradually to normal
working conditions and to obtain vocational guidance based on a skilled
assessment of their aptitudes. No charge is made for attendance and main¬
tenance allowances are paid. There is no set syllabus but each person is given
an individually planned course (usually lasting about eight weeks) under the
supervision of trained staff consisting of doctor, occupational psychologist,
social worker, disablement resettlement officer, remedial gymnast and industri¬
ally trained workshop supervisors, under the general leadership of a rehabilita¬
tion officer. Recommendations for courses (the majority coming from hospitals
and doctors) are made in the first instance to the disablement resettlement
officer at the employment exchange, who also has responsibility for putting
into effect the unit’s recommendation for employment or training to follow
the course.
For the blind, similar industrial rehabilitation facilities are available at two
centres conducted by voluntary organisations, with the financial assistance
of the Ministry of Labour.
1 For an account of medical rehabilitation of the disabled, see p. 148.
Vocational
Training
Sheltered
Employment
labour 453
There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government Training
Centres, educational institutions and employers’ establishments. For the more
seriously disabled there are special residential training colleges run by voluntary
organisations with the financial assistance and technical help of the Ministry
of Labour. There are also arrangements for the training of special categories
of disabled persons such as the blind, and for providing disabled persons
(including the blind), who are of the appropriate educational standard, with
grants to undertake study or training for the purpose of qualifying for pro¬
fessional or comparable employment.
Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company with no share capital, was
set up in accordance with the provisions of the Disabled Persons (Employment)
Act, 1944. Its object is to provide employment facilities for registered disabled
persons unlikely to obtain work except under special conditions. Its powers
include the provision of special factories and workshops, hostel accommodation
and facilities for homeworkers. The directors are appointed by the Minister
of Labour; funds for capital development and to meet operational costs are
provided by loans and grants under the Ministry of Labour Vote. At the end
of 1963 Remploy Ltd. operated some 90 factories and employed about 6,400
severely disabled men and women, including some 140 homeworkers.
A new comprehensive placing service for blind persons in industrial
employment began on 1st October, 1963, when the Ministry of Labour took
over the duties previously carried out by voluntary organisations and local
authorities. At that time there were about 6,500 blind persons working in
open industry and 3,500 in the 67 special workshops for the blind. In addition,
some 1,000 blind people were working at home under home workers’ schemes.
The new service is fully integrated with the Ministry’s general employment
service and the closest co-operation with Disablement Resettlement Officers,
Youth Employment Officers and local authority Welfare Officers is maintained.
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT,
CONDITIONS OF WORK AND LABOUR RELATIONS
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, industrial workers lacked legiti¬
mate means of defending their standards of living or of ameliorating their
working conditions. The traditional methods of fixing wages had become
obsolete, trade unions were regarded as criminal conspiracies, and there was
no protective legislation setting minimum standards of safety, health and
welfare in places of work.
The first attempt at protective legislation was the Health and Morals of
Apprentices Act, 1802, but the first effective Factory Act was that of 1833,
which created an inspectorate employed and paid by the central Government
to enforce its provisions. Since that date, legislation extending, strengthening,
adapting and consolidating the statutory protection for employees has been
passed at an accelerating rate. The progress in standards has owed much to
the recommendations of strengthened inspectorates, much to the example of
progressive employers and much to the persistent pressure of trade unions
and disinterested reformers.
Trade unions ceased to be actionable conspiracies in 1824 but their status as
legal entities was not properly established until 1871. This latter step had
been made acceptable to public opinion by the leaders of certain craft unions,
who had abandoned the 1 evolutionary and financially unsound policies of
earlier trade unions to pursue the limited practical objectives of securing for
their members better wages and improved working conditions.
454
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
After 1880 the organisation of unskilled workers became more extensive
and effective and the whole tone of trade unionism became more militant and
political, while employers began to form associations in an increasing number
of industries. Partly as a result of continuing antagonisms and of the changing
and difficult economic situation, much of the first thirty years of the twentieth
century was marked by widespread and prolonged strikes. Since 1932, how¬
ever, the strike rate (in terms of man-days lost) has, in most years, been very
much lower, and arrangements for the negotiation of terms of service and the
peaceful settlement of disputes have become general and are on the whole
satisfactory.
This improvement in industrial relations has been achieved mainly by
voluntary action. Except in certain industries where wages and holiday pay
are fixed by statutory order, there has been very little legal limitation on the
right of an employer to hire an employee on any terms which the employee
will accept. There is, in general, no legal obligation on an employer to recognise
a trade union, or not to refuse to employ trade unionists; nor is a collective
agreement with a trade union held to be in itself a legal contract of employ¬
ment, though the terms of a collective agreement may be expressly or by
implication incorporated in an individual contract of employment. The
Terms and Conditions of Employment Act, 1959, does, however, provide
machinery for enforcing on an employer the observance of terms or conditions
established by collective agreement in his industry (see p. 469). A new element
in extending the right of the employee was introduced by the passing of the
Contracts of Employment Act, 1963. Employers are now required by the Act
to give their employees written particulars of the main terms of employment,
and employees are given rights to minimum periods of notice when their
employment is to be terminated.
Nevertheless, in the majority of trades and industries minimum or standard
wages, normal working hours and other terms of employment are effectively
settled by collective agreements, whose negotiation and observance continue
to depend primarily on the strength, integrity and representative character
of the signatory organisations rather than on any legal sanction. The deter¬
mination by statute of minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay is in
principle confined to those trades and industries where the organisation of
employers or workers, or both, is inadequate to negotiate collective agree¬
ments and to ensure their observance.
On the other hand, the conditions of work of employees—their safety,
health and welfare—depend to a far greater extent on minimum standards
established by statute and enforced by official inspectorates. Voluntary action
is, however, of the greatest importance even in these matters. In some cases,
additional health, safety or welfare requirements are the subject of collective
agreements, while many employers provide higher standards on their own
initiative with help and advice from Government departments and various
voluntary bodies.
Management-employee relations depend not only on terms and conditions
of employment, but on human relationships at the place of work; managements
have in recent years become increasingly concerned with improving such
relationships.
PAY, HOURS
AND HOLIDAYS
Earnings
Minimum or standard time rates for most British manual workers, as deter¬
mined by agreements or by statutory orders, vary between 4s. od. and
5s. od. an hour for men and between 2s. qd. and 3s. qd. for women. Actual
earnings are usually higher. Higher rates are sometimes paid, and piece rates,
LABOUR
455
shift rates and overtime rates raise the level of average earnings. The Ministry
of Labour conducts a six-monthly survey of earnings and hours of work of
manual workers in manufacturing industries and in some of the principal
non-manufacturing industries in Great Britain. Table 39 is based on these
surveys.
The survey does not cover agriculture, coalmining, railways, dock work,
shipping, distribution, catering or other services but average weekly earnings
are separately compiled for the first four of these industries; they are some¬
what above the average in coalmining and dock work, and below the average
in railway work and agriculture.
A=April (^October
456
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 39
Average Weekly
and Hourly
Earnings of
Manual Workers
1956-64
Professional and
Technical
Between April 1956 and October 1963 average weekly wage rates increased
by about 27 per cent and average weekly earnings by about 41 per cent. Part
of the increase in wage rates has been offset by a rise in the cost of living. The
trends of manual workers’ earnings, and of wage rates and retail prices from
1952 to 1963 are shown in the diagram on p. 455.
Date®
Average Weekly Earnings
April 1956 ..
April 1959 ..
April 1961 ..
April 1964 ..
Average Hourly Earnings
April 1956 . .
April 1959 . .
April 1961 . .
April 1964 ..
Men
s. d.
235 4
262 11
301 4
352 5
d.
58-1
65-7
75-5
88-5
Youths
and Boys
s. d.
100 6
114 0
135 9
159 9
d.
26-8
30-7
36-9
43-8
Women
full-time
s. d.
119 9
137 1
152 7
176 4
d.
34-8
39-8
45-9
53-0
Girls
s. d.
78 4
87 4
99 11
116 10
d.
22-2
24-8
29-4
34-4
Source: Ministry of Labour.
1948 Standard Industrial Classification for 1956-59;
1958 Standard Industrial Classification for 1961-64.
Women in industry are for the most part engaged on different tasks from
men and are paid less than men on the grounds that these tasks are unskilled
or semi-skilled. In the relatively few instances in the field of manual employ¬
ment where men and women are employed on precisely the same work and
under identical conditions, collective agreements frequently provide for
equal remuneration.
The starting salaries in many professional and technical careers are often in
the range of £600 to £800 a year, though they may be lower for trainees
starting work in their teens, and higher for some graduates entering industry
and the Civil Service. Such posts offer incremental progression to higher
salaries and opportunities for promotion.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
are in the range of £2,750 to £7,000 a year. The posts with salaries of £5,000
to £12,000 a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, most chairmen and
full-time members of boards of nationalised industries, judges of the High
Court and Court of Appeal, and Lords of Appeal, the Permanent Secretaries
of Government departments, the clerks of the largest municipal authorities,
editors of daily newspapers, some persons outstanding in their professions
and in the higher managerial posts in industry, commerce and banking. A
few persons in business draw still higher salaries, while the earnings of star
entertainers and certain other very successful people exceed £25,000 a year.
Statistics published by the Inland Revenue Department indicate that in
1962 some 20-7 per cent of wage and salary earners earned £1,000 a year
or more, 4-9 per cent £1,500 a year or more, 2-4 per cent £2,000 a year
or more and i-i per cent £3,000 a year or more.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices,
administrative posts and professions. They are paid the same salary for
doing the same work in medicine, dentistry, physiotherapy, radiography,
university teaching, journalism, broadcasting and architecture, and as
LABOUR
457
Ministers of the Crown, members of Parliament, salaried magistrates and
solicitors, pharmacists working in hospitals, and administrative, professional
and technical workers in local government. Women in independent pro¬
fessions are not expected to charge lower fees than men. In many other
non-manual occupations, however, a woman in Britain doing the same job
as a man is still paid less for doing it, and the position is changing very slowly,
except in the public service.
Hours of Work National legislation in the United Kingdom embodies a general prohibition
of employment of children under thirteen years of age; forbids the employ¬
ment of older children and women in certain occupations; and limits and
defines permissible hours of work for women and young persons in a number
of industries or trades. Children aged thirteen to fifteen may not be employed
during school hours or before 6 a.m. or after 8 p.m. on any day, or for more
than two hours on school days or on Sundays. This part-time employment
is regulated in various ways by statute and by by-laws made by local authorities.
The Shops Act, 1950, makes local authorities responsible for ensuring that
the shops in their area observe its requirements. With certain exceptions,
shops must be closed on weekdays by 8 p.m. (9 p.m. on one late day) except
on the early closing day when they must be closed by 1 p.m., and all day
on Sunday; but local authorities may make orders modifying these and other
provisions of the Act within their own area. The hours of work of shop
employees under sixteen years of age are normally restricted to 44 a week,
and those of employees between sixteen and eighteen years of age to 48 a
week, with limited provision for overtime. Broadly speaking, all shop assistants
must be given a half-holiday (half a day) every week and, in addition, every
Sunday off or another day off instead.
In premises to which the Factories Act applies the working hours of women
and young persons between the ages of sixteen and eighteen are, subject to
certain exceptions, limited to 48 a week and nine a day, although some over¬
time is allowed (up to six hours a week but not more than 100 hours a year or
in more than 25 weeks in a year). Young persons who have not yet attained
the age of sixteen are limited to 44 hours a week. The maximum spell of work
and the intervals which must be allowed for meals are also specified. The
employment at night of male young persons over 16 years of age is permitted
in certain continuous processes but, in general, the employment of women
and young persons at night is prohibited.
In mines and quarries, women and young persons under eighteen may not
normally start work before 6 a.m. and must never start before 5 a.m. Their
work must normally end before 9 p.m., in the case of young persons under
sixteen, and before 10 p.m., in the case of women and young persons aged
sixteen to eighteen; and never in any case after 11 p.m.
The Young Persons (Employment) Act, 1938, imposes restrictions on the
hours of work of young persons (48 a week at the age of sixteen years and over
and 44 for those under sixteen years) in certain occupations not covered
by the Factories Act, the Mines and Quarries Act, 1954, or the Shops Act,
1950.
While the hours of work of adult men are not, in general, restricted by
statute, normal hours of work for both sexes and those of all ages are usually
wTell within the legal limits on the hours of women and young persons. Agreed
weekly hours are mainly 42 or 42! and may be worked as either a five-day or
a five-and-a-half-day week according to the industry and the rule of the
particular establishment. Workers in a number of industries have secured
458 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
reductions to 41 or 40 hours, although in some instances this is to operate from
some date in the future. Hours actually worked by men are somewhat longer
owing to overtime working.
In April 1964 the number of hours actually worked by manual workers
averaged 47-8 for men and 39-9 for women on full-time work.
Holidays with
Pay and Bank
Holidays
With a few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in indus¬
tries covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays
of twelve days or two weeks. Moreover, payment is made for bank or statutory
public holidays, which are as follows: in addition to Good Friday and Christmas
Day, there are Bank Holidays in most parts of England, Wales and the
Channel Islands on Easter Monday, Whit-Monday, the first Monday in
August1 and the first weekday after Christmas (Boxing Day), and in Scotland
on New Year’s Day, the first Monday in May, and the first Monday in
August.1 Northern Ireland observes all the English holidays and, in addition,
has a holiday on St. Patrick’s Day, 17th March, and on 12th July (com¬
memorating the Battle of the Boyne, 1690); Easter Tuesday is also a customary
holiday for industry and trade. Many agreements provide that payments
should also be made for specially proclaimed holidays.
In some industries agreements provide for extended holidays related to
length of service with the same employer, whilst in others there is a progressive
increase so that at some date in the future the basic period becomes three
weeks instead of two weeks. In addition, numerous firms have long-service
extended holiday schemes which apply to both staff and manual workers.
SAFETY Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their
employees and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a
duty of care towards each other. In addition, minimum required standards
of safety in certain kinds of workplaces or work are laid down under a number
of statutes, some of which also deal with health and welfare. The statutes
include: the Mines and Quarries Act, 1954, the Agriculture (Safety, Health
and Welfare Provisions) Act, 1956, the Factories Act, 1961 (which consolidates
earlier Acts), and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963, which
closely follows the Factories Act, 1961. Fatal and serious industrial accidents
have tended to diminish during the twentieth century and the British rates
for fatal and serious accidents are among the lowest in the world.
Factories,
Offices, Shops
and Railway
Premises
Over 200,000 industrial premises (factories, workshops, slaughterhouses,
shipyards and docks) and about 25,000 building and civil engineering sites
come under the Factories Act, which is administered by the Ministry of
Labour and enforced by H.M. Inspectorate of Factories, which forms part
of the Ministry. The total strength of the Factory Inspectorate, including
medical and other specialists, was 464 in 1963, its authorised strength being
482. Over a million premises come under the Offices, Shops and Railway
Premises Act, which is also administered by the Ministry of Labour; enforce¬
ment is shared by H.M. Inspectorate of Factories and local authorities.
Under these Acts, anyone intending to employ other people in industrial
or commercial premises to which they apply has to notify the enforcing
authority of his intention before he begins to employ people and every fatal
accident and every accident causing more than three days’ incapacity must be
1 The August Bank Holiday in 1965 and 1966 is to be on the last Monday in the month.
This is an experiment which the Government hopes will give a lead in extending the
summer holiday season over a longer period.
LABOUR
Training for
Safety
459
reported; under the Factories Act provision is also made for compulsory
notification and for investigation of certain dangerous occurrences.
In addition, a number of general and specific safety requirements are laid
down. The general requirements of the Factories Act include provisions con¬
cerning the fencing of prime movers, transmission machinery and dangerous
parts of other machinery; the sale, hire or use of power-driven machinery
without effective guards of certain parts; the cleaning of machinery in motion;
the training and supervision of young persons employed at certain machines;
the safety and examination of hoists and lifting equipment, steam boilers and
steam and air receivers; the construction of floors; precautions against falls,
against gassing, and against explosions of flammable dust or gas; fire prevention,
fire-fighting, fire alarms and means of escape in case of fire; the protection of
the eyes; precautions where dangerous substances are present; and the lifting
of heavy weights. These general requirements are supplemented or modified
by regulations providing for safeguards against special risks in particular
industries, processes, and types of machinery. There are corresponding pro¬
visions in the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act to deal with the hazards
arising in these premises, with power to make regulations.
Safety depends, in fact, at least as much on the education and voluntary
efforts of the employers and of the workers as upon safety regulations. In
addition to regulatory functions, the Ministry of Labour since 1959 has had
the duty of promoting safety, health and welfare in factories by the collection
and dissemination of information and by investigating safety, health and welfare
problems—activities which had, in fact, long been an important part of the
Ministry’s work. The voluntary Accident Prevention Movement is strongly
supported by the Factory Inspectorate. Inspectors inquire into safety aspects
of machine design and specification, circulate expert advice by personal
exhortation, lectures and literature, and encourage the appointment of safety
officers and the formation of works safety committees. The Factory Inspec¬
torate maintains an industrial health and safety centre in London, at which
various types of machinery demonstrating the effectiveness of guards are
displayed, as well as a wide range of protective clothing and equipment. The
Ministry also actively encourages the development of voluntary central
machinery within each industry for the consideration of safety matters and
the formulation of policy on accident prevention.
The concern of both trade unions and employers’ associations with safety
helps to maintain safety standards; and the requirements about accident
notification help inspectors to examine the means of prevention with employers,
machinery manufacturers and interested organisations. But the voluntary co¬
operation of managements and employees in individual workplaces is essential
to the safety drive. Many firms have works safety committees and, in many
areas, safety groups have been organised, whose members meet monthly for
the exchange of information, discussions, lectures and films on safety measures.
Training for safety is an important facet of the safety drive and, to help in
this work, the Ministry of Labour has incorporated a safety course in the
Training Within Industry for Supervisors (TWI) scheme (see p. 449). An
industrial safety training centre in Birmingham is run by the Birmingham
and District Industrial Safety Group, and there are safety training centres
for the construction industries which have been set up, with the assistance
of the Ministry of Labour, by local accident prevention groups at Enfield
(London), Aintree (Liverpool), Granton (Edinburgh), Norwich and Leeds
and by the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors at Cardiff. The
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents helps the accident prevention
460
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advisory Bodies
Mines and
Quarries
Agriculture
movement by providing publicity and organising conferences and courses
for safety officers; it has recently organised a course for the training of
safety instructors. The British Safety Council offers a similar service.
Organisations in industry are now concerning themselves to an increasing
extent with the promotion of safety at work and the provision of information
and advisory services to their members. They participate also in joint standing
and advisory committees appointed by the Minister of Labour. Representatives
of the Trades Union Congress, the British Employers’ Confederation, the
nationalised industries and the Ministry of Labour meet on the Industrial
Safety Sub-committee of the National Joint Advisory Council. The Minister
of Labour has also established a joint advisory committee, representative of
employers and workers in the building and civil engineering industries, to
examine safety and health problems in these industries.
The safety of workers in mines and quarries is the subject of comprehensive
legislation which also deals with health and welfare at work and a number of
related matters. Protective legislation in mines began with an Act of 1842,
which forbade the employment of women underground; successive measures
laid down detailed requirements for the safe conduct of operations and dealt
with such matters as ventilation, dust suppression, support of workings, the
safe use of electricity, rescue and first aid. The latest stage was reached when
the Mines and Quarries Act was passed in 1954. This Act established the
basic modern principles of safety, health and welfare, leaving the details to
be dealt with in statutory regulations; it both consolidates the previous law
and brings it up to date. Apart from technical matters, it also covers such
subjects as the general responsibilities of owners and managements, the
appointment and duties of officials, training, welfare, the powers of official
inspectors, statutory qualifications of managers and under-managers, employ¬
ment of women and young persons, and inspections on behalf of workmen.
The Ministry of Power is responsible for the administration of these
enactments, while the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate, which is part of the
Ministry of Power, is responsible for their enforcement.
The National Coal Board is expressly charged with the statutory duty of
securing the safety, health and welfare of its employees and has set itself to
accomplish this in all practicable ways. The Board has its own safety organisa¬
tion—a Standing Committee on Safety, a chief safety engineer, and safety
engineers at divisions, areas and the largest collieries. It conducts courses of
safety training for workmen and officials and is constantly on the alert for
new methods of reducing risks. Its research programme includes a number of
projects with a direct bearing on safety. Examples of voluntary action by the
Board to reduce risks include the use of fire-resistant conveyor belting, and
the withdrawal of light alloy equipment from the coal face pending the
development of an alloy unlikely to cause dangerous sparks.
The Ministry of Power maintains a Safety in Mines Research Establish¬
ment, with stations at Buxton and Sheffield, which carry out research into
safety problems in co-operation with the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate
and the National Coal Board’s research organisation.
Two Acts provide for the protection of agricultural workers by means of
regulations made by the Ministers concerned with agriculture in Britain.
The risks involved in the use of chemicals are dealt with in the Agriculture
(Poisonous Substances) Act, 1952; other risks are covered by the Agriculture
(Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions) Act, 1956. Regulations have been
LABOUR
Transport
461
made dealing with the safe use of dangerous chemicals, the provision of
first-aid equipment, safety standards for workplaces and ladders, the safe¬
guarding and safe operation of farm machinery, the lifting of heavy weights
and the avoidance of accidents to children arising out of the use of farm
vehicles and machines. Regulations are enforced by inspectors of the
Agricultural Departments. To safeguard the many interests which
might be adversely affected by the use of chemicals in agriculture and
food storage, a voluntary scheme is operated by the Government with the
help of an advisory committee and with the full co-operation of the chemical
industry.
The general safety legislation covering the main forms of transport protects
transport workers as well as members of the public against accidents involving
moving vehicles.
The Minister of Transport is responsible for the administration of the
Merchant Shipping Acts, which cover in great detail the question of marine
safety, including navigational procedures, the strength and design of hulls,
the safety of machinery, the safety and design of living quarters, life-saving
appliances, measures for protection against fire, and the carriage of special
cargoes and dangerous goods.
The Air Navigation Order and Regulations provide for the registration of
aircraft and for the issue of certificates of airworthiness and of competency
certificates and licences for aircrew, lay down requirements for safety equip¬
ment and for safety procedures during take-off, flight and landing, and
prescribe maintenance schedules for public transport aircraft. The Minister
of Aviation delegates most of his powers in respect of airworthiness to the
Air Registration Board (see p. 384).
The Ministry of Transport exercises technical supervision of the safety
aspects of railway construction and operation through an inspectorate, whose
main functions are statutory approval of new works on railways carrying
passenger traffic; accident investigation, including the holding of formal
inquiries; and technical advice to the Minister.
In the interests of road safety, the hours of driving and the rest periods of
drivers of buses and goods vehicles are regulated by the Road Traffic Acts.
In certain cases, the driver must be accompanied by a second person.
In addition to general safety legislation, there are certain statutory pro¬
visions concerned entirely, or mainly, with the safety of employees; for
example, railway employees are protected by the Railway Employment
(Prevention of Accidents) Act, 1900, and the statutory rules and orders made
under it which enable the Ministry of Transport to require the use of safe
plant and appliances, to forbid what is unsafe, and to make rules for safe rail¬
way operation. This Act also sanctioned the employment of inspectors, now
known as Railway Employment Inspectors, who inquire into the more serious
accidents to railway employees.
Both transport operators and the Ministries of Transport and of Aviation
give high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every
endeavour is made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic
densities, by improving the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment,
by traffic regulation and control of standards of maintenance and by training
crews in competency and safety awareness. The detailed regulations and
instructions issued by the ministries and their agents form the basis of
elaborate safety procedures laid down by the operators themselves and by the
makers of vehicles and aircraft, equipment and works. The radio industry
462
Other Work
Premises
HEALTH AND
WELFARE
Industrial and
Commercial
Premises
Merchant Seamen
Women and
Children
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the transport services co-operate in the development and application of
radar systems and other safety devices.
There are at present no specific statutory safety requirements in hotels and
restaurants, places of entertainment or educational establishments, apart from
the fire regulations applicable under local authority by-laws to all large
buildings. The Ministry of Labour has no statutory responsibility in regard
to safety in workshops or laboratories in education establishments, though
it keeps in touch with university authorities and the education departments.
Employers, however, are bound by their common law obligation to provide
a safe system of work, and employers and educational authorities may
voluntarily seek the advice and help of the Factory Inspectorate, which is
given freely on request.
Local authorities, under the Public Health Acts, have power to regulate the
provision of suitable sanitary accommodation in houses and at places of work
and to treat workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded
as nuisances the abatement of which can be enforced.
Factories, other industrial premises, offices, shops and railway premises must
comply with the health and welfare requirements of the Factories Act or the
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act. These include: the cleanliness of
workrooms, adequate ventilation and suitable temperature and lighting, the
avoidance of overcrowding and the provision of sanitary accommodation, and
the protection of workers against inhaling harmful dust or fumes; the provision
of washing facilities, lockers or other accommodation for outdoor clothing,
drinking water, first aid, and adequate seating arrangements. On entry into
employment in factories and docks or on building operations all young
persons under eighteen years of age must be medically examined by doctors
appointed by the Chief Inspector of Factories and known as Appointed
Factory Doctors, and they must be re-examined annually until they reach the
age of eighteen. Boys employed in certain jobs involving night work are
examined more frequently.
The general requirements of the Factories Act in regard to health and
welfare are supplemented by regulations, some of general application, others
providing for the needs of particular industries or processes. They may
include provision for compulsory periodic medical examinations. The Offices,
Shops and Railway Premises Act is similarly supplemented by regulations.
The far-reaching and detailed requirements of the Merchant Shipping Acts
and the regulations made thereunder include specific provisions for the
protection of merchant seamen, covering such matters as the engagement
and discharge of seamen, limitations on the employment of young persons at
sea, standards of crew accommodation, scales of provisions, medicines and
medical stores, and the care and repatriation of seamen left behind at ports
abroad.
The laws restricting the employment of children, young persons and women
form an important part of legislation to protect the health and welfare of
employees. National legislation, besides forbidding any employment of
children under thirteen years of age, forbids the employment of children
under fifteen years of age in any industrial undertaking; of women and young
persons underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations
(for example, those involving work with lead compounds); and of women in
factories and workshops within one month of childbirth. It also limits and
LABOUR
Industrial
Health Services
463
defines the permissible hours for children aged thirteen to fifteen and for
young persons under eighteen and women in a number of industries and
occupations. Local authorities, moreover, have wide powers under the
Children and Young Persons Act, 1933, as well as by the Education Acts,
1944-48, which regulate hours and conditions of employment of children
under fifteen years within their areas within the limits of national legislation.
The above are the main legislative provisions relating to health and welfare
at work, but it is essential to note that employers frequently achieve health and
welfare standards considerably higher than those prescribed by law. They are
helped to do this by the inspectorates, by Government departments and agencies,
by employers’ associations and trade unions and by expert voluntary bodies.
In addition to the statutory requirements of the Factories Act, 1961, and
the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963, and regulations under
both Acts a number of employers voluntarily maintain medical services for
their employees. It is estimated that there are about 300 factories with full¬
time and about 4,500 factories with part-time doctors employed. In addition
several thousand nurses are employed in industry. There are also the 2,300
Appointed Factory Doctors who carry out the compulsory medical examina¬
tions under the Acts and Regulations.
The big employers, including the State and the boards of nationalised
industries, have naturally taken the lead in this matter. A number of smaller
factories also provide medical services and in some cases (for instance, in
Slough and Harlow) have joined together in group medical schemes. There
are, however, difficult problems to be solved in connection with the further
development of industrial health services, and in 1955 the Minister of Labour
appointed a Standing Industrial Health Advisory Committee, of which he
is the chairman, to advise him on this subject. The membership of this
committee includes persons nominated by the British Employers’ Con¬
federation, the Trades Union Congress, the nationalised industries, the
British Medical Association, the Royal College of Nursing and other organisa¬
tions and bodies closely concerned with the promotion of industrial health.
The committee has advised on the conduct of two pilot surveys of medical
supervision in factories, one in Halifax and one of the pottery industry in
Stoke-on-Trent, and has approved the issue of two booklets. One, Health at
Work, describes the medical service in fourteen factories in different parts of
Great Britain, whilst the other, Organisation of Industrial Health Services, is
intended to provide guidance to occupiers considering the establishment of
an industrial health service.
Industrial hygiene services can give valuable assistance in securing healthy
working conditions in industry; there are at present two centres in Great
Britain which undertake studies of factory conditions and increasing use is
being made of their facilities. They are staffed and equipped to make compre¬
hensive investigations of particular problems or health risks and also carry
out routine physical, chemical and biological tests for industry.
Prompt and effective action in industrial health depends, among other
things, on adequate and properly co-ordinated arrangements for investigation
and research. Field investigations are carried out by the Factory Inspectorate,
which has specialised medical and technical branches. Research facilities are
provided by Government agencies such as the Medical Research Council and
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research; by the faculties of
industrial health and social medicine of the universities; and by the research
departments of various industries and large industrial concerns.
464
Welfare
Canteens
SAFETY, HEALTH
AND WELFARE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Welfare standards vary considerably from one firm to another. The amenities
provided by large factories or offices depend partly on the employees’ needs
and desires. The requirements of a factory, or office or shop where the work
is light, and where many employees are women or young persons, are different
from those of an iron foundry or steelworks, where much of the work is
arduous and is undertaken by men. Progressive firms are careful to find out
what their employees want, and welfare policy is often decided in consultation
with the workers, through regular consultative machinery or by other means.
An increasing number of firms in Britain pay part or all of the cost of clubs
and sports grounds, operate retirement and sickness insurance schemes
supplementing the State schemes, and afford training and educational facilities.
Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes.
The provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become
usual in large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. There are
also colliery canteens providing meals for about 98 per cent of coalminers.
It is customary for any surplus earned by canteens to be used to improve
the canteen or to finance some other welfare services, while any losses are
usually borne by the firm. Many offices and shops which are unable to
provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted luncheon voucher
schemes. There are now over 15,500 firms using this service and more than
72 million vouchers are issued annually and are accepted by all principal
catering establishments.
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been
the subject of legislation which, with certain exceptions, is similar to that in
Great Britain and is embodied in separate statutes to meet the special require¬
ments of Northern Ireland. Provision for the safety, health and welfare of
workers in factories with and without power, shipyards, electrical stations,
certain institutions and at docks, warehouses, building operations and civil
engineering works is embodied in the Northern Ireland Factories Acts. Many
firms voluntarily employ safety officers, and an Industrial Safety Group for
the area, supported by representatives of industry, trade unions, insurance
companies and public authorities, is very active and makes a valuable contri¬
bution in the field of industrial accident prevention on similar lines to what
is done in Great Britain.
The structure of labour relations in Britain is established mainly on a voluntary
basis, and rests on the organisation of employers and workers into employers’
associations and trade unions. These organisations1 discuss and negotiate
terms and conditions of employment and other matters affecting the work¬
people at their work. In some industries these negotiations are conducted
simply by ad hoc meetings, which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary
joint machinery has been established on a permanent basis. Normally these
arrangements for collective bargaining suffice to settle all questions which
are raised, but provision is often made for matters not so settled to be referred
for settlement to independent arbitration. In certain trades where wages
cannot be effectively controlled by voluntary agreement owing to the in¬
adequate organisation of employers or workers, provision has also been made
by the State for statutory regulation under the Wages Councils Act, 1959, the
Agricultural Wages Act, 1948, and the Agricultural Wages (Scotland) Act, 1949.
1 Some employers, including the central Government and the public corporations
operating the nationalised industries, negotiate directly with the trade unions repre¬
senting their different types of employees.
Employers’
Associations
The British
Employers'
Confederation
LABOUR 4^5
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ associations,
which are wholly or partly concerned with labour questions.
The primary aims of such employers’ associations are to help to establish
suitable terms and conditions of employment, including a sound wage
structure and proper standards of safety, health and welfare; to promote
good relations with employees and the efficient use of manpower; and to
provide means of settling any disputes which may arise. Different associations
vary in the emphasis which they put upon these different aims and in the
means by which they try to achieve them. Some concentrate on defensive
action, trying by negotiation and representations to modify proposals of
trade unions and Government in their members’ interests. Others also try to
give their members practical help and advice in developing positive employ¬
ment policies. A number of them, for example, have developed training schemes
for their industries and some provide advisory services on recruitment,
training and further education and general or specialised training courses.
There is diversity in regard to structure as well as function. Generally,
however, employers’ associations are organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis. Some associations are purely local in character and deal
with a section of an industry; others are national in scope and are concerned
with the whole of a particular industry. In some of the chief industries there
are local or regional organisations combined into national federations, while
in others, within which different firms are engaged on making different
principal products, there is a very complex structure with national and
regional federations for these different sections of the industry as well as for
the industry as a whole. Altogether there are some 1,500 employers’ associa¬
tions dealing with labour matters and about 80 of them are national federations.
The final authority of a local or small national association may be a meeting,
where all member firms are directly represented; but in larger organisations
some form of indirect representation is necessary, either through local associa¬
tions or through the regions or sections into which these associations are
grouped.
The representatives thus chosen, together with a number of office holders,
form a general council, central committee or general committee, which meets
perhaps once a quarter, mainly to take major policy decisions, to elect com¬
mittees and to ratify their work. The committees usually include a general
purposes committee and a negotiating committee. A small paid staff under a
director or secretary carries out the day-to-day work of the organisation.
There is usually a small working group, consisting of senior officials and
committee chairmen, which meets to deal with urgent questions and co¬
ordinate the work of the committees.
The central organ of employers’ associations is the British Employers’ Con¬
federation (BEC), which was set up in 1919 and was at first called the National
Confederation of Employers’ Organisations. Its membership now comprises
some 54 separate autonomous organisations in industries employing about
70 per cent of the persons engaged in private enterprise industries and
services in the country. The boards of nationalised industries are not in
membership. The confederation’s business is managed by a council which
meets under the chairmanship of the President and on which every member
organisation is represented.
The confederation deals with matters affecting the interests of organised
employers and their relations with their employees and is recognised by the
Government as a channel for consultation between Government departments
and representatives of private employers as a whole on such matters. It acts
466
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trade Unions
as an advisory and consultative body for its member organisations, providing
them with information and statistics, ascertaining their collective views and
representing them nationally to the Government and the public and also
internationally, for instance, on the International Labour Organisation. Its
representatives sit on various councils and committees advisory to the
Government, on other statutory bodies, and on a number of voluntary bodies.
There are two central organisations representing trade associations and
individual employers in respect of their trading and commercial interests—
the Federation of British Industries (FBI) and the National Association of
British Manufacturers (NABM). In 1964 the BEC, the FBI and the NABM
appointed an independent commission to propose the constitution of a
National Industrial Organisation which would embrace the three organisations;
the commission’s proposals were published in May 1964 and they are being
considered by the three organisations.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over a great many years, and consequently their
form and organisation vary considerably. Trade unions started more than
two hundred years ago among the skilled craftsmen and spread later to the
general labouring and unskilled classes. More recently trade unionism has
increased among clerical, supervisory, technical and administrative workers.
A number of associations of professional workers, formed primarily for the
preservation and improvement of professional standards, have also come to
exercise many of the functions of trade unions, including negotiations on
salary and fee scales, and are legally trade unions.
The qualification for membership of some unions is occupational, for
instance, they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed; while in
others the qualification is industrial, i.e. they seek to recruit all persons in an
industry, whatever their occupation. In a number of unions recruitment is
based on a combination of these principles. A few large unions recruit members
in a number of different occupations and industries.
At the end of 1962 the total membership of British trade unions was about
9,872,000. There were 623 unions but about two-thirds of all trade unionists
were in the 18 largest unions, while just over a half were in the eight unions
with a membership of over 250,000, namely: the Transport and General
Workers’ Union, the Amalgamated Engineering Union, the National Union
of General and Municipal Workers, the National Union of Mineworkers, the
Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, the National Union of
Railwaymen, the National and Local Government Officers’ Association and
the Electrical Trades Union.
The basic unit of organisation in most British trade unions is the local
branch (called a lodge in some trade unions). Every member of the union
belongs to a branch or lodge. He may attend its meetings, put forward
suggestions about terms and conditions of employment, discuss the work
and policy of the union, and take part in the election of branch officers.
The branch takes action on certain matters considered to be entirely, or
mainly, of local interest but refers wider issues to the union’s national or
regional bodies.
Many unions also have shop stewards or other representatives at the place
of work to enrol members and collect dues, to report any encroachment on
agreed or customary conditions of work, and in some cases to act as representa¬
tives of members at their place of work for the settlement of grievances.
Trades Union
Congress
labour 467
In a few trade unions, mainly in the printing and allied trades, organisation
is based primarily on the place of work.
In most large unions the central organisation is along the following lines:
elected officials, including a general secretary assisted by clerical and specialist
staff, are in charge of the work of the head office and are responsible to a
national executive council or committee which may be part-time or full-time,
and which is usually elected by, and responsible to, annual or biennial con¬
ferences of delegates from the branches.
Executive committees or councils play an important part in the government
of the unions; between conferences they are the highest authorities and carry
out policy decisions made by delegates.
Most unions also have some regional, district or area organisation, while in
large unions there are usually regional, district or area committees or councils.
Trade unions may affiliate to one or more federations or confederations
whose main purpose in most cases is to represent all or most of the trade
unions in an industry in negotiations with employers. The scope and authority
of these federations and confederations vary greatly in different circumstances.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades
Union Congress (TUC). Most trade unions of any size and importance are
affiliated to it: the main exceptions are the National and Local Government
Officers Association (NALGO), the National Union of Teachers (NUT) and
certain Civil Service staff associations. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of the workers. Its membership comprises 175 organisations,
of which about a dozen are federations of some 150 separate unions; approxi¬
mately 350 unions in all are affiliated directly or indirectly. These represent
about 8-3 million workpeople. The TUC deals with all general questions which
concern trade unions both nationally and internationally and gives assistance
on questions relating to particular trades or industries at the request of the
trade union concerned.
The congress of delegates, which constitutes the TUC proper, meets for a
week every year to discuss matters of general interest to trade unionists and
to employees generally. It elects annually a General Council which represents
it during the remaining 51 weeks of the year. The General Council is responsible
for carrying out congress decisions, for watching economic and social develop¬
ments, and for providing educational and advisory services. It is also
empowered in certain circumstances to mediate in inter-union disputes.
One of the main tasks upon which the TUC is at present engaged is a
re-examination of the aims and structure of the British trade union movement.
Previous inquiries dealt principally with structure but on this occasion the
purposes of the movement also are being reviewed in the light of modern
conditions.
The TUC and a number of affiliated unions have in recent years substantially
developed their educational services to members. At the training college in
TUC headquarters, Congress House, London, one-week and two-week
courses are provided for about 700 students each year in general trade union
subjects, management techniques, industrial relations, collective bargaining
(including special courses for office workers and for workshop representatives),
occupational health and safety, and social security. The TUC Educational
Trust also provides summer schools, regional week-end schools, and special
week-end schools for women and for young workers.
Certain unions organise one-week and other short residential courses, and
these and other unions provide week-end schools, for the education and
468
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Joint
Negotiating
Machinery
At National Level
training of officers and members in the principles and practice of trade
unionism. Scholarships for longer-term studies (usually one academic year) at
Ruskin College, Oxford, other adult residential colleges, or the London School
of Economics, are offered by the TUC Educational Trust and by certain unions.
The Trades Union Congress has been critically examining trade union
educational facilities. In 1961 it approved proposals that began to be applied
in 1963 and are designed to lead eventually to the disbanding of the National
Council of Labour Colleges and the Workers’ Educational Trade Union
Committee (through which some 80 unions had arranged education schemes)
and their replacement by a co-ordinated scheme financed mainly out of
increased affiliation fees to the TUC. This will provide a full range of educa¬
tional services (including postal courses) to members of all the TUC’s
affiliated organisations.
The TUC is recognised by the Government as the channel of consultation
between the Government departments and representatives of organised
workers on matters affecting the interests of employees generally.
The TUC is a non-political body but under the Trade Union Act, 1913,
individual trade unions can, by a ballot vote of members, decide to set up a
political fund, financed by a separate levy, which any member can refuse to
pay without loss of his normal union rights and benefits. About 100 separate
trade union organisations, including most of the largest trade unions, have
such a fund and, in most cases, it is used to support the Labour Party (or
the Co-operative Party, which is associated with the Labour Party and has
substantially the same platform).
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local
trades council, which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common
interest and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year.
There are more than 500 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped
together in 22 federations.
There is also a separate Scottish Trades Union Congress, to which trade
unions may affiliate in respect of their membership in Scotland.
While in some industries all matters affecting terms and conditions of employ¬
ment are discussed on an ad hoc basis between the employers’ organisations
and the trade unions concerned, in other industries there are standard
procedures for dealing with such matters by joint discussion at national
level. In many industries there are, for this purpose, bodies composed of
representatives of both sides of the industry with, in some cases, an independent
chairman. There are about 200 of these bodies, most of which are called
Joint Industrial Councils. Their functions vary considerably, some being
simply negotiating bodies, while others deal with a wide range of subjects
affecting the interests of the industry concerned. Provision is sometimes made
in their constitution that a dispute on which it is not found possible to reach
agreement should be referred to some form of conciliation or arbitration by
independent persons, including the means provided under the Conciliation
Act, 1896, or the Industrial Courts Act, 1919.
Collective agreements between employers’ associations and trade unions
are not civil contracts between particular employers and employees, and are
not, therefore, in themselves enforceable at law. Observance of agreed terms
and conditions is based mainly on the good faith of employers and the mutual
respect and vigilance of trade unions and employers’ associations, but can be
secured in particular instances through reference to the Industrial Court
(see p. 469).
LABOUR
At District and
Factory Level
Statutory Wage-
Regulating
Machinery
State Provision
for Conciliation,
Arbitration and
Investigation
469
Arrangements for negotiation and joint consultation also exist at district
and factory level in many industries, where matters are discussed either
between the appropriate representatives of the two sides on an ad hoc basis,
or through regular machinery provided by District Joint Industrial Councils
or similar bodies and Works Councils. Such bodies discuss how agreements
reached at a national level may be applied to their district or factory, but as a
rule have no power to alter the terms of such national agreements. They also
discuss new problems which may arise, and if no solution can be found at
factory or district level, refer them to the national body. In many of the larger
industries national agreements recommend such consultation, and in some
they even prescribe model rules for its conduct.
In certain industries in which, owing to the lack of organisation among
employers and workers, voluntary negotiating arrangements do not exist
for the effective settlement of terms and conditions of employment or are
inadequate to secure their observance by voluntary methods throughout the
industry, statutory bodies known as Wages Councils and Agricultural Wages
Boards have been set up. These are composed of equal numbers of representa¬
tives of employers and workers in the respective industries, with the addition of
certain independent members. Wages Councils may submit proposals for fixing
minimum remuneration and holidays with pay to the Minister of Labour, who
must then make orders giving statutory force to such proposals, subject only to
his right to return them as a whole to the council for further consideration.
Orders relating to employment in agriculture are made by the appropriate
Agricultural Wages Board (England and Wales or Scotland). Such orders
are effective only in the county agricultural wages committee area in respect
of which they have been made, but there is a national minimum enforceable
in England and Wales and also one for Scotland.
Matters which prove difficult to settle by negotiation are sometimes referred
by agreement to independent conciliators or arbitrators, and one way in which
the parties can find such persons is by invoking the help of the Minister of
Labour. Under authority derived from the Conciliation Act, 1896, and the
Industrial Courts Act, 1919, the Minister has certain powers to assist industry
to settle disputes which it is not found possible to resolve through an industry’s
own machinery and procedure. These powers are all intended to supplement
and not to supersede the industry’s own machinery. There is no legal obliga¬
tion on the parties to a dispute to notify the dispute to the Minister, nor to
place the question before a conciliator.
To assist conciliation in industry the Ministry of Labour has an industrial
relations service (see p. 473) which is staffed by specially trained industrial
relations officers who keep in touch with the course of relations between
employers and workers at national, district, and, in some cases, factory level,
and assists them, if requested, to settle their problems by joint discussion and
negotiation. Conciliators have no legal powers.
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both
parties, be referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, or
an ad hoc Board of Arbitration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent
tribunal established under the Industrial Courts Act. The court normally
consists of three members—the president, one member experienced in
representing employers and one in representing workpeople.
Like collective agreements, arbitration awards are not in themselves
enforceable at law but, under the Terms and Conditions of Employment
470
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Strikes and
Lockouts
Liaison between
the Government
and Industry
Act, 1959, reports that a particular employer is not observing the recognised
(i.e. agreed or awarded) terms or conditions of employment in his trade or
industry may be made to the Minister of Labour by organisations which are
parties to the agreement or award. If the matter is not otherwise settled, the
Minister must refer it to the Industrial Court which, after hearing the case,
may issue an award requiring the employer to observe the recognised terms
or conditions. Such an award becomes an implied term of the contract of
employment. This procedure, established under the 1959 Act, replaced an
earlier one of similar intention and effect.
The Minister of Labour is also empowered to appoint a Court of Inquiry
or Committee of Investigation into a dispute, whether existing or apprehended.
These procedures are primarily means of informing public opinion of the
facts of a dispute and are not means of arbitration. The report of a Court of
Inquiry has to be laid before Parliament. Although the recommendations
contained in the reports of such bodies are not binding on the parties, they
often provide the basis for further negotiations which lead to a settlement.
Over the past 30 years the number of working days lost each year through
stoppages of work arising from industrial disputes, i.e. through strikes and
lockouts, has been on an average about 2J million which, taking the working
population as a whole, works out at approximately one hour per worker per
year. These figures, however, only record the time lost at establishments
where strikes actually take place; they take no account of the effect in other
establishments or industries. Nevertheless, the time lost through strikes is very
much less than that lost on account of sickness, accidents and absenteeism
and the United Kingdom’s record over the past 10 years or so compares
favourably with that of most other industrial countries.
Strikes in Britain are not in general caused by a break-down in the collective
bargaining machinery. This on the whole works smoothly and well. For
example, in 1963 about 170 important claims for higher wages or shorter
hours covering practically all industries were settled peacefully. Less than
ten resulted in disputes that led to stoppage of work. In fact it is estimated
that over 90 per cent of all strikes and about 70 per cent of the time lost
through strikes are the result of the unofficial and usually unconstitutional
action of the comparatively small groups of workers in single firms.
These unofficial strikes are therefore symptoms of a break-down in relations
between management and workers at the place of work itself. The Government’s
approach to the problem presented by these strikes is that the best way to
tackle them is to attack their causes. This means in other words securing a
fundamental improvement in relations between employers and workers and
the loyal observance of agreements and constitutional procedures freely
negotiated. To this purpose the Minister of Labour has been getting the leaders
of both sides of industry, through his National Joint Advisory Council, to
work out agreed policies on labour/management relations. At the same time,
in industries where strikes have been a particular difficulty, he has brought
the leading employers and trades unionists together to thrash out outstanding
problems.
The Government is in contact with representatives of employers and workers
at all levels on matters affecting their common interests. At local and district
level the industrial relations officers of the Ministry of Labour keep in touch
with the representatives of both sides of industry, while, at national level,
officers of the department are requested by many Joint Industrial Councils
The Belgrade Theatre, Coventry.
MODERN THEATRES
{above and left)
The Festival Theatre, Chichester.
LABOUR
471
to attend their meetings as liaison officers. Standing arrangements also exist
for consultation between the Government, the British Employers’ Confedera¬
tion and the Trades Union Congress through the National Joint Advisory
Council, which was set up in 1939 to adUse the Government on matters in
which employers and workers have a common interest. It meets quarterly
under the chairmanship of the Minister of Labour. Its membership consists
of representatives of the British Employers’ Confederation and the Trades
Union Congress, together with representatives of the managements of
nationalised industries. In recent years it has been turning its attention to a
number of subjects that are of importance to relations between management
and workers generally throughout industry. These subjects include redun¬
dancy arrangements, provision for sick pay and guaranteed earnings, the
selection and training of supervisors, the training of shop stewards and
communication and consultation within the firm.
Labour
Relations of
Public
Authorities
Central and Local
Government
Nationalised
Industries
While labour relations in Government service and in the nationalised industries
are, in general, organised on the same principles as in private industry, there
are some special features.
Non-industrial employees in central Government service, where salaries and
conditions of service are under the direct control of the Treasury, are per¬
mitted and encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service staff associations
(trade unions) and there is a highly developed system of negotiation and
joint consultation by means of the National and Departmental Whitley
Councils (see p. 68), corresponding to the Joint Industrial Councils in
industry. The two sides of the National Whitley Council are parties to a
Civil Service Arbitration Agreement which, subject to certain limitations,
provides that if there is failure to reach agreement by negotiation a depart¬
ment or association may report the dispute to the Minister of Labour for
reference to the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal. The tribunal is an
independent one appointed by the Minister by virtue of his powers under the
Industrial Courts Act, 1919. Industrial employees of the central Government,
however, are organised by trades and not by departments; negotiations
regarding their wages and conditions of employment take place on Trade
Joint Councils and unresolved matters are referred for arbitration by the
Industrial Court. In the major employing departments, Departmental Joint
Councils also exist for the discussion of matters other than trade questions
which are of mutual concern to the department and its industrial employees
(and which are domestic to the department).
In local government services there are separate National Joint Councils
for the main grades of employees (such as manual, clerical and technical
employees, and road-menders) which deal with wages and conditions of service
as well as other matters. There are corresponding regional and district councils.
In the nationalised industries, the main corporations, though not subject to
detailed governmental control, have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory
arrangements for collective bargaining in their industries and for joint con¬
sultation with their employees; but in carrying out these duties they are free
to choose the arrangements that suit them. In nearly every case a complex
system which already existed before nationalisation, has been taken over and
modified. The arrangements, therefore, as in industry generally, vary sub¬
stantially. The main difference from private industry is that the corporations
are not usually members of employers’ associations. In some industries they
are sole or main employers, but even where part of the industry is in private
Q
472
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
HUMAN
RELATIONS AT
THE WORKPLACE
Personnel
Management
hands, as for example in air or road transport, the corporations are separately
and directly represented on wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally
settled by negotiation between representatives of managements and trade
unions at the national level; in most cases there are also regional and local
bodies, similarly representative, charged with the duty of applying these
agreements and dealing with any difficulties or differences which may arise.
Most of the industries use the facilities for arbitration offered to industry
generally by the Ministry of Labour, but coalmining and rail transport have
their own special arrangements.
The machinery for negotiation and conciliation in the United Kingdom is
usually agreed by and based on the industry as a whole and not on the individual
establishment or firm. Accordingly, those industries, such as electricity or
gas supply, where there are several corporations which act as employers, are
covered by a single set of arrangements for each industry, and the duty of
seeing that the arrangements are made falls on the central authorities, e.g., the
Gas Council or the Electricity Council. In civil aviation, there is a single joint
council at national level on which both the nationalised air corporations and
the private operators are represented. Where a single public corporation
engages in various activities, these may be treated as separate industries and
organised separately. For example, the National Coal Board’s coke and by¬
products plants have arrangements quite distinct from the coal mines.
Throughout the various organisational changes in the transport industries,
rail, road and water transport have kept their different methods, based on
individual traditions which existed before nationalisation.
Some of the nationalised industries have felt that joint consultation was
best carried out by their negotiating bodies; others have established separate
and specially constituted joint committees at all levels. In general, where
consultation and negotiation are conducted through the same machinery,
separate committees exist for different groups or grades of employees; where
the consultative and negotiating arrangements are kept apart, a single con¬
sultative committee serves all grades.
The system of labour relations in Northern Ireland is based on the same
principles as that of Great Britain and, in these matters, the Minister of
Labour and National Insurance has powers and duties broadly similar to
those of the Minister of Labour in Great Britain. About 90 per cent of trade
unionists in Northern Ireland are members of trade unions whose head¬
quarters are in Great Britain.
The establishment of good working conditions is assisted by the organisation
of employers and workpeople, by arrangements for negotiation and settlement
of differences, and by protective legislation and its enforcement. This
institutional framework, however, cannot by itself create satisfaction with
work and working conditions, nor the mutual trust and co-operation of
management and workers, nor the sense of shared effort and achievement
known as ‘team spirit’. Nor will good wages and hours, high standards of
safety and health and lavish employee services necessarily bring about these
attitudes and responses; their achievement depends rather on building up good
relations between individuals and interacting groups within the organisation.
In recent years, therefore, there has been a marked increase of interest in
‘human relations’ in industry, i.e. relations between managements and their
LABOUR
Education and
Training
Training Centres
and Group Schemes
473
workers as individuals, as distinct from relations between organisations of
employers and organisations of workers. This has led to more widespread
attention being given to all aspects of personnel management and to the
establishment of more personnel departments.
Practically all large industrial firms and many small ones now have a
personnel department staffed by one or more specialist officers. While the
form of organisation of personnel departments varies, the personnel officer
is generally responsible for advising all levels of management on every aspect
of labour relations. This officer also has particular duties with regard to
recruitment, selection, education and training, transfer of labour, the appli¬
cation of wage agreements, the promotion of good communication and
consultation and the supervision of working conditions and employee services.
Both voluntary and official organisations are concerned with promoting
better human relationships in industry. Voluntary organisations include
bodies which deal with management problems and provide a service to
subscribing firms, professional associations, linking individuals with a
common interest in particular functions of management, and bodies providing
specialist services, usually on a fee-paying basis.
In addition to its work in the settlement of disputes (see p. 469), the
Ministry of Labour’s industrial relations service helps to promote high
standards of personnel management and assists firms by advising on problems
of personnel policy.
Recruitment and promotion policies are matters which each undertaking
decides for itself, although in some industries the decisions may be limited
by collective agreements or by trade practices. Great importance has recently
been attached to selection; and courses for training personnel officers in
modern interviewing techniques, including the use of test procedures, are
now well attended. Selection of applicants for jobs is assisted by the Govern¬
ment Employment Services.
New plans to improve the supply of skilled labour were introduced under the
Industrial Training Act, 1964. Boards may be set up by the Ministry of Labour
to be responsible for the quantity and quality of industrial training in the
industry concerned. Each board can provide its own training courses or arrange
for other organisations to provide training. It will impose a periodic levy on
employers and will make grants to those whose training courses it approves.
By the middle of 1964 boards had been set up for four major industries:
engineering, construction, iron and steel, and wool textiles.
To advise the Minister of Labour on the administration of the Act and on
industrial training questions generally, a Central Training Council (CTC)
was appointed under the Act. It consists of employer and trade union
members, representatives of the nationalised industries, educationists, the
chairmen of a number of training boards and other members who have a
special interest in industrial training.
In some of the industries for which training boards have not yet been set
up, apprenticeship training is governed by agreements between employers’
associations and trade unions. Practical training is provided mainly within
the individual firm, and associated technical education is obtained by attending
a technical college. Training of operatives is usually arranged by the individual
firm but in a few industries there are agreed national or regional schemes.
Another Government measure to improve training facilities was announced
in March 1964. The Minister of Labour stated that £20,000 would be set
aside to enable the grants to industry for the appointment of Training
474
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Communica¬
tion and
Joint
Consultation
Research into
Human
Factors in
Industry
Development Officers and for the promotion of group training schemes to
continue. The Minister had already announced that the Government would
make available -£40,000 to encourage the development of group training
schemes in areas of high unemployment. The work of development includes
the organisation and integration of the training facilities available in any
group of firms agreeing to join in a group scheme.
The realisation that the co-operation of workpeople depends largely on their
proper understanding of management’s aims and plans has focused attention
on the means of conveying information to workers. Methods used include
posters, wall information sheets, production charts, displays of photographs,
the production of news-sheets and house journals, discussions and lectures,
film shows and exhibitions. It is increasingly held, however, that, although
these media have their use, it is more important to improve communication
down the normal chain of responsibility to workshop level (a matter which
depends on personal relations and on the adequacy of supervisor training)
and to establish means for joint consultation, such as those provided by a
works council.
In the nationalised industries the various Acts placing them under public
ownership impose obligations on the management, except where adequate
machinery already exists, to consult with the appropriate trade unions to
establish such machinery for promoting measures affecting the safety, health
and welfare of employees and for discussing matters of mutual interest,
including efficiency. Arrangements for consultation at all levels, including the
workplace level, have been made in all the nationalised industries according
to the traditions and needs of each industry.
The range of subjects which works councils can fruitfully discuss is wide
and includes hours of work (within the framework of agreements), safety,
health, efficiency of production, absenteeism, labour turnover, training,
education, recreation and employees’ services generally. Works councils are
usually kept informed about the state of trade and production and the firm’s
prospects, and frequently consider problems resulting from decisions to
change production methods. It is the general practice, however, to exclude
all questions relating to wages and conditions of employment, and other
matters covered by negotiation between organisations of employers and
workers.
The Government has assisted these developments by advice on techniques,
by the supply of posters, pamphlets, films and other publicity material, and
by encouraging and promoting joint consultation. Industrial relations officers
of the Ministry of Labour are often approached by firms seeking advice on
the establishment of works councils or on ways in which their activities can
be made more effective.
The Government has sought to extend by research the available knowledge
of the factors influencing human relations in industry and human efficiency.
This research is conducted by a committee on Human Sciences, set up in 1957
by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (see p. 205), and by
research units of the Medical Research Council (see p. 213).
Development
the Services
475
17
SOUND AND TELEVISION
BROADCASTING
Broadcasting of sound and of television in the United Kingdom is regulated
under powers conferred on the Postmaster General by the Wireless Tele¬
graphy Acts, 1949-1955, which prohibit the sending or receiving of radio
communications, except under licence. Users of sound and television receiving
sets must obtain an annual licence, which can be purchased from most post
offices.
Sound broadcasting services are provided solely by the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC), which was established as a public corporation by Royal
Charter in 1927. Two television services are provided by the British Broad¬
casting Corporation (BBC 1 and BBC 2) and one by the Independent Television
Authority (ITA), which was established by the Television Act, 1954, and is
continued by the Television Act, 1964.
There were i5,973,3°4 receiving licences current in the United Kingdom
in June 1964, of which 13,010,335 were for sound and television combined
and 2,962,969 (including 592,349 for sets fitted in cars) for sound only. A
combined sound and television licence costs £4; a licence for sound only
costs £1. Registered blind people are entitled to free sound licences or to
combined licences for ^3. One licence covers all receiving sets in a household,
but a separate licence is required for a set fitted in a car.
of When sound broadcasting began in the United Kingdom in 1922, it was
decided in Parliament that the Postmaster General should grant only one
licence for that purpose at any one time, and the first licence was granted
exclusively to a limited company (the British Broadcasting Company). The
decision to grant only one licence for broadcasting was maintained when the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) was formed to take over the functions
of the limited company in 1927; it was reaffirmed in 1937 when the BBC’s
second charter was granted to cover the sound services and the television
service which the BBC had inaugurated during the previous year; and it was
upheld throughout the second world war and during the post-war period
until 1952.
During the second world war television broadcasting was suspended and
transmissions were not resumed until 1946. After resumption the television
service gained rapidly both in technical efficiency and in popularity; and
between 1949 and 1952 the Government instituted a major review of sound
and television broadcasting. After prolonged parliamentary and general
discussion it was decided by the Government that the potential power of
television was so great that it would be undesirable to leave transmission ser¬
vices in this medium in the hands of a single authority, however excellent.
The ITA was therefore established in 1954, as a public body, to provide
services additional to those of the BBC for an initial period of ten years.
It was made clear that the BBC would continue to be the main instrument
for broadcasting in the United Kingdom. Independent television (ITV)
476
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Broadcasting
Authorities
Organisation
and Finance
transmissions began in September 1955—the BBC’s monopoly in the provision
of sound broadcasting services remaining undisturbed.
The services provided by both broadcasting authorities were reviewed by
the Committee on Broadcasting, i960, and subsequently the powers of the
ITA were renewed, till 1976, by the Television Act, 1963 (which was incor¬
porated in the Television Act, 1964). This Act also strengthened the Authority’s
controlling and regulatory powers in relation to the independent programme
companies under contract to it to produce the actual programmes. The BBC was
confirmed as the sole provider of sound broadcasting services and authorised
to introduce a second television service (BBC 2); this opened in April 1964.
The Government has also decided to offer licences to five groups formed
to operate pay-television, for an experimental period and subject to the same
code of conduct as applies to existing television services.
The BBC and the ITA are independent authorities in the day-to-day
operations of broadcasting, including programmes and administration. The
Government, however, retains ultimate control, and the Postmaster General,
as the responsible Minister, is answerable to Parliament on broad questions
of policy and may issue directions to the BBC and the ITA on a number
of technical and other subjects. The Postmaster General also has powers to
prohibit the broadcasting of any particular matter or class of matter, or to
revoke the licences of the BBC or ITA at any time; these powers, however,
are treated as major reserve powers, and no formal veto has ever been placed
on the broadcasting of a particular item. Both the BBC and the ITA are
required to prepare annual reports and accounts, which are presented by
the Postmaster General to Parliament.
The BBC and the ITA both consult with the Postmaster General as to the
hours of television broadcasting, and he has approved an arrangement which
permits any one service a maximum of 50 hours a week (30 hours a week for
BBC 2), together with extensions (averaging ten hours a week) for certain
stated purposes, such as religious broadcasts, ministerial and party political
broadcasts, schools broadcasts, programmes of adult education and outside
broadcasts. The authorities may broadcast television programmes, within the
prescribed maxima, during any periods best suited to the needs of their
audiences. At the beginning of 1964 the BBC was broadcasting about 40 hours
of programmes from London in its domestic sound services during a normal
weekday.1
The BBC operates under the provisions of two documents, each granted for
a limited period at the end of which they may be renewed or amended: the
Charter, which sets out the constitution, objects and organisation of the BBC
and contains certain financial provisions; and the Licence and Agreement
between the BBC and the Postmaster General, which deals with technical
matters, certain non-technical conditions such as the prohibition of commercial
advertisements and sponsored programmes, and details of the financial
arrangements in force. The operations of the ITA are governed by the
provisions of the Television Act, 1964, which formulates its constitution, its
functions, its purpose and the framework of its finances; and by the Licence
(which contains technical provisions) issued to it by the Postmaster General
in 1964.
1 Hours of broadcasting on the Light Programme and Third Network (see p. 479) were
extended in the autumn of 1964.
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
477
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
The Independent
Television Authority
Under the current Charter (which covers the period up to July 1976) the
corporation consists of nine governors (including a chairman, a vice-chairman
and separate national governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland),
each appointed for a period of not more than five years by the Sovereign in
Council. As a corporate body, the governors are responsible for the conduct of
the whole broadcasting operation, including the content and presentation of
the programmes in sound and television, and the provision and working of the
necessary installations and equipment.
In discharging its responsibilities the BBC is required to ensure that
its services are used, as stated in the preamble to the Charter, ‘as a means of
disseminating information, education and entertainment’, and to pay heed to
the requirements of the Licence (for instance, it must allow the broadcasting
of any announcement at the request of a Government department, and must
not broadcast sponsored programmes). It must refrain from expressing
editorial opinion on current affairs and on matters of public policy, and it is
relied on to treat controversial subjects with complete impartiality.
The chief executive officer of the BBC—the Director-General—is appointed
by the governors at their discretion and with him they discuss all major
matters of policy and finance. Under the Director-General are six directors
(the Chief Assistant to the Director-General, and the Directors of Sound
Broadcasting, Television, External Broadcasting, Engineering, and Adminis¬
tration) who, between them, cover the whole work of the BBC, and who,
with the Director-General, constitute its Board of Management. The number
of staff employed is over 18,000.
The governors are advised on all aspects of their work by a number of
councils, established in accordance with the terms of the Charter, for example,
the General Advisory Council, which has been in existence, except for a
break during the war years, since 1934; the National Broadcasting Councils
for Scotland and Wales, which, under the chairmanship of the national
governors for Scotland and Wales, are responsible for domestic services
in those countries; and the Regional Advisory Councils for the English regions
and for Northern Ireland. There are also a number of other councils and
committees, not specifically required by the Charter, but established by the
BBC to advise on such matters as religious broadcasting, schools broadcasting,
music, adult education and agriculture.
The services of the BBC are financed from (1) an annual sum, voted by
Parliament, which is related to revenue derived from the sale by the Post
Office of broadcast receiving licences; (2) an annual grant-in-aid, voted by
Parliament, for the External Services, i.e. the European Services, the Overseas
Services, and the Monitoring Service; and (3) profits from BBC publications,
mainly the Radio Times, which has a weekly sale of nearly 5 million copies
and attracts a large advertising revenue. The gross revenue from the sale of
licences for the year which ended on 31st March, 1964, amounted to
£50,039,5rS, from which the Post Office deducted £3,130,000 for the expenses
it incurred in collecting the licence fees, investigating complaints of electrical
interference, and administration, so that the net amount the BBC received
was £46,909,513. In the same year, the net revenue from publications was
£1,290,229 and grant-in-aid receipts for the external services amounted to
£8,063,000.
The Independent Television Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy
chairman and, at present, ten other members (three of whom have special
responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Monmouthshire, and Northern
Ireland severally) appointed by the Postmaster General. It is responsible,
478
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
under the Television Act, 1964, for television broadcasting services ‘as a
public service for disseminating information, education and entertainment’.
The ITA owns and operates the transmitting stations, but the production
studios and equipment are owned, and the actual programmes are provided,
by programme companies under contract to the ITA. Fourteen programme
companies are under contract for the period July 1964 to July 1967:
Rediffusion Limited; Associated Television Limited; ABC Television
Limited; Granada TV Network Limited; Scottish Television Limited;
Independent Television for South Wales and the West of England Limited
(TWW); Southern Television Limited; Tyne-Tees Television Limited;
Anglia Television Limited; Ulster Television Limited; Westward Television;
Border Television Limited; Grampian Television Limited; and Channel
Television Limited. A common news service is provided by Independent
Television News Limited.
The Authority has controlling and regulatory powers of a wide and important
character in regard to programmes. The Television Act requires it to ensure
that they do not offend against good taste or decency, that they are balanced
in their subject matter, that they preserve due impartiality in presenting
matters of industrial or political controversy, and that the news is reported
accurately; it also provides for the submission by the programme contractors
of programme schedules for the approval of the Authority; and lays on it the
duty to produce and keep under review a code of programme standards
governing the rules to be observed about the showing of violence, particularly
when large numbers of children and young people may be expected to be
watching. In the choice of programme companies the ITA is guided
by their potential ability to provide an efficient service and, in the case
of regional companies, by their associations with the local communities
concerned.
The chief executive officer of the ITA is the Director-General. There are
also two Deputy Directors-General, and a headquarters and regional office
staff covering all technical, administrative, clerical, typing and office services,
which numbered 237 in 1964. Staff serving at the transmitting stations
bring the total number of ITA staff to 622.
In the discharge of its duties the ITA is advised by a General Advisory
Council and three statutory committees: the Advertising Advisory Committee;
the Educational Advisory Committee; and the Central Religious Advisory
Committee to the BBC, which by arrangement also advises the ITA.
Programme schedules are discussed by the Programmes Policy Committee.
The ITA also has a panel of six consultants to assist it in the exercise of its
day-to-day responsibilities for religious services and programmes. A standing
consultative committee, composed of two representatives of the ITA and a
representative of each of the programme companies, provides consultative
machinery between the ITA and the companies on matters, other than
programmes, affecting the companies as a whole. There is also an Independent
Television Companies Association, designed to further the collective interests
of the companies with such outside bodies as trade unions and sporting
organisations, and generally to ensure that they speak as far as possible
with one voice on public issues connected with television broadcasting
policy.
The ITA receives no payments from licence revenue; its finance is drawn
from annual rental payments made to it by the programme companies. In the
year which ended on 31st March, 1963, these payments amounted to about
^5^ million, while the running costs of the ITA were £4 million.
Sound
Broadcasting
Domestic Services
External Services
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 479
The BBC operates its domestic sound broadcasting services from 57 long¬
wave and medium-wave transmitters at 43 transmitting stations, and from
34 very high frequency (VHF) transmitting stations. The VHF service is
available to 99‘4 cent of the population of the United Kingdom. The
external broadcasting services are at present transmitted from 43 high power,
high frequency transmitters: 37 in the United Kingdom, two (used for relay
purposes) at Tebrau, near Singapore, and four (also for relay purposes) in
Cyprus. The Government has approved a major programme of building new
transmitters for the overseas services, which will cost over ^4! million.
There are 180 studios for the domestic sound programmes, of which 63
are in London and 117 at various centres in the regional areas. The external
services use 38 London studios. There are also 32 semi-automatic studios
which can be operated by programme officials without an engineering staff.
The domestic sound services consist of the Home Service, the Light Pro¬
gramme and the Third Network which also carries the Third Programme.
These separate, but inter-related, services give the BBC reasonable scope in
providing programmes that fall within a very wide range of what can be
effectively broadcast in sound only.
Each of the services has its own characteristics: the Home Service is
planned as a general service, and in addition to a wide range of musical
programmes and plays provides the principal news and information services,
discussions on domestic and foreign affairs, political broadcasts (ministerial
broadcasts and controversial broadcasts by party spokesmen) and special
programmes of various kinds, including broadcasts for schools. It is also the
vehicle for regional broadcasting (i.e. programmes specially compiled for
listeners in Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales, the Midlands, north and
west of England). The main purpose of the Light Programme is to provide
a service of entertainment and relaxation for the majority. The Third Pro¬
gramme is intended for those who take pleasure in close and responsive
listening to broadcasts of artistic and intellectual distinction, and the re¬
mainder of the Third Network to meet the practical needs of selective
minority audiences for expert information on specialist subjects.
The external broadcasting services of the BBC are intended to provide a link
of culture, information and entertainment between the peoples of the United
Kingdom and those in all other parts of the world; to present events of
world-wide importance with speed and accuracy; and generally to reflect
British opinion and the British way of life. These services are broadcast in
English and in 40 other languages for nearly 620 hours a week, which is longer
than the output of all the BBC’s domestic sound and television services
added together, and involves the transmission of some 1,100 news pro¬
grammes and 1,200 talks a week.
The services, under the Director of External Broadcasting, are divided into
the European Services and the Overseas Services, each in charge of a Con¬
troller. Within these two groups are the regional divisions. Common to both
groups are the External Services News Department, which prepares all the
news broadcasts for audiences outside the United Kingdom, and the External
Services Production Department, which supplies feature programmes.
The European Services broadcast nearly 230 programme hours a week and
are subdivided into four regional groupings: South European (Spain,
Portugal, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Israel), Central European (Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Poland, Finland), East European (Soviet Union, Rumania,
Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Albania), and German. A French language service
480
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Television
Broadcasting
BBC
provides programmes for both European and African listeners. There is
also an English service directed to the whole of Europe, and a European
Talks Department.
The Overseas Services, which are directed to countries outside Europe,
broadcast about 390 programme hours a week. They comprise the General
Overseas Service with its world-wide audience of English-speaking listeners,
and a number of regional services in English and 22 other languages.
The General Overseas Service, which includes among its audience peoples
of the Commonwealth, British Forces and British communities overseas,
gives a complete programme service for nearly 23 hours every day. The
regional services consist of the African Service with programmes in English,
Hausa, Swahili and Somali; the Arabic Service; the Asian Service with
programmes in 14 oriental languages; the Latin American Service with
programmes in Spanish and Portuguese; and other special programmes in
English for North America, Australia, the Pacific, the Caribbean and the
Falkland Islands, in Maltese for Malta, in French for Canada and in French
and English for Mauritius.
The external broadcasting services include the Transcription, English by
Radio and Television, and Monitoring Services. The Transcription Service
records 1,000 BBC sound programmes annually, distributing them to broad¬
casting organisations in all parts of the world. The English by Radio and
Television Service produces some 200 English lessons with commentaries in
46 languages every week, reaching an audience of several millions by direct
transmission from London and the BBC’s Far Eastern station, and by recorded
broadcasts from some 200 local stations in 87 countries. It has completed
its first series of English-by-television lessons, now being shown in 20
countries, and a second series is in production; also completed is a television
series for teachers of English. The Monitoring Service reports foreign broad¬
casts from some 50 countries in 35 languages and works under a reciprocal
agreement with its American counterpart for monitored material from the
Far East and other areas inaudible in the United Kingdom.
In the external services the Corporation works in consultation with the
Government departments concerned with overseas relations which prescribe
the languages and hours of broadcasting, but the day-to-day content of the
programmes remains the responsibility of the BBC.
The BBC maintains offices in New York, Paris, Ottawa, Toronto, Sydney,
New Delhi and Beirut (as well as offices in Berlin and Singapore to deal with
BBC programmes) to encourage local interest in the BBC, to promote the
use of BBC television and radio material and to provide the BBC with advice
and help concerning programmes, whether for home listeners about that area
or for listeners in the area itself. The offices (which are concerned with the
whole field of sound radio and, where appropriate, television) are also
responsible for promoting good relations with the local broadcasting organisa¬
tions, and for keeping the BBC informed about local broadcasting and other
developments of interest; in these matters, they work closely with the BBC’s
Overseas and Foreign Relations Department. Audience research is undertaken
by sampling surveys and other research methods to assess the size, nature
and tastes of various audiences.
In 1936 the BBC launched the world’s first regular public service by high
definition television. Two programmes are now being transmitted: BBC 1,
which is available to over 99 per cent of the population of the United Kingdom
from 46 transmitting stations, and BBC 2, at present from one station only
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
ITV
Programmes
481
in the London area. BBC 2 is transmitted on 625 lines on ultra high frequency
(UHF) and is expected to reach some two-thirds of the population by the end
of 1966.
In the course of a year, the BBC television service broadcasts on a national
network more than 7,000 items, made up of studio productions, outside
broadcasts, films, and relays from other countries. BBC Television Enterprises
undertakes the world-wide sale of BBC television programmes (films, tele¬
recordings and video-taped material); it also purchases material for the use
of the BBC television service and conducts business relations with other
television organisations throughout the world.
BBC studio productions in London come from five main studios at Lime
Grove, two at Riverside Studios, Hammersmith, and the Television Theatre,
Shepherds Bush. With one exception all London studios are now capable of
operation on 405 lines for BBC 1, and on 625 lines for BBC 2. In addition,
the BBC’s largest studio, Studio 1 at the Television Centre (see below), can
operate on the American 525 line standard. The BBC also has fully equipped
regional studio centres at Manchester, Birmingham, Cardiff, Glasgow,
Bristol and Belfast; these centres contribute programmes to the national
network as well as producing others of only local interest. Work has started
on a new Midland regional headquarters near Birmingham, which will become
the first combined television and sound radio centre in the world. In addition
to the main studios a number of small interview studios (used mainly for short
insertions into news bulletins) have been established throughout the country.
The Television Film Department of the BBC uses two studios at Ealing
as well as mobile film units. Television news and newsreel programmes
originate from specially equipped studios at Alexandra Palace, London.
Two further main studios are now being equipped at the Television Centre;
a start has also been made on the first part of the extension to the main block.
Eventually, the Television Centre will be able to produce 1,500 hours of
television programmes in a year.
Outside broadcasting, which provides about 1,000 programmes annually,
covers most parts of the United Kingdom with its mobile units, presenting
programmes both of national and of specifically regional interest. Live
programmes and news items from other parts of the world are brought to
viewers in the United Kingdom over the Eurovision network and by means
of communications satellites (see p. 484).
The first regular independent television (ITV) service was inaugurated in
September 1955 by a programme transmission from the IT A London station
at Beaulieu Heights, Croydon. By 1964 programmes were being transmitted
from 22 stations in all parts of the United Kingdom, and 13 million homes
in the United Kingdom were able to receive independent television.
ITV programmes are produced at studio centres in London, Birmingham,
Manchester, Glasgow, Cardiff, Southampton, Newcastle, Norwich, Belfast,
Dover, Plymouth, Carlisle, Aberdeen, Bristol and St. Helier. The establish¬
ment of these studios is the direct result of the ITA’s policy of encouraging
the development of regional television, and the programmes are either for
local broadcasting or for transmission to one or more of the other regions
through the link system operated by the ITA. This consists of some 6,000 miles
of vision links, about 60 per cent of which are two-way circuits.
Both the BBC and the ITV services include programmes of music, drama,
light entertainment, variety, films, news reports covering international,
national, and local events, political programmes, and outside broadcasts,
482
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advertising
Pay-T ele vision
Wire
Broadcasting
particularly of national and State occasions and sport. Religious broadcasts
and broadcasts for schools and adult students also feature regularly as do
programmes designed to stimulate thought and widen people’s horizons,
such as interviews with outstanding personalities, investigations into matters
of public interest, and programmes on the arts; and there are programmes of
specialised interest, such as children’s and family programmes, programmes
for women, regional programmes, and programmes on agriculture. In
addition, there are special series of party political broadcasts under arrange¬
ments agreed between the broadcasting authorities and the leading political
parties.
The BBC seeks to avoid giving publicity to any individual firm or organised
interest except in so far as is necessary in providing effective and informative
programmes under the terms of the Charter. The ITA broadcasts advertise¬
ments (on which the programme companies depend for their revenue) subject
to the relevant provisions in the Television Act, namely, that there should
be no sponsoring of programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should
be clearly distinguishable as such and recognisably separate from the pro¬
gramme, and that the amount of time given to advertising should not be so
great as to detract from the value of the programmes as a medium of informa¬
tion, education and entertainment. The ITA also has rules agreed with the
Postmaster General about certain classes of broadcasts (including, in particular,
religious services) in which advertisements may not be inserted and, on the
advice of the Advertising Advisory Committee, drew up certain ‘principles for
television advertising’ with a view to the exclusion of misleading or unsuitable
advertisements from the programmes. These principles formed the basis of
the ‘Code of Advertising Standards and Practice’ which, under the Act, the
ITA keeps under review. The cost of inserting advertisements in the ITA
service is borne by the advertisers, who pay the programme companies for
advertising time.
An experiment in pay-television by wire, a service whereby subscribers pay
for programmes they choose to view, will take place in a few areas; it is
expected to be fully operational by the autumn of 1965. The Postmaster-
General will license, subject to certain conditions and safeguards, companies
taking part.
All pay-television companies have elected to operate in conjunction with
wire broadcasting companies (see below) and to use television wire broadcasting
systems for distributing the pay-television service.
Wire broadcasting—a system whereby programmes are received at a central
point, whence they are distributed by wire to listeners and viewers—
began in the United Kingdom in 1925 as a private venture and remains in
the hands of private enterprise. Wire broadcasting companies operate under
licence from the Postmaster General. They are not allowed to originate
programmes of their own, and their function is to distribute programmes put
out by general broadcasting stations. A specified minimum of their programme
material must be taken from BBC sources. Subscribers to wire broadcasting
services must have ordinary broadcast receiving licences. At the beginning
of 1964 there were 664 wire broadcasting services, of which 520 gave television
service and the remainder sound-only service. The number of subscribers at
that date was 1,189,144, including 767,519 who were receiving television
services.
Audience
Research
Technical
Developments
International
Relations
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 483
Audience research, as conducted by the BBC, is carried on by means of
(a) a Survey of Listening and Viewing, during the course of which a representa¬
tive sample of the population is interviewed each day about its listening and
viewing on the previous day, (b) a continuous system of gathering information
about the way programmes are received by those who happen to see or hear
them, through panels of representative listeners and viewers, and (c) ad hoc
investigations. The ITA has a research officer who co-ordinates research
programmes carried out for it by outside experts.
The Postmaster General is advised on the technical aspects of television
(and VHP sound broadcasting) by the Television Advisory Committee,
which consists of an independent chairman, the Director-General of the BBC,
the Director-General of the ITA, representatives from the radio industry,
independent members, and representatives of interested Government
departments.
Research into technical problems is carried out by the scientific and
engineering staffs of the BBC, the Post Office and the radio industry. In the
BBC a comparison is being made of three systems of colour transmission,
based on the NTSC (National Television Systems Committee (USA)),
SECAM (Sequentiel Couleur avec Memoire) and PAL (Phase Alternation Line)
systems. Other recent studies include: investigations into various systems of
stereophonic sound transmissions; methods of improving studio acoustics,
microphones and loudspeakers; long-distance propagation studies in the
short wave, VHP and ultra high frequency bands; and methods of increasing
national coverage both in sound and television by such means as the sharing
of frequencies between stations, the construction of transmitting aerials having
special horizontal radiation patterns, and the development of unattended relay
transmitters of low power for providing a television and VHP sound service
to small and isolated communities. The BBC has also developed equipment
for converting television programmes from European standards to those of
North America, and the world’s first electronic standards converter which
operates unattended and gives converted pictures of far higher quality than
those of earlier converters.
The BBC and the ITA (together with the Independent Television Companies
Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union. The
union, which now has 28 full members among the broadcasting organisations
in the European zone and 25 associate members (mostly from outside Europe,
including the United States of America and many of the nations of the
Commonwealth), meets every year to exchange views and information, and
to study common problems. It also maintains a Technical Monitoring Station,
where frequency measurements and other observations on broadcasting stations
can be carried out.
Within the Commonwealth, the BBC is closely associated with the broad¬
casting organisations of the other member countries and of the dependent
territories. The BBC, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, and the Rank Organisation have jointly set up
a British Commonwealth International Newsfilm News Agency Trust.
Through an associated non-profit-making company (the British Common¬
wealth International Newsfilm News Agency Limited), this joint enterprise
provides a reliable service of international news on film for subscribers who
operate television services, produce cinematograph newsreels or acquire
newsfilm for any other purposes, including education, anywhere in the world.
484
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Eurovision
Inter-continental
Television
Both the BBC and the independent television companies are associated
with the Centre for Educational Television, which began work in 1962 and
concentrates particularly on the needs of the service in developing countries.
The centre receives a Government grant totalling £100,000 over five years,
but most of its funds come from private sources, including the independent
television companies. The BBC provides free technical and other facilities,
including film library resources and some use of lecture studios. Training
in television work is also provided for overseas trainees at the Thomson
Centre, in Glasgow, run by the Thomson Foundation, a charitable trust.
The BBC and the ITA also participate in the work of the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency
responsible for the regulation and control of all international telecommuni¬
cation services (including sound and television), for the allocation and
registration of all radio frequencies and (through its International Con¬
sultative Committees) for the promotion and co-ordination of the international
study of technical problems in broadcasting. In addition, the BBC has
long-established relations with the United Nations Radio Division, with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO),
and with the Council of Europe.
As well as taking part in the exchange of sound radio programmes arranged
between the member countries of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU),
the BBC is a regular contributor to the network of European television
(Eurovision). This network now includes 23 Western European member
countries; the exchange of television programmes between them is arranged
by the EBU, which maintains an International Television Co-ordination
Centre (Eurovision) in Brussels. The range of Eurovision is steadily increasing
as countries expand their networks and facilities, and new countries participate.
Successful programme exchanges have also been made between Moscow and
London by both the BBC and the independent television companies.
The first television relay across the Atlantic by means of Telstar, the com¬
munication satellite, was seen in Britain in the early hours of nth July, 1962.
The first programme exchanges between America and Europe via Telstar
were televised on 23 rd July, 1962. Further exchanges have been achieved by
means of the subsequent satellite Relay and successful transmissions have
been effected between Japan and Europe.
18
THE PRESS
485
Ownership
The British press caters for all political views, different levels of education
and a wide range of interests. It is not subject to State control or censorship.
The British public buys more newspapers per person than any other in
the world, except the Swedish. It has been estimated (United Nations
Statistical Year Book, 1963) that for every 1,000 inhabitants of Britain and
Sweden 490 copies of daily papers are sold every day. Next comes Luxembourg
with 445 per 1,000 inhabitants. Circulation figures of individual newspapers
are proportionately high: five of the daily morning newspapers and five of
the Sunday papers have circulations in the millions. These high figures
are largely explained by the fact that the London morning and Sunday
papers have national circulations, i.e. they are distributed throughout the
United Kingdom, being available almost everywhere on the day of publication.
Britain imports just over half its newsprint requirements, while the rest
is made from imported raw materials. In 1963 1-3 million tons of newsprint
were used in the United Kingdom. The average size of London national
morning papers varies between 16 and 32 pages. Prices of daily newspapers
vary from 3d. (for the majority of papers) to 5d. (for The Times). Sunday
papers run up to 48 pages and to a price of 8d. In addition to their normal
paging some newspapers carry occasional supplements. The Sunday Times
has had a regular colour supplement since February 1962 and The Observer
and The Daily Telegraph since September 1964.
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 there are 129 daily and
Sunday newspapers and over 1,200 weekly papers published in Greater
London and almost every sizeable town in the rest of the country. These
papers deal mainly with news of interest to the region where they are sold.
There are also the sporting papers, papers in foreign languages for groups of
nationals of other lands resident in Britain, and religious papers.
Ownership of the newspaper press is varied: it includes individual owners,
two or more partner proprietors, local printing and publishing firms, news¬
paper companies owning between one and half a dozen papers, or press groups
controlling a chain of newspapers in different parts of the country. Some large
newspaper groups also have extensive interests in periodicals and holdings
in independent television programme contracting companies.2
A Royal Commission on the Press reported in 1949 {Cmd. 7700) that the
British press ‘is completely independent of outside financial interests and . . .
its policy is the policy of those that conduct it’; there was evidence that the
direct influence of advertisers on policy was ‘negligible’. Although pronounced
views may be expressed in newspapers and their political leanings may be
obvious, they are financially independent of any political party.
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly; figures are based on the
1964 edition of The Newspaper Press Directory.
2 The Television Act, 1963, stipulates that, if it appears to the Independent Television
Authority at any time that newspaper shareholdings in television programme companies
have led or are leading to results which are contrary to the public interest, the
Authority may, with the consent of the Postmaster General, notify the companies that
their programmes may cease to be transmitted.
486
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The ‘National’
Press
Provincial
Newspapers
While early newspapers were often family concerns (and some provincial
weeklies still are), with the development of papers for mass readership large
capital sums were needed and ownership began to be transferred to joint
stock companies. Control, however, continued to rest, and still rests more
often than not, with one person or a small group, holding a large proportion
of the voting shares. The largest press groups are: International Publishing
Corporation Limited; Daily Mail and General Trust Limited; Beaverbrook
Newspapers Limited; and, for provincial newspapers, the Thomson Organisa¬
tion Limited and Westminster Press Provincial Newspapers Limited.
The International Publishing Corporation is the largest publisher of
periodicals in the world, and by far the largest in England and Wales. In
Scotland the largest publishers of magazines are the D. C. Thomson Group.
Certain newspapers and periodicals are controlled by trustees whose aim
is to preserve the character and traditions of the paper and prevent control
from falling into the hands of people who might change the editorial policy
and tradition. Various forms of trust govern the direction of The Times,
The Guardian, The Observer, The Economist, Spectator and New Statesman.
Between 1949 and 1961 seventeen London and provincial daily and Sunday
newspapers ceased publication and the ownership of those that remained
became concentrated in fewer hands. This trend was studied by a second
Royal Commission, appointed in March 1961.
The Commission reported in 1962 that further concentration of ownership
of the press might lead to a stifling of variety of opinion; and it recommended
that a Press Amalgamations Court should be set up to examine transactions
involving the acquisition of newspaper titles or of controlling interest in
companies which own newspapers, the scheme being limited to daily and
Sunday newspapers with aggregate weekly sales of more than three million
copies. This suggestion is still under consideration by the Government.
Ten morning papers published in London, and one {The Guardian) which
is produced in London and Manchester, are ‘national’ in the sense of circu¬
lating throughout the British Isles, and there are eight ‘national’ Sunday
papers (see Table 40). Most papers with big circulations have northern
editions published in Manchester which, after London, is the largest press
centre in England. Certain specialised daily papers published in London have
a circulation limited by interest and not by region, for example, Lloyd's List
and Shipping Gazette and Sporting Life. The leading Scottish papers (The
Scotsman and The Glasgow Herald) have a considerable circulation outside
Scotland. The two London evening papers each have affiliations with a
national daily, but draw their readership very largely from people living within
fifty miles of London.
The provincial newspapers, numbering about 80 morning or evening daily
and Sunday papers and over 850 weeklies, provide the general and local
news expected by readers whose daily life and interests are known to, and
shared by, the newspaper staff. Only a few reflect a definite political tendency,
most of them considering themselves independent. The total circulation of
the provincial morning and evening papers is about 6| million. Among the
provincial mornings, The Journal, the Yorkshire Post, the Sporting Chronicle
and the Northern Echo have circulations of over 100,000, two provincial Sunday
papers—the Sunday Sun and the Sunday Mercury—have circulations of over
200,000; while, among evening papers, the circulations of the Birmingham
Evening Mail and Despatch, the Liverpool Echo and Evening Express and the
THE PRESS
487
TABLE 40
‘National’
Newspapers and
London Evenings
Title
Dailies
The Times (1785)
The Daily Telegraph
(1855)
The Guardian (1821)
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Herald (1912)6
Daily Worker (1930)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Sketch (1909)
Financial Times (1888)
The New Daily (1960)
London Evenings
Evening News (1881)
Evening Standard
(1827)
General
Political
Tendency
Controlled by®
Independent
Conservative
Independent
Independent;
stresses
importance of
British Com¬
monwealth
Conservative
Labour
Communist
Left of centre
Conservative
Independent
Right of centre
As for
Daily Mail
As for
Daily Express
Times Publishing Co.
Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Manchester Guardian
and Evening News Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
Daily Mail and General
Trust Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
People’s Press Printing
Society.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Daily Mail and General
Trust Ltd.
Financial Times Ltd.
New Daily Ltd.
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1964
256,123
1,312,582
271,739
4,275,643
Daily Mail and General
Trust Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
2,423,424
1,265,020
61,256
4,951,488
923,130
152,351
60,501
1,423,871
758,799
a "phe company named is, for each newspaper, the one in ultimate control of the
undertaking and is not necessarily the company which publishes the newspaper.
* The publishers replaced the Daily Herald with a new newspaper, The Sun, in
September 1964.
488
TABLE 40 (contd.)
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Title
General
Political
Tendency
Sundays
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Times
(1822)
The Sunday Telegraph
(1961)
News of the World
(1843)
The People (1881)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Citizen (1850)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
(formerly S. Pictorial)
Controlled by*
Independent
Conservative
As for The
Daily Telegraph
Independent
Independent
As for
Daily Express
Supports the
Co-operative
Movement
and the
Labour Party
As for
Daily Mirror
The Observer Ltd. All
shares owned by The
Observer Trust.
The Thomson Organis¬
ation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
News of the World
Organisation Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
Co-operative Press Ltd.
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1964
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
714,424
1,240,239
660,635
6,224,174
5,578,963
4,307,856
283,370
5,052,906
° The company named is, for each newspaper, the one in ultimate control of the
undertaking and is not necessarily the company which publishes the newspaper.
Manchester Evening News and Chronicle exceed 400,000. The Yorkshire
Evening Post has a circulation of over 300,000, the Newcastle Evening
Chronicle and the Wolverhampton Express and Star exceed 200,000, and
eleven other evening papers have between 100,000 and 200,000. The provincial
newspaper, often read far more thoroughly than the national daily, is a
valuable medium for national and local advertising.
There are over 90 London suburban weeklies.
Scotland Scotland has six morning, seven evening and two Sunday newspapers,
excluding the Scottish editions of the Daily Express, Daily Mail and Sunday
Express. The leading morning papers are The Glasgow Herald (circulation
84,461) and The Scotsman, published in Edinburgh (circulation 71,721).
Others are: the Daily Record and the Noon Record, published in Glasgow;
the Courier and Advertiser, published in Dundee; and the Press and Journal
of Aberdeen. Evening papers include the Edinburgh Evening News and
Dispatch, Glasgow’s Evening Times and Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening
Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express
Northern
Ireland
Wales
Channel
Islands and
Isle of Man
Periodicals
THE PRESS 489
and the Greenock Telegraph and Clyde Shipping Gazette. The Sunday papers
are the Sunday Mail and the Sunday Post.
Weekly newspapers published in Scotland number about 150. The most
widely known are the Weekly Scotsman and the People's Journal.
Northern Ireland has two morning papers and one evening paper, all published
in Belfast: they are The News-Letter (Unionist) and the Irish News (Nationalist)
and the evening Belfast Telegraph (Unionist) which has a circulation of
214,105. There are 42 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, with circu¬
lations ranging from under 4,000 to about 23,000. The majority are published
by individual companies. No Sunday newspapers are published in Northern
Ireland at present but one is planned.
One daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in Cardiff, has a
circulation of 104,928, mainly in southern Wales. In North Wales the
Liverpool Daily Post gives wide coverage to events in the area. Evening
papers published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff, the South
Wales Argus, Newport, and the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea. North
Wales is served by the Liverpool Echo and to a smaller extent by the Manchester
Evening News and Chronicle.
The weekly press includes 48 weekly papers in English, many of them
carrying articles in Welsh; 3 bilingual papers; and 11 papers in Welsh, of
which 4 are denominational.
The Channel Islands have one morning paper (Guernsey Star), three evening
papers and two weeklies. The Isle of Man Times is issued from Mondays to
Wednesdays with a special weekly edition which is published on Friday; its
companion paper, the Isle of Man Examiner, is published on Thursday. There
are four other weeklies.
Weekly, monthly and quarterly journals cover an enormous field. Salient
features of the last twenty-five years have been the development, on the one
hand, of periodicals with a mass appeal, particularly those for women and
adolescent girls; and, on the other hand, the growth of the trade and technical
press. There are over 4,000 periodical publications: general magazines with
circulations of up to a million; women’s magazines, some of which have even
larger circulations; numerous publications for children; religious periodicals
for all denominations; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport,
gardening and other hobbies, and humour; journals specialising in various
subjects such as politics, finance and economics, science, the professions, and
the arts; trade and technical publications, many of which have circulations
throughout the world, some being published solely for export, with little or
no circulation in Britain; and the publications of learned societies, trade unions,
regiments, universities, colleges, schools, and other associations. There has
also been a large increase in recent years in the number and circulation of
‘house journals’, produced by industrial organisations mainly for their staffs.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Woman (3>i55>385);
Woman's Own (2,304,539); Woman's Weekly (1,528,309); Woman's Realm
(1,386,109); Reveille (1,251,994); Weekend (1,087,812); Woman's Mirror
(1,005,371); together with the Radio Times (4,789,117) and TV Times
The leading weekly journals of opinion are The Economist (circulation
68,361), a politically independent publication covering a wider range of
49°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interests and attitudes than its title implies; the New Statesman (circulation
90,213), which is a review of politics, literature and the arts with an independent
socialist political tendency; the Spectator (40,674), which covers much the same
subjects from an independent conservative standpoint; and Tribune, which
has a strongly left-wing but anti-communist bias. The Statist, independent,
specialises in the financial and industrial aspects of world affairs. Punch
(127,554), traditionally the leading humorous periodical, has in recent years
devoted increasing attention to public affairs. New Society (30,000), which
covers the sociological aspects of current affairs, has rapidly established its
reputation, as has New Scientist (52,500), which reports on the progress of
science and technology in terms which the non-specialist can understand.
Other papers whose circulations are in the tens of thousands are the illustrated
weeklies such as the Illustrated London News, the Field, Country Life, and
The Listener, which includes the texts of outstanding BBC broadcasts. All
these weeklies are read in libraries, clubs and other institutions, and readership
is far wider than the circulation figures suggest.
Monthly and quarterly journals, particularly the literary and political
journals and those specialising in international and Commonwealth affairs,
generally speaking appeal to the more serious type of reader.
In addition to the circulation of periodicals published in England, Wales
has its own farming weekly, the Welsh Farm News, and several monthly and
quarterly journals, published both in Welsh and English.
Four monthly illustrated periodicals are published in Scotland: Scottish
Field, Scotland's Magazine, the Scots Magazine and Scotland; and two
weeklies devoted to farming interests, Farming News and the Scottish
Farmer. Among literary journals, probably the most famous is Blackwood's,
published in Edinburgh. Numerous popular magazines are also published in
Scotland.
In Northern Ireland, weekly, monthly and quarterly publications cover
farming, the linen industry, building, motoring and politics.
News Agencies There are three principal British news agencies:
Reuters Ltd., which is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of
the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand and operated by them on
a non-profit-making basis under the terms of a deed of trust which guarantees
the independence and integrity of the news service and ensures that all profits
are used to develop it. Founded in London in 1850, Reuters has offices in
many countries and maintains several hundred correspondents throughout
the world, supplying a continuous report of foreign news to the London
newsroom. This is then distributed to the national newspapers, to the radio
and television news services and, through an extensive private network of
communications, to news media in almost every part of the world.
Press Association Ltd., which is owned collectively by British provincial
newspapers. The Association distributes home news within the British Isles,
supplies the same home news to Reuters and its associated agencies for
distribution abroad and distributes to newspapers of the British Isles outside
London the overseas news of Reuters and the Associated Press. All profits
are used to develop the service.
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. (Extel), which distributes mainly home
news to the national and provincial press, broadcasting organisations, overseas
news agencies, and private subscribers.
Two other agencies supply a general service of overseas news:
Training for
Journalism
Press
Institutions
THE PRESS 491
Associated Press, which is a branch of the Associated Press of America.
British United Press, which is a Canadian subsidiary of United Press
International, an American agency.
A number of other United Kingdom, Commonwealth and foreign agencies
and news services have offices in London, and there are agencies in other
cities, specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical requirements.
Syndication of features is not as common in the United Kingdom as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
There is no recognised pre-entry training for a career in journalism, but all
new entrants to provincial newspapers in the United Kingdom (and most
national newspaper reporters start work in the provinces and go to London after
gaining experience) take part in a training and education scheme administered
by the National Council for the Training of Journalists, which represents all
the principal press organisations. The scheme, which is based on training in
newspaper offices, and local colleges of further education, consists of a six-
month probationary period, followed by three years of basic training and a
proficiency test. A National Diploma Course of eighteen months may be
undertaken later. University graduates may be recruited for some of the
specialised posts in journalism (for instance, as correspondents abroad or on
special subjects) but their numbers are comparatively small.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union travelling fellowship scheme for
the training and education of young journalists throughout the Common¬
wealth, each year about ten journalists from overseas spend six months
in the United Kingdom: two or three months in the offices of newspapers
or periodicals and the remaining time acquiring a general idea of life in
Britain.
The Thomson Foundation provides scholarships and organises training
courses in Britain for journalists from newly developing countries.
Both employers and employees in the industry are well organised. On the
employers’ side the most important organisations are the Newspaper
Proprietors’ Association, whose members are proprietors of London (national)
daily and Sunday newspapers; the Newspaper Society, whose members are
proprietors of provincial daily and weekly newspapers in England and
Wales; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society which represents the interests
of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper
Proprietors’ Association which represents the owners of weekly newspapers
in Scotland; the Belfast Newspaper Society whose members are the
proprietors of Northern Ireland’s daily newspapers; Associated Northern
Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly news¬
papers in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Proprietors Association,
whose membership embraces the independent publishers of trade and
technical publications and general magazines. On the employees side there
are the Institute of Journalists (loj), founded in 1884 as the National Associa¬
tion of Journalists; and the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in
1907. The National Union of Journalists has a membership of over 17,500
(June 1963) working journalists and is the largest trade union confined to
journalists in the world; editors who have powers of dismissal are excluded
from full membership but may be associate members. The Institute of
Journalists, as it admits all qualified journalists on equal terms of membership,
may claim to be representative of the profession as a whole. Free-lance
journalists (who are not on the staff of any one paper or group of papers, but
492
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press
Council
The Press and
the Law
send contributions to any journal) may belong to the NUJ or loj. The aims
of these organisations are the improvement of the economic status of journal¬
ists, the promotion of their professional welfare, and the safeguarding of the
status of the press and its editorial staffs.
The main aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are to sustain
the dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of
editors, to protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the
education and training of journalists: the guild has about 320 members. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong.
The Printing and Kindred Trades Federation is made up of trade unions
concerned with printing and publishing. The principal craft unions are
the National Graphical Association and the Scottish Typographical Associa¬
tion, which organise such workers as compositors and machine minders.
The National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA)
has a varied membership (850 categories), which includes machine room
assistants, clerical and administrative staff, and general assistants in printing
works.
Following the recommendations of the 1947-49 Royal Commission on the
Press, a Press Council representative of the press organisations was set up in
1953 and in 1963 (after the further recommendations of the second Royal
Commission) was reconstituted, with a 20 per cent lay membership (to
represent the general public) and a lay chairman, with additional funds, and
an enlarged scope of endeavour. Its aims are: to preserve the established
freedom of the British press; to maintain the character of the British press in
accordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; to keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct of
the press or the conduct of persons and organisations towards the press; to
report on developments in the British press which may tend towards greater
concentration or monopoly; to make representation on appropriate occasions
to the Government, to organs of the United Nations and to press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodical reports recording its work
and to review from time to time developments in the British press and the
factors affecting them. Reports are published annually.
The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say
what it likes provided it does not transgress the law and, in general, is at
liberty to comment on matters of public interest. Apart from enactments
relating directly to such matters as the registration of newspapers, there are
no laws applying to the press in particular and not to the general public;
but requirements which affect journalists and the press occur in a variety
of Acts of Parliament. For example, the Public Bodies (Admissions to Meet¬
ings) Act, i960, and other Local Government Acts govern the admission of
the press (and the public) to meetings of local councils; and restrictions on
the reporting of domestic proceedings and proceedings concerning juveniles
are imposed by legislation governing procedure in the law courts. The press
must comply with the copyright laws and with the laws against the publication
of matters covered by the Official Secrets Acts, with the laws of seditious
libel, blasphemous and obscene libel, and defamation, with the laws for the
protection of children from publications which might do them moral harm, and
with the laws against fraudulent advertising, against breach of parliamentary
THE PRESS
493
privilege, and against ‘contempt of court’—for example, the publication of
anything affecting a case before the courts which might tend to influence the
result of the trial, or of comment on court proceedings which might tend to
prejudice their reputation for fairness.
Legal proceedings against the press are comparatively infrequent; the
majority of actions that do take place are libel actions brought by private
individuals seeking to protect their own interests. In such cases, the editor,
proprietor, publisher, printer and distributor of the newspaper, as well as
the author of the article, may all be held responsible.
494
19
SPORT
Central and
Local
Government
Participation
In Britain, the word ‘sport’ is used generally to describe such activities as
organised outdoor games, athletics, field or country sports, indoor games,
aquatic sports, and such popular pursuits as horse-racing, dog-racing, show
jumping, riding, boxing, rock climbing, motor racing, cycling and rifle
shooting as well as those (for instance, archery, fencing, gliding and ice-skating)
which, although less popular judged by the number of participants and
spectators, all have their own devotees. Those who engage in sport may be
professionals (i.e. paid players) or amateurs.1 Professionals keep up the technical
standards of the sports in which they take part and spectators make a vital
contribution by their enthusiasm and their financial support; but the sporting
life of Britain derives its character principally from the amateur element—
people who devote time and energy to organising sport and to teaching and
training, as well as the many thousands of all ages who engage in sport for
pleasure alone.
The Government is not directly concerned with the organisation or promotion
of sport in Britain but the Lord President of the Council and Secretary of
State for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for Scotland and the
Minister of Education for Northern Ireland have power to pay grants to
voluntary bodies towards approved expenditure on the provision of playing
fields, swimming baths and other facilities for physical recreation, and (in
Great Britain) to national voluntary organisations for headquarters adminis¬
tration, including the cost of coaching schemes. In England and Wales, the
Minister of Housing and Local Government, and in Scotland, the Secretary
of State, control local authority borrowing to finance facilities for sport and
are concerned also with the use of land. The Lord President ensures that
there is co-ordination between the various ministers concerned with sport in
Great Britain and between the ministers and local authorities.
An advisory committee, consisting of the principal adviser on sport to the
Lord President, the general secretaries of the British Olympic Association
and the Central Council of Physical Recreation, and representatives of the
Department of Education and Science and the Scottish Education Department,
makes recommendations for giving financial support to British amateur
teams taking part in international sporting events abroad.
In Great Britain public expenditure on facilities exclusively for sport,
outside educational establishments, amounted to about £12 million in
1963-64, including annual grants to voluntary bodies, which amounted
to about .£400,000. By 1965-66 work worth an extra j£i million is to be
authorised for the construction of sports facilities by voluntary bodies,
bringing the total value of work authorised for this purpose to ^1-5 million.
Grant aid to voluntary bodies can be up to 50 per cent of the cost of an
approved scheme; the maximum grant is normally £10,000. Grants to national
voluntary organisations for administration and coaching purposes are to be
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby Union football, hockey and rowing, are
entirely amateur, but in other sports the distinction between professional and amateur
status is becoming less strictly defined.
SPORT
495
increased to £625,000 in 1965-66. In Northern Ireland in 1963-64 over
£150,000 in grants was given to public authorities and voluntary organisations
for sports facilities and coaching schemes.
Facilities for The Secretary of State for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for
Sport Scotland and the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland require that
all publicly maintained schools shall provide for the physical education
(gymnastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of their pupils. Schools
in the national systems (excepting those solely for infants) must have their
own playing field, or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a
gymnasium. Facilities for, and instruction in, many kinds of sport are also
provided at the independent preparatory and public schools and at the
universities (some of which have departments of physical education). Local
authorities are empowered under the Public Health Acts and the Physical
Training and Recreation Acts to provide playing fields. They also provide
gymnasia, tennis courts, golf courses and swimming baths, on a varying
scale. Increasing provision of sports facilities for employees is being made
by industry and commerce.
Composite
National Bodies
The Central Council
of Physical
Recreation
The national organisations most closely concerned with the general development
of sport are the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the Scottish Council
of Physical Recreation, and the National Playing Fields Association. The British
Olympic Association, whose main functions are connected with the participa¬
tion of British teams and competitors in the Olympic Games, is also interested
in all matters likely to benefit sport or physical recreation in Britain as a whole.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation (CCPR) is a voluntary association
of all national bodies in England, Wales and Northern Ireland concerned
with the development of post-school physical recreation. Its funds are partly
raised by voluntary contributions but it receives a grant from the Department
of Education and Science, with which it is closely associated in much of its work.
The CCPR is composed of representatives of the British Olympic Associa¬
tion, the National Playing Fields Association, the governing bodies of 41
sports, 16 national outdoor activity associations, 16 bodies concerned with
dancing and rhythmic movement, and 34 voluntary youth organisations, in
addition to representatives of community centres, educational, physical
education and health education organisations, local authorities and the
Services’ sports branches. Its headquarters are in London and it has nine
regional offices in other parts of England. Its activities in Wales are controlled
by a representative Welsh committee, and in Northern Ireland by a separate
section with its own executive committee.
Broadly, the function of the CCPR is to promote all forms of physical
recreation. Its activities include the organisation of some 2,400 courses for
coaches and instructors, courses in personal performance, lectures, displays
and other publicity events which are attended, on average, by about 52,000
young men and women each year. Its staff give advisory, technical and
administrative help wherever required, but particularly to the headquarters,
regional, county and local branches of the constituent organisations and to
local education authorities and industrial concerns.
The Scottish The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation (SCPR) is the counterpart in
Council of Physical Scotland of the CCPR, and has 128 affiliated organisations, including the
Recreation governing bodies of all the Scottish sports; it receives a grant-in-aid from
the Scottish Education Department.
496
The National
Playing Fields
Association
National
Recreation
Centres
Outdoor Games
and Sports
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The main aim of the National Playing Fields Association (NPFA) is to
stimulate the provision of playing fields and playgrounds, especially for
children, by publicity and financial assistance. Since its inception in 1925
it has distributed over £1-5 million in the form of grants for playing field
and playground schemes and about £107,000 in the form of loans. It assists
more than 400 schemes a year.
The NPFA council is composed of representatives of the governing bodies
of various sports organisations, of the British Olympic Association and the
CCPR, and of a number of educational bodies, voluntary youth organisations,
physical education associations and local authorities. The national headquarters
in London employs a small full-time staff, including a technical and research
department which gives advice on all aspects of recreational planning,
including the provision and layout of indoor and outdoor sports facilities.
It also advises on matters relating to children’s playgrounds, play leadership
schemes, and the play and recreational needs of children from their earliest years.
The NPFA works in close co-operation with the Department of Education
and Science, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and local
authorities, one of its important functions being to persuade central and local
government of the importance of providing adequate playing space in all
areas of new development or redevelopment, and of preserving existing
playing space in areas threatened by such development. The Association
derives its funds mainly from voluntary contributions but has recently been
in receipt of a small contribution towards administrative costs from the
Department of Education and Science and the Ministry of Education for
Northern Ireland.
The NPFA has branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland; there are also
branches in nearly every English and Welsh county; administration is
carried out, in the main, on a voluntary basis, in many cases in association
with a county Rural Community Council.
There are five National Recreation Centres in Britain, outside London—two
in England, one in Wales and two in Scotland—administered by the CCPR
and the SCPR. The purpose of the centres, all but one of which were estab¬
lished by voluntary funds, is to provide residential facilities for leadership and
personal performance training in a wide range of games, sports and outdoor
activities. It is hoped that a sailing centre at Cowes, also administered by
the CCPR, will be ready in 1968.
The Crystal Palace National Recreation Centre in London, designed
and built by the London County Council at a cost of nearly £3 million,
is the first national headquarters for sport in Britain. Covering 36 acres, the
centre has a main stadium with seating for 12,000 spectators; a sports hall
in which there is a large arena divisible into three, with seating for 2,000
spectators; a swimming hall with racing and diving pools of Olympic
dimensions, a teaching pool and a gallery for 2,000 spectators; an indoor
cricket school and practice rooms suitable for all indoor activities; a lecture
theatre, two first-aid rooms and six changing rooms; a hostel for 140 residents;
and staff housing. The centre is managed by the CCPR. It is designed for
international competitions as well as to provide training facilities for leaders,
coaches and athletes.
Outdoor games played in Britain include team games such as football,
cricket, and hockey, and games such as lawn tennis and golf, in which
individuals or couples match their skill. Judged by the number of participants
sport 497
and spectators, the most popular of the team games are football and cricket,
and the most popular of the individual games is lawn tennis.
Although football of a kind was played in the Middle Ages or even earlier,
as an organised game it dates from just over a century ago. One type of
football, in which only the feet are used, was adopted at Cambridge in 1855;
the other type, in which the ball is handled as well as kicked, was first played
at Rugby School, whence it derives its name, and was adopted by the Black-
heath football club in 1859*
In England the controlling body of the non-handling game, Association
Football (colloquially known as ‘soccer’), is the Football Association (FA)
formed in 1863. Its chief function is to promote the interests of the game and
to prevent infringement of the agreed rules; it also arranges tor the instruction
of promising young players (some 10,000 is spent annually on coaching),
organises various matches and competitions, including the international
matches played by England, the Amateur Cup competition, two national
youth competitions, and the competition for its own leading trophy, the
Football Association Challenge Cup; and chooses and manages English
international teams. Over 350 clubs are registered with the FA, more than
200 as full members and between 130 and 140 as associate members. There
are also some 25,000 clubs affiliated to county (i.e. district or regional)
associations. The FA derives its main income from subscriptions and ad¬
mission charges to international and cup matches, and ploughs back a large
portion of the money into the game. Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales
have their own controlling bodies: the Scottish Football Association, the
Irish Football Association and the Football Association of Wales.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played once or
twice weekly) are controlled by the Football League, which comprises over
90 professional clubs in these countries. The funds of the League are derived
largely from contributions paid by member clubs in the form of a levy of
4 per cent of the net gate receipts from league matches, after allowable
expenses have been deducted, and from annual payments from tne leading
football pools promoters for the use of league fixture lists.
In Scotland the Scottish Football League comprises 37 clubs; Northern
Ireland has its own league. Clubs belonging to the English and Scottish
Leagues are organised in divisions, the members of which compete against
one another for the respective league championships. Their positions in
the divisional tables are decided at the end of the season by the number of
points gained for wins or draws. During the season about 30 million people
watch league football matches and gate receipts usually amount to between
£5 and £6 million.
Several million people stake small weekly sums on the results of the league
matches by filling in what are known as ‘pools’ coupons. The odds against
winning anything in the pools are very great, but the prizes are high and
individual payments of ^300,000 may occasionally be made. The promoters
of the pools deduct varying amounts from the stakes for commission and
expenses.
The annual competition for the FA Cup is organised on a knock-out basis
and the Cup Final is one of the most important football matches of the year
in England; it is always played at Wembley Stadium, near London, which
can accommodate some 100,000 spectators. The Scottish Cup Final is played at
Hampden Park, Glasgow. The international matches between England, Scot¬
land, Wales and Ireland also excite great interest, as do the matches between
British teams and teams from European and South American countries.
498
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cricket
There are many more amateur association football players than there are
professionals (the comparative figures are about 650,000 amateurs, including
schoolboys and members of the armed forces, to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals),
but with one or two notable exceptions their teams cannot compete on equal
terms, since professional teams are more systematically and intensively
trained. Amateur teams compete against each other for the Football Associa¬
tion Amateur Challenge Cup.
Rugby Football, or ‘rugger’, is played under the auspices of the Rugby
Football Union, established in 1871. The rules of the game are completely
different from those that govern soccer, and there are 15 players, instead of 11,
in a side. International matches between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
and France are played regularly at the leading rugby football grounds of each
country, including Twickenham, London—the headquarters of the Rugby
Football Union—and there are tours by international teams to and from
New Zealand, Australia and South Africa. Other important rugger matches
are the county championship competitions, the annual match between the
universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the Hospitals’ Cup final, and the
Inter-Services tournament.
Seven-a-side football (a variant of Rugby football) is also played by clubs
and schools to a limited extent. Membership of the Rugby Union is strictly
confined to amateur clubs. In the north of England Rugby League Football
is played. This is a thirteen-a-side game played by professionals as well as
amateurs. The Rugby Football League (instituted in 1895) regularly sends
touring teams to Australia and New Zealand and has annual international
games, professional and amateur, against France. The major match of the
season—the Rugby League Challenge Cup Final—has attracted crowds of
95,000 at Wembley Stadium in recent years.
Cricket is often called the English national game. The exact date of its origin
is not recorded, but it is known that the game was played at Guildford Grammar
School during the sixteenth century, and by the beginning of the eighteenth
century it was popular both in the villages of England and on the larger country
estates. The game has been played more or less as it is played today since the
adoption of a generally accepted set of laws in 1744. About 1750 a cricket
club was formed in the Hampshire village of Hambledon; within 20 years
it had made an outstanding name for itself and acquired a membership
representative of patrons of cricket from all over England. In 1787 the
Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), now the governing body of cricket, was
founded, with its headquarters in London on a site rented by a Yorkshireman
called Thomas Lord. In the year 1810-11 the MCC moved its headquarters to
a ground near Regent’s Park, keeping the name Lord's’, four years later Lord's
transferred to another ground, at St. John’s Wood, in the same neighbourhood,
where it has remained ever since. Other clubs that sprang up all over England
during the nineteenth century recognised the MCC’s authority, and nowadays
all cricket is played according to the ‘laws of cricket’ as laid down by the
MCC in consultation with cricketing organisations in Britain and the overseas
Commonwealth.
In England cricket is played in schools and universities, and almost all
towns and villages have their cricket teams which play at least one match a
week from May to September; in the London area nearly 400 pitches are
provided by the county council, besides many leased or owned by clubs.
Apart from the university match between Oxford and Cambridge and
certain representative games, the greater part of first-class cricket is played
in a county championship between seventeen ‘first-class counties’. (The
SPORT
499
other counties have a ‘minor counties championship’ of their own.) Famous
grounds besides Lord's are the Oval, Kennington, London, headquarters of
the Surrey Cricket Club5 Old Trafford, Manchester; IIeadinglsy, Leeds, and
Trent Bridge, Nottingham.
In the late nineteenth century more amateurs played cricket than economic
conditions in the twentieth century allow: with first-class matches lasting
three days and each county playing up to thirty matches in a season, the
number of cricketers who can afford to play as true amateurs declined and
the distinction between amateur and professional in the first-class game has
now been abolished. League cricket, which is a feature of the game in the
north of England, is played by teams mainly consisting of amateur Saturday
afternoon players with one or more professionals, many of whom are
distinguished players from other Commonwealth countries. The MCC is
an entirely amateur body, although retired professional cricketers of the
highest merit’ are elected to honorary membership.
In addition to county championships, matches known as ‘test matches
played regularly between a number of Commonwealth countries. The first
of these matches was played at Melbourne, Australia, in 1877, between
England and Australia. Present-day test matches last 30 hours (spread over
five or six days); they arouse great popular interest and are widely reported
in the press and on radio and television.
A form of tennis has been played out of doors from the earliest times, but
modern lawn tennis dates from about 1873, when it began to take its place
as one of the British national summer games. In 1877 the words ‘and lawn
tennis’ were added to the title of the All England Croquet Club at Wimbledon,
near London, and in the same year the first championships were played;
the Lawn Tennis Association, the controlling body of the game in Britain,
was founded in 1888. The governing body of the game in the world is the
International Lawn Tennis Federation (founded in 1913), with headquarters
in London and Paris.
The number of people who play lawn tennis has greatly increased during
the present century, particularly since the game has spread to practically
every country in the world. In Britain the game is played in almost all girls
schools and in very many boys’ schools where the pupils are of secondary
school age. It is also played on private courts, in parks and recreation grounds
and at several thousand tennis clubs.
The annual championships held at Wimbledon for two weeks at the end
of June and beginning of July are the main event of the lawn tennis season
jfi Britain and, in fact, in the world. These championships, in which men and
women of many nationalities compete, draw large crowds; there is accom¬
modation for over 30,000 spectators in the grounds of the All England Club
 14,000 can be accommodated round the centre court where the finals are
played. Other tournaments which attract a good deal of attention are: the
British Hardcourt Championships, the British Junior Championships, and
the County Championships. There are also competitions for boys’ and girls’
schools on a national basis, and the Foundation Cup (for women). The most
important international event is the Davis Cup (for men). Women players
from Britain and the United States of America also compete annually for the
Wightman Cup.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in the other
countries of the United Kingdom until towards the end of the nineteenth
5°°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hockey
Lacrosse
Netball
Polo
century. Since then, however, it has gained steadily in popularity and
nowadays there are golf courses in the vicinity of many towns and villages—
some owned by local authorities, but the majority owned by golf clubs. The
headquarters of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club is St. Andrews, Scotland.
The main event of the golfing year is the British Open Golf Championship,
which was first played in i860; other important matches include the Walker
Cup (for amateurs) and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played
between Britain and America; the Amateur Championship; and the Ladies
Championship.
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain
for at least five centuries. Modern hockey, however, dates from the formation
(in 1886) of the Hockey Association, which standardised the rules relating
to men’s hockey. Nowadays there are some 1,100 hockey clubs affiliated to
the Hockey Association. Although there are no professional county teams and
no cup ties, a county championship was instituted in 1957. In addition,
regular amateur international matches (inaugurated in 1894) are played.
There are over 35,000 adult and some 50,000 schoolboy hockey players
in Britain.
In Britain hockey is more commonly played by women than by men. The
controlling bodies are: the All England Women’s Hockey Association
(founded 1895) to which are affiliated the Irish Ladies Hockey Union, the
Scottish Women’s Hockey Association, the Welsh Women’s Hockey Associa¬
tion, some 1,900 girls’ schools and about 900 clubs. The first international
women’s hockey match took place in 1896. Nowadays such a match is played
annually at Wembley Stadium and attracts some 56,000 spectators.
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North
America, is played mainly by women—in girls’ schools, at lacrosse clubs, and
at universities. International matches are played, as well as regional matches,
by women’s teams representing the East, West, South, North and Midlands
of England, under the auspices of the All England Ladies Lacrosse Association.
The men’s game, of which the controlling body is the English Lacrosse
Union, is played in seven universities, and by clubs and schools, mainly in
and around London and Manchester. County matches are played and there
is an annual fixture between the North of England and the South.
Netball is a popular game for girls and women. The controlling body is the
All England Netball Association to which are affiliated the English county
associations, the netball clubs of the three Women’s Services and sections of
the national youth organisations for girls and women. Inter-county and home
international matches are played regularly and inter-Commonwealth tours
are arranged.
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British
in India, and brought to England in 1869. The governing body of British
polo is the Hurlingham Polo Association to which all the Commonwealth
polo associations and that of South Africa are affiliated. Polo players are a
very small section of the community, for the cost of keeping polo ponies is
high. However, many of the clubs now own trained ponies which are hired
out to members at moderate cost. There are about 300 players handicapped
by the Hurlingham Polo Association, but many less expert players take part
in club games for which they may be locally handicapped.
Public interest in polo has increased in recent years and large numbers of
spectators attend inter-club tournaments and matches between high-handicap
teams composed of players from several countries.
SPORT
Bowls
Mountaineering
Ski-ing
Athletics
501
The game of bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century.
Nowadays the flat green game is regulated, as far as the English Bowling
Association is concerned, by the International Bowling Board (IBB), founded
in 1905. The Bowling Associations of Ireland, Scotland and Wales also come
under and play to the laws laid down by the IBB, but there are other bowling
associations in England—the English Bowling Federation, the Crown Green
Association and the English Women’s Bowling Association—which are not
under the IBB’s control.
During the summer bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in
winter it is played on indoor greens, which are increasing in number. At one
time regarded as a pastime for the elderly, the game is now played by people
of all ages. Over 2,550 bowling clubs in England are affiliated to the English
Bowling Association alone, and international and inter-county matches are
played.
The popularity of mountaineering has greatly increased in recent years. The
number of clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Association
of Scottish Climbing Clubs, the representative bodies of the sport, has
doubled to over 140 in the last six years, mainly by the addition of smaller
town and district clubs to the older larger clubs such as the Alpine Club
(founded in 1857, the oldest mountaineering club in the world), the Climbers’
Club, the Scottish Mountaineering Club and the Fell and Rock Climbing
Club. A number of local education authorities, as well as national bodies
such as the YMCA, the Scouts and the Central Council of Physical Recreation,
have established mountaineering training centres in the hills. Training courses
are also run by the Mountaineering Association, the Youth Hostels Associa¬
tion and other bodies, while many schools now have mountaineering sections.
Membership of the known clubs is about 15,000, but several times this
number take part in climbing and mountaineering.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring most of the
great ranges of the world and in climbing their peaks; for example, the first
ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, and of Kangchenjunga
in 1955. In recent years frequent expeditions have gone to far off mountains,
to Greenland, Alaska, the Andes, Patagonia, the Caucasus and the Pamirs,
as well as the Himalayas.
Ski-ing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the winter sports
centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and Glenshee,
where ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction are now available.
Amateur athletics, which include running (track, road and cross-country),
relay racing, jumping, hurdling, throwing and race-walking, are governed by
the Amateur Athletic Association (AAA), which was founded in 1880 to
encourage amateur athletics, to improve the management of amateur athletic
meetings by the establishment of uniform regulations, and to promote annual
championship meetings. The association, whose membership increased
rapidly, is now organised from club to national level by honorary officers
and managed by representative members appointed by the Northern, Midland,
Southern and Welsh areas and by affiliated clubs and associations (amateur
athletic clubs, schools and youth organisations), of which there are hundreds
throughout England and Wales. The AAA administers a coaching scheme,
with a constant expenditure of nearly £20,000 a year, under which seven
full-time national coaches, working mainly in separate regions, lecture,
502
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Highland Games
Country Sports
Hunting
demonstrate and coach in schools, youth clubs, evening institutes, training
colleges and universities and at special courses organised by the national
associations, by regional associations or by the Central Council of Physical
Recreation. The Crystal Palace National Recreation Centre is being used as
a training centre and for athletics matches. Some of the work of the national
coaches is directly concerned with coaching young athletes but their main
duties are to instruct men who wish to qualify as honorary coaches, over
2,000 of whom give voluntary services in the counties and districts of England
and Wales. Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own amateur athletic
associations, with similar functions; there are also separate Women’s AAAs
for each country.
International athletics and the selection of teams representing the United
Kingdom are dealt with by the British Amateur Athletic Board, which is
composed of representatives of the three national associations for men and
of the Women’s Council, and is affiliated to the International Amateur
Athletic Federation.
Track meetings are held throughout Britain from April to October. The
main events in England and Wales are: the AAA championships for men
and international matches held at Crystal Palace, London; area and county
championships; and the universities, Services, business houses and schools
championship meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country running
from October to March, and international, county and area cross-country
championships are held.
Teams representing Britain compete in the Olympic Games (held every
four years), and separate teams representing England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, held at four-yearly
intervals between the Olympic Games.
The Highland games are traditional gatherings of local people in the High¬
lands of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting the
weight, and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping competitions
take place. Among the better known Highland games are the Northern
Meeting at Inverness, the Braemar Gathering on Deeside (traditionally
attended by the royal family), the Argyllshire Gathering at Oban, and the
meeting at Aboyne. The Highland games attract large numbers of spectators
from all over the world.
The most popular country sports are hunting, shooting and fishing; these are
old-established sports with a long history, and they still play a considerable
part in the life of the countryside. The organisation which looks after their
interests is the British Field Sports Society.
In Britain hunting means primarily fox hunting on horseback with a pack of
hounds; but it also includes stag hunting, which preceded fox hunting and
still goes on, mainly in Devon and Somerset; hunting the hare, either on foot
with beagles or with harriers when the followers are mounted; and otter
hunting along the banks of rivers. Hunting depends not on right but on
permit: most landowners and farmers allow followers of recognised hunts to
cross their property.
Fox hunting originated some 200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for
the landed gentry and local farmers, it has gradually widened its appeal, in
spite of the fact that it is an expensive pastime for those who ride to hounds.
The sport is not without its critics, but a large number of people, including
many townsmen, take a keen interest in it and follow the hunt in cars, on
SPORT
The start of the
1964 English
cross-country
championship at
Western Park,
Leicester.
Britain’s new
sports centre at
Crystal Palace,
London.
SPORT
503
Shooting
Fishing
bicycles or on foot. The fox hunting season proper starts in early November
and lasts until April; it is preceded by cub hunting, i.e. the hunting of young
foxes, when young hounds are trained. At the end of the season most hunts
organise steeplechases, known as point-to-points, which are patronised by
large crowds.
There are between 190 and 200 packs of hounds in England and Wales,
13 in Northern Ireland, and 10 in Scotland. The packs range in size from
the large establishments in the ‘shires’, i.e. the Midlands of England (for
instance, the Belvoir, the Cottesmore, the Quorn, and the Fernie) where
mounted followers may be two hundred or more, to small kennels in the
west and north, where hunting is sometimes on foot.
Hunts are financed mainly by the subscriptions of their members and with
the aid of the farmers, whose support enables fox hunting to continue to
flourish; sometimes however, the Master of Fox-hounds (MFH), who is in
charge of the hunt, must bear a proportion of the cost.
Game shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the
early part of the nineteenth century; nowadays, game consists mainly of
grouse, partridge, pheasant, snipe and woodcock.
There is virtually no free shooting in any part of the United Kingdom. In
the first place, a gun licence or a game licence must be applied for and pur¬
chased annually and secondly, nearly all game birds are to be found on
privately owned land, shot over either by the owner and his friends or by
syndicates which have leased the shooting. However, in some parts of the
more remote countryside, rough shooting may be enjoyed in a less formal
way. Much of the country’s wildfowling is controlled by the Wildfowling
Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, through its numerous clubs.
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other birds are ‘preserved’; that
is to say, there is a ‘close season’ during which they are protected by law and
allowed to breed in security, often under the care of privately employed
gamekeepers on numerous estates. The grouse, partridge and pheasant
seasons open on 12th August, 1st September and 1st October, severally, and
last for between four and five months. Grouse shooting takes place mostly
in Scotland, northern England and North Wales; partridge and pheasant
shooting in nearly every county in England, Wales and Scotland, the former
mainly over farm land, and the latter in or near woodland; and wildfowling on
the marshes and fenlands of the coastal areas.
The Game Research Association, formed by landowners, farmers and others
interested in game conservation and research, collects and collates information
on a national scale and makes a detailed study of factors controlling game
population, including diseases to which game birds are subject, game ecology
and density, survival rates and movements of game in changing environments.
Deer stalking, which derives its name from the fact that, in order to get
an effective shot, a very cautious approach is needed (since red deer have a
keen scent, are far-sighted, and take alarm at the slightest sound), is mainly
a sport of the Highlands of Scotland. The deer are preserved in privately
owned ‘deer forests’, ranging in size from 9,000 to over 30,000 acres. The
close seasons are October to June, inclusive, for stags and February to
October, inclusive, for hinds.
Fishing is the most popular of the country sports in that it is within the reach
of everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and
line to the experienced fly-fisherman), and that many more people fish in
their leisure hours than hunt or shoot.
R
5°4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aquatic Sports
Rowing
The outstanding forms of the sport in Britain are salmon and trout fishing.
Trout streams are to be found in most parts of the country, and in Scotland
there are also many hundreds of lochs which provide good sport. Salmon
fishing may be enjoyed on many rivers in England, North Wales and Northern
Ireland, but the best salmon rivers are to be found in Scotland. In England
and Wales the most widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such
as pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench, chub and bream, and the National
Federation of Anglers (NFA) has some 390,000 members. Match angling—
competitive fishing for coarse fish by weight—is a feature of the many angling
clubs affiliated to the NFA, particularly in the midlands and north of England;
a national angling championship, composed of no teams of 12 anglers, is
organised annually by the NFA; and the NFA enters a team in the Inter¬
national Angling Competition.
Fishing around the coasts is another popular pastime, while deep-sea
fishing for tuna and shark has gained many adherents during the past twenty
years.
Coastal and deep-sea fishing is free to all (except for salmon and sea trout
fishing in Scotland) but, as a rule, freshwater fishing has to be paid for and
local inquiries made about any permit or licence required. Most coarse
fishing is let to angling clubs; trout and salmon fishermen either rent a
stretch of river, join a club, stay at an hotel with its own fishing rights, or
pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. The cost of salmon
fishing is often high.
Aquatic sports include rowing, sailing, swimming, canoeing, punting and
water ski-ing. The first three are the most commonly practised in Britain
and are included in the Olympic events and the Commonwealth Games.
Rowing as a pastime is enjoyed by people from all sections of the community,
and as a sport it arouses considerable public interest. The two most popular
annual rowing events are the University Boat Race, which originated in 1820
and has been rowed annually on the Thames in the early spring since 1836;
and Henley Regatta, founded in 1839, which takes place each July at Henley-
on-Thames in Oxfordshire. The University Boat Race is between eight-oared
crews from Oxford and Cambridge over a course of some 4J miles between
Putney and Mortlake; it is watched by many thousands of rival supporters
gathered on both sides of the river. Considerable interest is also shown in
the Head of the River Race from Mortlake to Putney, in March, in which
between 200 and 300 eights row in procession—the largest assembly of
racing craft in the world.
Crews from all over the world compete at Henley Regatta, where various
kinds of races are rowed over a straight course of 1 mile 550 yards; for
instance, for the Grand Challenge Cup, open to eight-oared crews from any
nation, the Silver Goblets for pair oars, the Diamond Sculls for single
scullers, and the Ladies Challenge Plate open to crews from schools and
colleges in the United Kingdom. Many other riverside resorts arrange
regattas every summer.
The oldest annual event in the English racing calendar is Doggett’s Coat
and Badge, founded in 1716 and organised since by the Worshipful Company
of Fishmongers. Originally for professional watermen and limited to six
entrants, the race is now open to amateurs (who must, however, still be
apprentice watermen); if necessary, it may be rowed in heats. The course
is from London Bridge to Chelsea.
SPORT
505
Sailing
Swimming
Racing
Horse-racing
The art of oarsmanship is taught in many schools, universities and rowing
clubs, including women’s rowing clubs, throughout Britain; and women as
well as men compete in the European rowing championships. The Amateur
Rowing Association is the governing body of the sport.
Enthusiasts have always devoted much of their leisure to yachting on the
inland waters and round the coasts of Britain, but during the last fifteen years
the sport, and in particular small boat sailing, has greatly widened its appeal.
There are about 11,700 dinghies registered with the Royal Yachting Associa¬
tion, of which the most popular classes are the National Enterprise and
National Firefly; but as by no means all classes attain national status, there
are an even greater number of boats not included in this register.
Most British yacht racing is administered by the Royal Yachting Associa¬
tion, subject to the rules of the International Yacht Racing Union, founded
in 1907. The main event of the inshore yachting season is the annual regatta
at Cowes in the Isle of Wight, the headquarters of the Royal Yacht Squadron,
founded in 1812. Other events include the Round the Isle of Wight race and
the races arranged during the special yachting weeks (or fortnights) held at
such sailing centres as Poole in Dorset, Bembridge in the Isle of Wight,
Lowestoft in Suffolk, Harwich and Burnham-on-Crouch in Essex, Plymouth
in Devon, Falmouth in Cornwall, and on the Scottish river Clyde.
Off-shore, or ocean, racing is based on rating and measurement rules
drawn up by the Royal Ocean Racing Club, founded in 1925. Typical courses
are: Cowes to Jersey (Channel Islands), Plymouth to La Rochelle (Charente
Maritime, France) and Harwich to the Hook of Holland.
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the
seaside, and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people.
The existence of indoor swimming baths makes all-the-year swimming
possible, and instruction and coaching is provided in some places by qualified
teachers who hold certificates for elementary or advanced teaching and coach¬
ing awarded by the Amateur Swimming Association (ASA). (The Scottish
counterpart is the Scottish Amateur Swimming Association.) The objects of
the ASA are to promote the art of swimming and encourage its teaching to
schoolchildren; to stimulate public opinion in favour of providing proper
accommodation and facilities for learning to swim; to promote the game of
water polo and the art of diving; and to draw up, publish and enforce uniform
laws for the control and regulation of amateur swimming and water polo
championships and competitions.
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean first and foremost,
horse-racing. Other forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing,
pony-racing, trotting races, and pigeon flying.
The history of the English turf proper began with the formation of the
Jockey Club in 1750, although horse-racing was known in Tudor times and
even earlier. The Jockey Club and the National Hunt Committee (founded
in 1866) now exercise control over all horse-racing in England and indirectly
in many other countries, and their rules are the basis of universal turf
procedure.
There are two forms of racing: flat racing carried on from late March till
November under the authority of the Jockey Club; and steeple-chasing,
conducted under the rules of the National Hunt Committee.
The classic flat races are: the Two Thousand Guineas for colts and fillies,
run on the Newmarket course, owned by the Jockey Club; the One Thousand
5°6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Guineas for fillies only, also run at Newmarket; the Derby for colts and
fillies, run at Epsom; the Oaks for fillies only, also run at Epsom; and the
St. Leger for colts and fillies, run at Doncaster. The Derby is the outstanding
event in the racing calendar; it takes place annually in early June and
the scene on Epsom Downs on Derby Day is one of the most colourful
and exciting of the sporting year. The most fashionable race-meeting of
the flat racing season is held on the course at Ascot in Berkshire, in
mid-June and is known as ‘Royal Ascot’, being traditionally attended by the
Sovereign.
The best known steeple-chase is the Grand National, which has been
run annually since 1839 over the Aintree course near Liverpool. The race,
which draws immense crowds and arouses widespread interest (and some
criticism) tests the skill, stamina and courage of both horse and rider to the
utmost. Most steeple-chase meetings are held during the period September
to May, one of the most important being the National Hunt Festival Meeting
at Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, early in March.
In England and Wales there is racing on 61 racecourses (excluding
point-to-point courses), at which there are approximately 780 days’ racing
annually; Scotland has seven racecourses, where racing takes place on an
average of 50 days in the year. There are approximately 7,500 horses in
training in Great Britain, at an average cost of 10 to 11 guineas a week
each.
Horse racecourses must be licensed by the Jockey Club or the National
Hunt Committee. On-course facilities for both cash and credit betting are
provided by bookmakers who must have personal permits, and by totalisators
operated by the Horserace Totalisator Board, which is empowered to deduct
from money staked with the totalisator such percentage as it may determine.
The practice is to deduct 15 per cent from the losing stakes in the win, place
and forecast pools and 10 per cent of the double and treble pools; this
provides an average yield of approximately 11 per cent of the total annual
turnover. Facilities for off-the-course betting are provided in licensed betting
offices, of which there are some 14,400 throughout Great Britain. People
under 18 years old are forbidden by law to place bets.
A levy from both bookmakers and the Horserace Totalisator Board is
collected by the Horserace Betting Levy Board, which distributes the revenue
for purposes conducive to the improvement of horse breeding and racing,
for the advancement and encouragement of veterinary science and education,
and the welfare of those employed in racing.
Greyhound Racing The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926,
when the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester.
There are now some 140 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of which are
situated in or on the outskirts of large towns, and meetings are generally held
two or three times a week. The licensing authorities for greyhound racing
tracks are the county and county borough councils. Some fourteen million
people a year attend the tracks.
The main authority of the sport is the National Greyhound Racing Club,
founded in 1928; its functions include drawing up the rules of greyhound
racing and exercising strict discipline over all aspects of the sport. The
National Greyhound Racing Society—an association of 62 of the leading
tracks—accepts the rules of the National Greyhound Racing Club and
controls the general policies of greyhound racing. Most of the classic grey¬
hound races, including the Derby at the White City, the Laurels at Wimbledon,
the St. Leger at Wembley, and the Cesarewitch at West Ham, take place
SPORT
Riding
Show Jumping
Boxing
507
in the London area, although many other large centres have their ‘big’
nights.
There is a considerable volume of betting at greyhound race-meetings,
both with bookmakers and on the totalisator which may be operated by the
occupier of any licensed greyhound track on the 104 ‘betting days’. Ten per
cent of the money staked on the totalisators must be paid to the Government;
up to 6 per cent may be deducted for operational expenses before successful
backers are paid. The ‘copyright’ in tote odds granted to the Horserace
Totalisator Board in respect of horse-racing also applies to the occupiers of
licensed greyhound tracks on which totalisators are operated.
Interest in the art of horsemanship continues to increase rapidly, and many
more people have learned to enjoy riding as a pastime since the end of the
second world war than at any time since the advent of the motor car. There
are some 1,200 riding schools in Britain, many of a high standard, and about
50 new schools are opened each year; membership of the British Horse
Society has risen to about 12,000; there are some 180 riding clubs with
varied membership; and the Pony Club (open to young people up to the
age of seventeen years) now has an overall membership of about 77,000
members. There are over 900 branches of the Pony Club throughout the world,
of which 250 are attached to hunts in Britain, and the remainder are overseas.
The British Horse Society, as the national equestrian federation of Great
Britain, is the authority on all matters relating to horses and ponies, including
breeding, training, riding, show jumping and dressage, and is responsible for
preparing equestrian teams for the Olympic Games and all international events.
The Society is also the parent body of the Pony Club and the riding clubs,
and organises and provides tests, lectures, demonstrations, courses and
examinations to promote horsemanship and horsemastership.
Horse trials of all kinds are held throughout Britain during the spring and
summer. The three-day trials held each year—in April at Badminton Park,
Gloucestershire, and in September at Burghley House, Lincolnshire—are
among the outstanding equestrian events of the year. These trials include
dressage, cross-country riding, and show jumping; some 25 one-day trials
on similar lines are held annually.
Show jumping competitions are held each year at over 1,000 shows. The
main events take place during the Royal International Horse Show (held at
the White City, London, under the auspices of the British Horse Society
towards the end of July)—the outstanding contest being the individual
jumping championship for the King George V Gold Cup. Jumping competi¬
tions are also a feature of the Horse of the Year Show, which takes place in
October at Wembley and is acknowledged to be one of the finest indoor
horse shows in the world. The total membership of the British Show Jumping
Association has risen to over 6,000. The number of horses and ponies registered
is approximately 4,500 and over 3^i40>ooo is distributed annually in prize
money.
The selection of British riders and horses taking part in international
competitions (whose successes have materially contributed to the increased
popularity of show jumping) is the responsibility of the executive committee
of the Association.
Boxing as an English sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modern
form, and the one that has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates
from 1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules which
5°8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fencing
Wrestling
and Judo
Motor Racing
eliminated much of the brutality that had hitherto characterised prize fighting,
and made the basis of the sport a trial of strength and skill.
Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs, and there
are various amateur boxing competitions carried out according to the rules
of the Amateur Boxing Association (ABA), which controls all amateur
boxing, including schoolboy boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing
in the three Services.
Professional boxing is covered by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The board has strict medical regulations which provide
for the examination of boxers before each contest, and the appointment of
inspectors to ensure that the regulations are observed and that all contests
are ‘vetted’ to safeguard against over-matching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests
since the presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late
Lord Lonsdale in 1909. Competitions organised by the ABA are decided at
ten weights: flyweight, bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight, light welter¬
weight, welterweight, light middleweight, middleweight, light heavyweight
and heavyweight. In professional boxing there are no light welterweight
or light middleweight classes.
Fencing, as a sport, has made considerable progress throughout Britain during
the past 20 years. The Amateur Fencing Association (founded 1902) has some
450 clubs, and many classes are organised and financed by local authorities.
Fencing is now practised in many schools and among the annual championships
held under the auspices of the Association are the National Schoolboys’
Championships, organised on a regional basis and attracting a large number
of entrants.
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world. The style most commonly
used in Britain is the ‘free’ style, which evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can
or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling is still
practised in the north of England and in Scotland, and Cornish style wrestling
(in which the contestants wear rough canvas jackets by which all the holds
must be taken) takes place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the free and Graeco-
Roman styles are used at the Olympic Games; in the Commonwealth Games
only free style is wrestled.
Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British Amateur Wrestling
Association, which is affiliated to the International Amateur Wrestling
Federation, under the rules of which all wrestling is conducted. Professional
wrestling is usually in the ‘all-in’ or ‘free’ style, which is not the same as the
free style used in amateur wrestling. Judo, a Japanese form of wrestling, has
a large following, and is governed by the British Judo Association which has
coaching schemes assisted by the Department of Education and Science.
Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain; more
racing and sports cars have been built in Britain than in any other country;
and British drivers (including women drivers) have an international reputation
second to none.
British cars and British drivers take part in the international rallies and
world classic races which are the main features of the sport. They include the
British classic races—the British Grand Prix (held at Brands Hatch in 1964),
and the Tourist Trophy for sports cars (now held at Goodwood). There are
also British national race meetings and British national rallies, as well as
Cycling
Rifle Shooting
SPORT 5°9
several thousand day and night rallies and trials, endurance tests, hill climbs
and other events, arranged by various driving clubs, of which there are over
500 in Great Britain.
The best-known motor racing circuits are those at Goodwood, Sussex;
Silverstone, Northamptonshire; Crystal Palace, London, Brands Hatch,
Kent; Snetterton, Norfolk; Mallory Park, Leicestershire; Oulton Park,
Cheshire; Aintree, near Liverpool; and Charterhall, Berwickshire, in
Scotland. The controlling body of motor racing in Britain is the Royal
Automobile Club (RAC), founded in 1897; the RAC is represented on the
Federation Internationale de I’Automobile, which draws up the regulations
for international motor racing.
In addition to motor car racing, there are motor cycle races—the most
important contest of the year is for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy and
motor cycle speedway racing, introduced into Britain in 1928, and governed
by the Speedway Control Board. There is also go-kart racing.
The internationally recognised body for cycle racing in the United Kingdom
is the British Cycling Federation. It controls track and massed start road
racing in Britain, and is concerned with the cycling events in the Olympic
and Commonwealth Games and the annual world championship. Time trials
are organised by the Road Time Trials Council.
Touring by bicycle is also a popular pastime, and both the British Cycling
Federation and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (CTC) cater for this. The CTC
is the oldest touring club in the world and has a membership of some 25,000.
Its representatives in all parts of the United Kingdom give advice and practical
help to touring cyclists; its fifty district associations arrange holiday and week¬
end tours and competitions, rallies and rides of all kinds; and its travel
department gives CTC members every facility, both at home and abroad,
from the provision of itineraries to the supplying of tickets, maps and other
essential requirements.
Full-bore (-303) rifle shooting is organised by the National Rifle Association
(NRA), founded in i860. The Imperial Meeting held annually at Bisley Camp,
Surrey, is open to subjects of the Queen, and, for certain competitions, to
all-comers. The meeting, which is attended by some 2,500 competitors from
Britain and other Commonwealth countries, including cadets from schools,
lasts for just over a fortnight: the first week consists of team and individual
competitions for members of the armed forces, and there are three days for
schools only. The premier award of the meeting is the Queen’s Prize, which
attracts about 1,250 entries. The NRA also organises postal matches for
British and overseas teams, and periodically sends rifle teams to shoot in
overseas countries of the Commonwealth.
Small-bore (-22) rifle shooting—carried out either on indoor ranges of
15 to 25 yards in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards—is also widely
practised in Britain. Some 4,000 clubs throughout the country are affiliated to
county rifle associations and the National Small-Bore Rifle Association
(NSRA), which arranges inter-club and inter-county competitions of various
kinds for teams and individuals. The NSRA also organises a National Bisley
Meeting (usually attended by about 1,500 competitors), a Scottish meeting
(some 600 competitors), and a pistol shooting competition (some 400 competi¬
tors) at Bisley. International small-bore rifle matches are fired against teams
from overseas countries, and British teams are entered for the world champion¬
ships and the competitions in the Olympic Games.
510
Indoor Games
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Indoor games played in Britain include billiards, table tennis, and badminton,
which are enjoyed by large numbers of people, and for which facilities are
provided in social clubs of every kind, including youth clubs; and games
such as real tennis (a game which originated in thirteenth-century France),
squash rackets, rackets and fives, which are less national games than games of
the schools, universities and specialised clubs. Annual championships are
held in all these games the controlling bodies of which are: the Billiards
Association and Control Council; the Badminton Association of England and
the Scottish Badminton Union; the Tennis, Rackets and Fives Association
and the Squash Rackets Association. Basket-ball, an indoor variant of
netball which originated in the United States of America, is also played in
Britain, primarily by men. Matches in the game are included among the
Olympic events. The controlling body in Britain is the Amateur Basket Ball
Association.
APPENDIX
5ii
Currency
Postage
Exchange
Facilities and
Control
Income Tax
NOTES FOR VISITORS TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
The unit of currency is the pound sterling (£), which is divided into 20 shillings
(s.). The shilling is divided into 12 pennies or pence (d.). Prices are sometimes
quoted in guineas, the guinea (an old coin no longer in circulation) being £1 Is.
Coins in common use are: halfpenny, penny, threepenny piece, sixpence,
shilling, two shilling piece (florin) and half-crown (2s. 6d.). Silver and cupro¬
nickel coins (3d., 6d., Is., 2s., 2s. 6d., 5s.) are legal tender for payments up to
£2; nickel-brass threepenny pieces up to 2s.; and bronze (Jd. and Id.) up to 12d.
Bank of England notes are issued in denominations of 10s., £1, £,5 and £10.
Scottish banks issue £1, £5, £10, £20, £50 and £100 notes which are generally
accepted in Scotland and in some other parts of the United Kingdom. Northern
Ireland banks issue £1, £5, £10, £50 and £100 notes.
In 1963 the Halsbury Committee was asked to advise on the most convenient
form which a decimal currency might take; it recommended that the present £
should stay as the main currency unit and should be divided into 100 minor
units each worth 2-4d. called ‘cents’ or ‘decimal pennies’. Other new coins
would be worth l-2d. (4 cent), 4-8d. (2 cents) and 4s. (20 cents). The present
shilling and florin would stay as 5 and 10 cent pieces before being gradually
replaced by coins closely resembling them. No decision has yet been taken by
the Government.
Minimum postage rates for letters are: 3d. (inland) and 6d. (overseas). Details
of all postal rates are given in leaflets obtainable at any post office and are
summarised in the books of stamps sold there.
Persons coming to the United Kingdom may bring in notes in any currency,
travellers’ cheques, letters of credit, etc., without limit; and although visitors
leaving the United Kingdom may normally only take with them sterling notes
to the value of £50, they can make arrangements for up to £100 to be changed
into travellers’ cheques available in their own country. Currency can be ex¬
changed at banks and there are bureaux de change at all the main ports and at
London and Prestwick airports, the main London air terminals and Victoria
Station, London.
Regulations relating to exchange control in the United Kingdom are some¬
what complex and are subject to modification from time to time. According y,
any person who is going to live in the United Kingdom or who desires informa¬
tion affecting his own particular circumstances is advised to consult his own
or a United Kingdom bank; banks in Britain are experienced in all aspects of
exchange control.
In general, persons visiting the country for a limited period are regarded as
non-resident; any sterling account which they open with a United Kingdom
bank will be designated an External Account and funds in it may be used
without formality to make payments anywhere in the world. Persons intending
to reside permanently in the United Kingdom are subject to the provisions of
the Exchange Control Act, 1947, and will require permission to make payments
outside the Scheduled Territories.
The question of when a visitor to the United Kingdom who is not domiciled
there is chargeable for income tax as a ‘resident’ is complicated. The main
qualifications are:
1 A visitor is resident in the United Kingdom for any income tax year
(beginning 6th April) in which he is in the United Kingdom for a period or
periods equal, in the whole, to six months.
5^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Travel and
Tourist
Information
Passports,
Visas,
Registration
2. Even if a visitor does not stay six months in any one year he is regarded
as being resident if he visits the United Kingdom regularly for substantial
periods of time.
3. If a person maintains a place of abode in the United Kingdom available
for his use, he is regarded as resident for any year in which he pays a visit, of
whatever length.
Double Taxation Agreements: A visitor who is regarded for tax purposes as
resident in the United Kingdom, and who is liable to United Kingdom tax on
income arising in another country and taxed there, may be entitled to a reduction
of liability to United Kingdom income tax.
Information on specific questions relating to income tax may be obtained
from The Secretary, The Board of Inland Revenue, Somerset House, London,
W.C.2 (or, for residents in Great Britain, from local offices).
Information about travel to Britain can be obtained in the major cities of the
world from travel agents, airline, shipping line and railway offices, and British
Government offices abroad, or directly from the headquarters of the British
Travel and Holidays Association (BTHA), 64 St. James’s Street, London, S.W.l
(Telephone: Mayfair 9191). The Association has overseas offices in Argentina
(Buenos Aires), Australia (Sydney), Belgium (Brussels), Canada (Toronto and
Vancouver), France (Paris), Germany (Frankfurt-am-Main), Italy (Rome),
the Netherlands (Amsterdam), South Africa (Johannesburg), Sweden (Stock¬
holm) and the United States (Chicago, Los Angeles and New York); and
representatives in Brazil (Sao Paulo), New Zealand (Auckland) and Mexico
(Mexico City). Information available from the Association includes details of
places of interest, lists of exhibitions, fairs, festivals, concerts and special events
of interest to overseas visitors to Britain, with hours of opening, etc.; and advice
on motoring and touring itineraries. The Association publishes an annual guide,
Hotels and Restaurants in Britain, listing accommodation, services and charges,
and booklets giving particulars of youth hostels, holiday camps, and camping
and caravan sites.
For information about the principal events of the day in London, visitors
may use the Teletourist Service (operated by the General Post Office in con¬
junction with the BTHA and the BBC). The information can be obtained in
four languages by dialling the following telephone numbers: ASK 9211
(English), ASK 9311 (French), ASK 9411 (German), and ASK 9511 (Spanish).
If using a call box, the caller should refer to the instructions notice. The weather
forecast for the London area is also given in the French, German, and Spanish
services; in English it can be obtained by calling WEA 2211. The London
Tourist Board, 29 St. James’s Street, London, S.W.l (and with information
centres at Victoria Station and the West London Air Terminal) gives publicity
to London’s attractions for the holiday and business visitor.
Demand for hotel space in London is heavy, especially in the summer; the
London Hotels Information Service, 88 Brook Street, London, W.l (Mayfair
5414), gives information free of charge to overseas visitors as to where accom¬
modation is available.
Additional information on travel in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
is obtainable from: the Welsh Tourist and Holidays Board, 7 Park Place,
Cardiff; the Scottish Tourist Board, 2 Rutland Place, West End, Edinburgh, 1;
the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, 10 Royal Avenue, Belfast, and 13 Lower
Regent Street, London, S.W.l.
As a general rule travellers entering the United Kingdom must have a valid
passport and a visa issued by British Consular authorities abroad, but visas are
not required for citizens of the following countries: all countries of the British
Commonwealth, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,
German Federal Republic, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, San Marino,
APPENDIX
513
Customs Duties
and Purchase Tax
Import of
Domestic
Animals and
Birds
Motor Vehicles
and Driving
Licences
Republic of South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey,
the United States of America, and all countries in Central and South America.
Citizens of the Republic of Ireland do not require either passport or visa (but,
with residents of Commonwealth countries, are subject to immigration control
if seeking employment in Britain: see p. 450).
Nationals of the following countries who wish to visit the United Kingdom
for social or holiday visits of up to three months may use instead of a passport
their national identity card (in the Netherlands a ‘toeristenkaart’, obtainable
from town halls) in conjunction with a special Visitor’s Card (obtainable from
travel agents in the tourist’s own country): Belgium, France, Germany (Federal
Republic and West Berlin), Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands,
and Switzerland. A passport must, however, still be used where the purpose of
the visit is other than touristic, or where a stay of longer than three months is
intended.
Foreign visitors who are sixteen years of age or over must register with the
police three months after their arrival.
The personal baggage of persons entering the United Kingdom is subject to
Customs examination. Many articles are liable to customs duty and a number
to purchase tax. Failure to make a complete declaration may result in
penalties; but, although there is no legal entitlement to them, certain concessions
are given to travellers who properly declare their belongings.
Used personal effects, including tools of trade and articles of professional
use, which have been in the ownership and use of a traveller for a considerable
period and are not intended for other persons or for sale, may be admitted free
of duty and purchase tax, as may also used furniture and domestic articles
belonging to persons transferring residence to the United Kingdom. Small
quantities of dutiable goods, including tobacco, wine and spirits, and perfume,
carried by travellers for their personal use are allowed to pass free of duty
within fixed limits.
Inquiries on importing personal and household effects should be addressed
to the Secretary, H.M. Customs and Excise, King’s Beam House, London, E.C.3.
There are purchase tax concessions for overseas visitors shopping in Britain.
Many of the principal stores are able to send goods to an address abroad free
of purchase tax; and under the Personal Exports scheme, if the tax-free value
of goods bought at one time is £5 or more, a visitor may have them delivered
free of tax to the seaport or airport by which he is leaving the country.
All cats and dogs brought into the United Kingdom have to undergo six
months’ quarantine; and the landing of the animals must be authorised by a
licence issued by the appropriate Agricultural Department for England and
Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland (see Chapter 12). The department will
provide a list of approved carrying agents and quarantine kennels. An annual
licence (costing 7s. 6d. and obtainable at any post office) is needed for a house¬
hold dog aged 6 months or more.
The import of birds of the parrot family, if they are personal pets, is allowed
under licence, subject to certain conditions, by the Agricultural Departments.
Imports of live poultry are permitted only from certain countries.
Regulations concerning the temporary import of motor vehicles by visitors to
Britain are best obtained from the national motoring organisations in the visitor’s
country of residence. If a visitor is given a Temporary Importation Permit by
the customs officer at the port of entry, exemption from the need to pay vehicle
excise licence duty will be granted for the same period as stated on the Permit
(maximum, 365 days). Insurance against third party risks is compulsory; a
visitor must produce evidence in the form of either an International Motor
Insurance Card (green card) or a certificate of insurance issued by a British
insurer.
5*4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Social Security
Benefits
Health Services
Employment
Permits
Length
Area
Capacity
A visitor holding a current International Driving Permit or a current domestic
driving licence for his own country is entitled to drive without obtaining a
British driving licence during the currency of his own permit or licence, subject
to a maximum of 12 months. Any person taking up permanent residence must
take a driving test to secure a British licence which costs 15s. and is valid for
three years.
The rule of the road is to keep LEFT. Road signs are illustrated and explained
in The Highway Code (published by H.M. Stationery Office).
Eligibility for the main social security benefits is dependent on (a) sufficient
National Insurance contributions having been paid under the United Kingdom
schemes or {b) the existence of a reciprocal agreement between the United
Kingdom and the previous country of residence of the claimant (see p. 133).
Information on specific points may be obtained from the Ministry of Pensions
and National Insurance, 10 John Adam Street, London, W.C.2.
To qualify for family allowances, a residence qualification must be fulfilled,
varying in length according to the nationality and previous country of residence
of the applicant.
The services provided under the National Health Service are available to
everyone in Britain without regard to residence, nationality or insurance qualifica¬
tion. Immigration authorities have been instructed, however, to refuse admission
to the country to any person coming solely for the purpose of securing free
treatment under the Health Service.
Persons from countries other than members of the British Commonwealth and
the Irish Republic are admitted to the United Kingdom to take up employment
with a particular employer only if they have a permit issued by the Ministry of
Labour (see p. 450). Until 1st July, 1962, citizens of the Commonwealth and of
the Irish Republic had free entry into the United Kingdom, but since that date
they have been subject to control under the Commonwealth Immigrants Act,
1962 (see p. 450), and must obtain an employment voucher issued by the
Ministry of Labour before entering Britain for full-time employment.
Visitors of foreign nationality wishing to set up in any business or profession
in Britain must ask for permission from the Under-Secretary of State, Home
Office, Aliens Department, Princeton House, 271 HighHolbom, London, W.C.l.
BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES AND THEIR METRIC
EQUIVALENTS
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons = 1
8 bushels = 1 quarter =
1 pint
1 quart
1 gallon
bushel
2‘54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1 -609 kilometres
1 square inch =
1 square foot =
1 square yard =
1 acre
1 square mile
6-451 square centimetres
929-03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
59 square kilometres
= 2
0-568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
APPENDIX
515
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
16 oz. =
14 lb.
112 1b.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.) =
2,000 lb.
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (lb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
28-350 grams
0-454 kilogram
6-35 kilograms
50-8 kilograms
1-016 metric tons
0-907 metric ton
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Weights and
Measures
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them,
as the case may be—e.g., 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540
centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
914
829
743
658
572
486
401
315
230
144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-404
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
Kilo¬
grams
Av.
Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres Gallons
Hecto¬
litres
per
Hectare
English
Bushels
per
Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
0-898
1- 796
2- 695
3- 593
4- 491
5- 389
6- 287
7- 186
8- 084
8-982
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 113
2- 226
3- 340
4- 453
5- 566
6- 679
7- 793
8- 906
10- 019
11- 132
Thermometrical
Table
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by f;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by f, then add 32.
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
5l6
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide
to further reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers in the United Kingdom are asked to note that the Central Office oflnforma-
tion reference documents marked with an asterisk and listed as free, are only
available free of charge from British Information Offices overseas; in the United
Kingdom they may be obtained, on payment of a small charge, from the Central
Office of Information, Reference Division Distribution Unit, Hercules Road,
Westminster Bridge Road, London, S.E.l. In the United States, equivalent free
material can be supplied by British Information Services, 845 Third Avenue
{at 51st Street), New York 22, N.Y.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Information can
be purchased from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These
pamphlets are listed here with their respective prices {postage extra).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from
H.M. Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
Physical
Background
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
Best, R. H. and Coppock, J. J. The Changing Use of Land
in Britain Faber
Charlesworth, J. K. The Geology of Ireland
Oliver & Boyd
East, W. Gordon, Editor. Regions of the British Isles (series)
Nelson
Gunston, J. Understanding the Countryside Odhams Press
Hoskins, W. G. The Making of the English Landscape
Hodder & Stoughton
Manley, G. Climate and the British Scene Collins
Mitchell, Jean, Editor. Great Britain: Geographical Essays
Cambridge University Press
Mountfort, G., Hollom, P. A. D. and Peterson, R. A Field
Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe Collins
Shepherd, Walter. The Living Landscape of Britain Faber
Southern, H. N., Editor. Handbook of British Mammals
Blackwell
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse.
3rd edn Longmans
 Man and the Land Collins
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a Geographic
and Economic Survey. 5th rev. edn Longmans
Steers, J. A. The Coast of England and Wales in Pictures
Cambridge University Press
 The Sea Coast Collins
Tansley, Sir Arthur. The British Islands and their Vegeta¬
tion. 2 vols, 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
Watson, J. Wreford, Editor. The British Isles: A Systematic
Geography Nelson
s. d.
1952 22 6
1962 42 o
1953 25 o
i960 50 o
onwards
1962 30 o
1955 25 o
1952 30 o
1962 42 o
1954 25 o
1963 13 6
1964 37 6
1962 90 o
1955 25 o
1963 65 o
i960 30 o
1953 30 O
1950 90 o
1964 45 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Demographic
Background
British Regional Geology Handbooks HMSO
Weather Report of the Meteorological Office Monthly
HMSO
Carr-Saunders, A. M., Jones, D. Caradog, and Moser,
C. A. A Survey of Social Conditions in England and Wales
Oxford University Press
Cauter, T. and Downham, J. S. The Communication of
Ideas: A Study of Contemporary Influences in Urban Life
For The Reader's Digest, Chatto & Windus
Freeman, T. W. Conurbations of Great Britain
Manchester University Press
Hopkins, Harry. The New Look Seeker & Warburg
Political and Economic Planning. Social Mobility in
Britain, edited by D. V. Glass Routledge
Scott, J. D. Life in Britain Eyre & Spottiswoode
Young, Michael and Willmott, Peter. Family and Kinship
in East London Routledge
Zweig, F. The Worker in an Affluent Society Heinemann
Annual Reports
Registrar General, Northern Ireland
For 1962 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland For 1962 HMSO
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
Part I. Medical: Tables 1962 HMSO
Part II. Civil: Population Tables 1962 HMSO
Part III. Commentary 1961 HMSO
Census Reports of Great Britain 1801—1931 (Guides to Official
Sources No. 2) HMSO
Census 1951. England and Wales
General Report HMSO
General Tables HMSO
Report on Usual Residence and Workplace HMSO
Report on Greater London and Five other Conurbations
HMSO
Census 1951. Great Britain. One per cent Sample Tables
Part I. Ages and Marital Conditions, Occupations, Indus¬
tries, Housing of Private Households HMSO
Part II. Characteristics and Composition of Private House¬
holds, Non-Private Households, Education, Birth¬
place and Nationality, Fertility, Welsh and Gaelic
Languages, Conurbation Supplement HMSO
Census 1951. Northern Ireland. Final Report Belfast, HMSO
Census of Scotland 1951
Vol. III. Population, Age, Sex and Conjugal Condition,
Birthplace and Nationality, Gaelic-Speaking Population
and Housing HMSO
Vol. IV. Occupations and Industries HMSO
Census 1961. England and Wales Preliminary Report
Census 1961. County Report: London HMSO
Census of Northern Ireland 1961. Preliminary Report
Belfast, HMSO
Census 1961. Scotland Preliminary Report HMSO
Census of Wales (including Monmouthshire) 1961. Report on
Welsh-Speaking Population HMSO
51?
s. d.
1946 5 o
to to
1961 6 o
2 9
1958 25 o
1954 25 o
i9S9 37 6
1963 35 °
1963 40 o
1956 25 o
1959 25 o
1961 25 o
1963 8 6
1963 30 o
1964 25 o
1964 15 o
1964 25 o
1951 3 6
1958 13 o
1957 52 6
1957 65 o
1957 105 o
1952 17 6
1952 40 o
1955 i5 °
1955 32 6
1957 120 o
1961 7 6
1963 40 o
1961 4 o
1961 5 o
1962 10 o
518 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics
1815-1950, by N. H. Carrier and J. R. Jeffery HMSO 1953
Matters of Life and Death [prepared by the General Register
Office]. 4th edn HMSO 1959
Ulster Year Book 1960-62 Belfast, HMSO 1962
Royal Commission on Population. Report Cmd 7695 HMSO 1949
Residence in the United Kingdom: Notes for the Guidance of
Persons from Overseas Reference Paper R.5589 COI 1963
Women in Britain Reference Paper R.4497 COI i960
2. GOVERNMENT
General Survey Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 4th edn
Cambridge University Press 1961
 The Law and the Constitution. 5th edn
University of London Press 1959
Keeton, George W., General Editor. British Commonwealth:
the Development of its Laws and Constitutions
Vol. I Part 1. England and Wales, Northern Ireland and
the Isle of Man, by George W. Keeton,
Dennis Lloyd and others Stevens 1955
Vol. XII Scotland: the Development of its Laws and
Constitution, by T. B. Smith Stevens 1962
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History of Modern
Britain since 1485. 7th edn Black 1964
Morrison, Herbert [now Lord]. Government and Parliament:
A Survey from the Inside, rev. edn Oxford University Press 1959
Richards, Peter G. Patronage in British Government
Allen & Unwin 1963
Wade, E. C. S. and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law.
6th edn Longmans i960
Wilson, F. M. G. Administration in Action Allen & Unwin 1961
Wilson, Thomas, Editor. Ulster under Home Rule
Oxford University Press 1955
The Monarchy Cathcart, Helen. Her Majesty W. H. Allen 1962
Laird, [Dorothy. How the Queen Reigns
Hodder & Stoughton 1959
Morrah, Dermot. The Work of the Queen Kimber 1959
Tanner, Lawrence E. The History of the Coronation Pitkin 1952
Queen and People, by Dermot Morrah For COI, HMSO 1959
The Monarchy in the United Kingdom
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5526 COI 1963
Parliament Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A Parliamentary
Dictionary Butterworth 1964
Boardman, Harry. The Glory of Parliament
Allen & Unwin i960
Boyd, Francis. British Politics in Transition, 1945-63.
Pall Mall 1964
Bromhead, P. A. The House of Lords and Contemporary
Politics 1911-1957 Routledge 1958
Butler, D. E. The Electoral System in Britain since 1918
Oxford University Press 1963
 and Freeman, Jennie. British Political Facts 1900-1960
Macmillan 1963
Campbell, George. Parliament English Universities Press i960
s. d.
8 6
1 6
10 o
9 o
free*
free*
21 o
18 o
70 o
105 o
32 o
30 o
35 o
42 o
35 °
25 o
25 o
25 o
21 o
17 6
2 o
free*
25 o
21 o
27 6
35 o
30 o
40 o
7 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Campion, Lord. An Introduction to the Procedure of the
House of Commons, 3rd edn Macmillan 1958
  Consultant Editor; Fellowes, Sir Edward and
Cocks, T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas Erskine May’s
Treatise on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of
Parliament Butterworth 1964
Chester, D. N. and Bowring, Nona. Questions in Parliament
Oxford University Press 1962
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parliament. 6th edn Cassell 1964
Hansard Society. Parliamentary Reform 1933-1960 Cassell 1961
Hanson, A. H. and Wiseman, H. V. Parliament at Work
Stevens 1962
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Parliament. 2nd edn
Cambridge University Press 1958
 Party Politics Vol. I. Appeal to the People
Cambridge University Press i960
Vol. II. The Growth of Parties
Cambridge University Press 1961
Vol. III. The Stuff of Politics
Cambridge University Press 1962
Laundy, Philip. The Office of Speaker Cassell 1964
McKenzie, R. T. British Political Parties. 2nd edn
Heinemann 1963
Morrison, Lord. British Parliamentary Democracy
Asia Publishing House 1962
Plaskitt, H. and Jordan, P. Government of Britain
University Tutorial Press 1963
Richards, Peter G. Honourable Members: A Study of the
British Backbencher Faber 1964
Schofield, A. N. Parliamentary Elections. 3rd edn Shaw 1959
‘The Times’. The House of Commons 1959 The Times 1959
Wilding, Norman and Laundy, Philip. An Encyclopaedia of
Parliament, rev. edn Cassell 1961
The British Parliament
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5448/64 HMSO 1964
The Growth of Parliamentary Government in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5625 HMSO 1963
The Organisation of Political Parties in Britain
Reference Paper R.4767 COI i960
Parliamentary Elections in Britain Reference Paper R.5513 COI 1963
The Privy Council,
Her Majesty’s
Government,
Government
Departments
Daalder, Hans. Cabinet Reform in Britain, 1914-1963
Oxford University Press
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Cabinet Government. 3rd edn
Cambridge University Press
Lee, Sir Frank. Home and Overseas Responsibilities of the
Board of Trade (Stamp Memorial Lecture 1958)
Athlone Press
Mackenzie, W. J. M. and Grove, J. W. Central Administration
in Britain Longmans
Mackintosh, John P. The British Cabinet Stevens
Know Your Ministry: A Description of Government Depart¬
ments Whose Operations Affect the Conduct of Business
Europa Publications
New Whitehall Series: For the Royal Institute of Public
Administration
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, by
Sir John Winnifrith Allen & Unwin
1964
1959
1958
1957
1962
1959
1962
5I9
s. d.
24 o
126 o
35 o
30 o
25 o
35 °
65 o
45 o
45 °
45 °
75 °
42 o
9 6
11 6
36 o
84 o
21 o
63 o
3 o
1 7
free*
free*
45 o
60 o
3 6
30 o
50 o
25 o
30 o
520
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New Whitehall Series—contd.
The Colonial Office, by Sir Charles Jeffries Allen & Unwin
Her Majesty’s Customs and Excise, by Sir James Crombie
Allen & Unwin
The Foreign Office, by Lord Strang and others
Allen & Unwin
The Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam Allen & Unwin
The Ministry of Labour and National Service, by
Sir Godfrey Ince Allen & Unwin
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, by
Sir Geoffrey King Allen & Unwin
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, by
Sir Harry Melville Allen & Unwin
The Scottish Office and other Scottish Departments, by
Sir David Milne Allen & Unwin
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, by
Sir Gilmour Jenkins Allen & Unwin
The Treasury, by Lord Bridges Allen & Unwin
The Ministry of Works, by Sir Harold Emmerson
Allen & Unwin
Government Administration in Wales Cmnd 631 HMSO
Handbook on Scottish Administration HMSO
Her Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Public Departments
[5 issues a year] HMSO
Central Government of Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5564/64 HMSO
Royal Commissions and Similar Bodies in Britain
Reference Paper R.5605 COI
The Civil Service Dunnill, Frank. The Civil Service: Some Human Aspects
Allen & Unwin
Royal Commission on the Civil Service 1953-55 (Priestley
Commission). Report Cmd 9613 HMSO
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.5599 COI
Local Clarke, J. J. The Local Government of the United Kingdom.
Government 15th rev. edn Pitman
 Outlines of Local Government of the United Kingdom.
19th rev. edn Pitman
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of Local
Government and Administration. 7th rev. edn Butterworth
Headrick, T. E. The Town Clerk in English Local
Government Allen & Unwin
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Local Government
Macmillan
Jackson, W. Eric. The Structure of Local Government in
England and Wales. 4th edn Longmans
 Local Government in England and Wales, new edn
Penguin Books
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Principles of Local Government, edited
by J. A. G. Griffith. 4th edn University of London Press
Layton, Elizabeth. Building by Local Authorities
Allen & Unwin
Marshall, A. H. Financial Administration in Local
Government Allen & Unwin
Municipal Year Book For 1964 Municipal Journal
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 4th edn
Shaw
s. d.
1955 18 o
1962 30 o
1955 18 o
1955 18 o
i960 25 o
1958 18 o
1962 25 o
1958 21 o
1959 21 O
1964 30 o
1956 15 o
1959 I 9
1956 2 6
2 O
1964 3 o
1963 free*
1956 18 o
1955 6 6
1963 free*
1956 30 o
1960 25 o
1962 62 6
1962 25 o
1958 30 o
i960 28 o
1959 3 6
1960 18 o
1961 40 o
i960 32 o
1964 126 o
1962 105 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Fire Service
The Law
Annual Report
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1963 Cmnd 2338 HMSO
London Government. Government Proposals for Reorganisa¬
tion Cmnd 1562 HMSO
Report of Royal Commission on Local Government in
Greater London 1957-60 Cmnd 1164 HMSO
The Modernisation of Local Government in Scotland HMSO
Local Government in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5505/64 HMSO
The Corporation of the City of London
Reference Paper R.4864 COI
Blackstone, G. V. A History of the British Fire Services
Routledge
Fire Protection Year Book and Directory 1964 Benn
Annual Reports
Fire Research Board For 1962 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England and Wales)
For 1963 Cmnd 2407 HMSO
H.M. Inspector of Fire Services for Scotland
For 1963 Cmnd 2374 HMSO
The Fire Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5580 COI
3. LAW AND ORDER
Allen, Sir C. K. Administrative Jurisdiction Stevens
 Law and Orders Stevens
Allsop, Peter. The Legal Profession. 5th edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Archer, Peter. The Queen’s Courts Penguin Books
Bedford, Sybille. The Faces of Justice Collins
Devlin, Sir Patrick. The Criminal Prosecution in England
Oxford University Press
Gibb, A. D. A Preface to Scots Law. 3rd rev. edn
William Green
Giles, F. T. Children and the Law Penguin Books
 The Magistrates’ Courts Stevens
Halsbury, Lord. Laws of England. 3rd edn. Editor-in-Chief
Viscount Simonds. 43 vols. Butterworth
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Justice in England. 4th edn
Cambridge University Press
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law. 5th edn
Butterworth
Ringrose, C. W. Where to Look for Your Law. 14th edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Rubinstein, Ronald. John Citizen and the Law. 5th edn
Penguin Books
Rudd, G. R. The English Legal System Butterworth
Smith, T. B. British Justice: The Scottish Contribution.
Hamlyn Lectures 13th series Stevens
Street, Harry. Freedom, the Individual and the Law
Penguin
Wade, H. W. R. Administrative Law Oxford University Press
Walker, D. M. The Scottish Legal System William Green
Wootton, B. Crime and the Criminal Law Stevens
521
s. d.
1964 5 6
1961 1 o
1960 28 o
1963 1 o
1964 3 6
1961 free*
1957 60 o
1964 21 o
1963 6 6
1964 2 o
1964 1 6
1963 free*
1956 16 6
1956 45 o
1960 12 6
1963 6 o
1961 21 o
1960 15 o
1961 12 6
1959 3 6
1963 22 6
I954 4A37 °
-1964
1964 45 o
1962 22 6
1962 12 6
1964 7 6
1962 37 6
1961 25 o
1963 6 o
1961 21 o
1959 5o o
1963 21 o
522
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Yardley, D. C. M. Introduction to British Constitutional Law
Butterworth 1964
Annual Reports
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice Act
For 1962-63 HMSO 1964
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid Scheme
For 1962-63 HMSO 1963
Council on Tribunals For 1962 HMSO 1963
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales
For 1962 Cmnd 2120 HMSO 1963
Criminal Statistics, Scotland For 1963 Cmnd 2344 HMSO 1964
Report of the Committee on Civil Jury Trial in Scotland
[Strachan Report] Cmnd 851 HMSO 1959
Report of the Working Party on Legal Aid in Criminal
Proceedings HMSO 1962
Time spent Awaiting Trial: First Report of the Home Office
Research Unit HMSO i960
The English Legal System
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 5312 HMSO 1962
s. d.
25 o
5 o
3 6
2 6
10 o
4 6
2 6
3 6
3 o
3 6
Treatment of
Offenders
Elkin, Winifred A. The English Penal System
Penguin Books 1957
Field, Xenia. Under Lock and Key Max Parrish 1963
King, Joan F. S., Editor. The Probation Service. 2nd edn
Butterworth 1964
McClintock, F. H., with Walker, M. A. and Savill, N. C.
Attendance Centres Macmillan 1961
Morris, T. and Morris P. Pentonville Routledge 1963
National Council of Social Service. Problems of the Ex-
Prisoner: Report of the Thompson-Pakenham Committee
NCSS 1961
St. John, John. Probation: The Second Chance Vista 1961
The After-Care and Supervision of Discharged Prisoners.
Report of the Sub-Committee of the Advisory Council on
the Treatment of Offenders HMSO 1964
Annual Reports
Council of the Central After-Care Association
For 1962 HMSO 1963
Prisons and Borstals, 1963 Cmnd 2381 HMSO 1964
Prisons in Scotland For 1963 Cmnd 2367 HMSO 1964
Children and Young Persons, Scotland. Report by the Com¬
mittee appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland
Cmnd 2306 HMSO 1964
Compensation for Victims of Crimes of Violence.
Cmnd 2323 HMSO 1964
Corporal Punishment. Report of Advisory Council on the
Treatment of Offenders Cmnd 1213 HMSO i960
Organisation of Aftercare in Scotland HMSO 1963
The Organisation of the Prison Medical Service. Report of the
Working Party HMSO 1964
The Organisation of Work for Prisoners. Report of the
Advisory Council on the Employment of Prisoners
HMSO 1964
Penal Practice in a Changing Society Cmnd 645 HMSO 1959
Persistent Criminals. Studies in Causes of Delinquency
HMSO 1962
Preventive Detention. Report of Advisory Council on
Treatment of Offenders HMSO 1963
3 6
30 o
30 o
28 o
50 o
5 o
25 o
3 °
2 o
8 6
4 6
7 °
8
3 6
2 o
1 3
1 6
3 °
25 o
3 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Police
Service
The Probation Service in Scotland HMSO 1955
Report of the Committee on Children and Young Persons
[Ingleby Report] Cmnd 1191 HMSO i960
Report of the Departmental Committee on the Probation
§gi*yice Cmnd 1650 HIM SO 1962
The Sentence of the Court. A Handbook for Courts on the
Treatment of Offenders HMSO 1964
The War against Crime in England and Wales, 1959—1964.
Cmnd 2296 HMSO 1964
Work and Vocational Training in Borstal. Report of the
Advisory Council on the Employment of Prisoners
HMSO 1962
The Treatment of Offenders in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4414/64 HMSO 1964
Moriarty, C. C. H. Police Procedure and Administration.
6th edn Butterworth 1955
Thomas, J. L. Police Administration. 3rd edn
Police Review Publishing Co. 1958
Whitaker, Ben. The Police Penguin 1964
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis
For 1963 Cmnd 2408 HMSO 1964
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary, Scotland
For 1963 Cmnd 2368 HMSO 1964
H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary (Counties and Boroughs
in England and Wales) For 1963 HMSO 1964
Police. Choice of Careers. New Series No. 80 HMSO 1957
Royal Commission on the Police, 1962. Final Report
Cmnd 1728 HMSO 1962
Report of the Committee of the Police Council on Higher
Police Training HMSO 1962
The Police Service in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5598 COI 1963
523
s. d.
1 3
10 o
10 o
4 o
1 3
2 6
3 °
i5 o
5 °
3 6
6 6
1 6
5 6
1 9
12 6
1 3
free*
4. DEFENCE
Brassey’s Annual: The Armed Forces Year Book i963> edited
by Rear-Admiral H. G. Thursfield Clowes
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1963-64, edited by John W. R.
Taylor Sampson Low
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1963-64, edited by R. V. B. Blackman
Sampson Low
Kemp, Lt.-Cdr. P. K. Fleet Air Arm Jenkins
 H.M. Destroyers Jenkins
Lewis, Michael. The History of the British Navy
Allen & Unwin
Schofield, Vice-Admiral B. B. The Royal Navy Today
Oxford University Press
Sheppard, E. W. A Short History of the British Army. 4th edn
Constable
Taylor, John W. R. C.F.S., Birthplace of Air Power: The
Story of the R.A.F.’s Central Flying School 1912-58 Putnam
Thetford, Owen. Aircraft of the Royal Air Force since 1912.
Putnam
 British Naval Aircraft 1912-58 Putnam
Defence Estimates, 1964-65 HMSO
1963 84 o
1964 126 o
1964 105 o
1954 18 o
1956 18 o
1959 30 o
1960 18 o
1950 42 o
1958 21 O
1962 63 O
1962 63 o
1964 11 6
524
State and
Voluntary
Services
Social Security
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Statements on Defence Policy
Defence: Outline of Future Policy Cmnd 124 HMSO
Statement on Defence 1962: The Next Five Years
Cmnd 1639 HMSO
Statement on Defence 1964 Cmnd 2270 HMSO
Central Organisation for Defence Cmnd 2097 HMSO
Reorganisation of the Territorial Army Cmnd 1216 HMSO
Civil Defence
Civil Defence Handbooks Nos. 1-10 HMSO
Manuals of Civil Defence. Vol. I.
Pamphlet No. 1. Nuclear Weapons HMSO
No. 2. Radioactive Fall-out HMSO
W.V.S. for Civil Defence 1938-63. Report on 25 years work
HMSO
5. SOCIAL WELFARE
Brasnett, Margaret E. The Story of the Citizens’ Advice
Bureaux National Council of Social Service
Hall, M. Penelope. The Social Services of Modem England.
6th rev. edn Routledge
National Citizens’ Advice Bureaux Committee. Advising
the Citizen National Council of Social Service
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social
Services: Handbook of Information and Directory of
Organisations, rev. edn NCSS
  Public Social Services: Handbook of Information.
NCSS
 Women’s Employment Federation. Training and
Employment in Social Work NCSS
Political and Economic Planning. Family Needs and the
Social Services Allen & Unwin
Annual Report
Charity Commissioners for England and Wales
For 1963 HMSO
Report of the Working Party on Social Workers in the Local
Authority Health and Welfare Services HMSO
Social Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5595 HMSO
Voluntary Service to the Community in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5089 COI
Annual Reports
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
For 1963 Cmnd 2392 HMSO
National Assistance Board For 1963 Cmnd 2386 HMSO
National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland
For 1963 Belfast, HMSO
War Pensioners For 1963 HMSO
Everybody’s Guide to National Insurance, rev. edn HMSO
Guides to Official Sources, No. 5. Social Security Statistics
HMSO
Reports by the Government Actuary
National Insurance Acts, 1946-61 HMSO
National Insurance Acts (Northern Ireland), 1946-60
HMSO
1957
1962
1964
1963
i960
1953
to
1963
1959
1959
1963
1964
1964
1961
1960
1962
1964
1961
1964
1959
1963
1961
1964
1964
1964
1964
1964
1961
1963
1961
s. d.
1 3
1 6
6 6
1 6
9
9
to
7 6
2 6
1 3
2 6
7 6
28 o
5 °
10 6
15 o
5 °
30 o
5 °
15 °
5 6
free*
10 o
6 6
2 9
6 6
9
8 o
1 9
3 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Health and
Welfare
Reports by the Government Actuary—contd.
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946-61
HMSO
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts (Northern
Ireland) 1946-60 HMSO
Social Insurance and Allied Services [Beveridge Report]
Cmd 6404 HMSO
Social Security in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5455 COI
Abel-Smith, B. History of the Nursing Profession Heinemann
Acton Society Trust. National Health Services in Great
Britain: Hospitals and the State. Series of 6 Reports AST
Dainton, Courtney. The Story of England’s Hospitals
Museum Press
Freeman, H., Editor. Trends in the Mental Health Services
Pergamon Press
Grundy, F. The New Public Health H. K. Lewis
Lindsey, Almont. Socialized Medicine in England and Wales
University of North Carolina jOxford University Press
Medical Services Review Committee. Review of the
Medical Services in Great Britain [Porritt Report]
Social Assay
Moss, J. Health and Welfare Services Handbook
Hadden, Best & Co. Ltd.
National Council of Social Service. Statutory Provisions
for Old People NCSS
Political and Economic Planning Psychiatric Services
in 1975 PEP
Stocks, Mary. A Hundred Years of District Nursing
Allen & Unwin
Timms, N. Psychiatric Social Work in Great Britain Routledge
Annual Reports
General Board of Control for Scotland
For 1961 Cmnd 1752 HMSO
Health and Local Government Administration in Northern
Ireland For 1961 Cmd 444 Belfast, HMSO
Ministry of Health
Part I. Health and Welfare Services
For 1963 Cmnd 2389 HMSO
Part II. On the State of the Public Health
For 1962 HMSO
Scottish Home and Health Department, Health and Welfare
Service in Scotland. Report for 1963 Cmnd 2359 HMSO
Accident and Emergency Services: Report of Central Health
Services Council Sub-committee HMSO
Field Work of the Family Doctor. Report of Central Health
Service Council Sub-committee [Gillie Report] HMSO
Health and Welfare: The Development of Community Care
Cmnd 1973 HMSO
Health Education. Report of a Joint Committee of the Central
and Scottish Health Service Councils HMSO
A Hospital Plan for England and Wales Cmnd 1604 HMSO
A Hospital Plan for England and Wales (Revision to 1973-74)
HMSO
Hospital Plan for Scotland Cmnd 1602 HMSO
Hospital Plan for Scotland (Revision to 1973-74) HMSO
525
s. d.
1963 1 9
1961 1 o
1942 12 6
1962 free*
1960 30 o
1955 4 °
to each
1959
1961 21 o
1963 70 o
1960 21 o
1962 45 o
1963 18 o
1962 45 o
1962 2 o
1963 5 °
i960 25 o
1964 32 o
1962 1 3
1962 7 o
1964 11 6
1963 12 6
1964 6 o
1962 3 6
1963 4 6
1963 24 o
1964 5 6
1962 18 6
1964 1 6
1962 2 6
1964 8
526 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Health Service Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1962-63 HMSO 1964
National Health Service (Scotland) Summarised Accounts
Annual For 1961-62 HMSO 1963
Report of the Maternity Services Committee HMSO 1959
Report of the Working Party on Workshops for the Blind
HMSO 1962
Services for the Disabled. 2nd edn HMSO 1962
Health Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5154 HMSO 1962
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4972 COI 1962
Child Welfare Children in the Care of Local Authorities in England and
Wales, March 1963 Annual Statistics Cmnd 2240 HMSO 1964
The Needs of Young Children in Care HMSO 1964
Prevention of Neglect of Children. Report by Scottish Advisory
Council on Child Care HMSO 1963
Work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office
1961-63, Report of HMSO 1964
Children in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5236/64 HMSO 1962
6. EDUCATION
Alexander, Sir William. Education in England: the
National System—How it Works. 2nd edn Newnes 1964
Association of Commonwealth Universities. Common¬
wealth Universities Yearbook, 1964 The Association 1964
Baron, George. A Bibliographical Guide to the English
Educational System. 2nd edn Athlone Press i960
British Council and The Association of Universities of
The British Commonwealth. Higher Education in the
United Kingdom: A Handbook for Students from Over¬
seas. rev. edn Longmans 1962
British Institute of Management. British Business Schools.
Report by Sir Oliver Franks BIM 1963
Cotgrove, Stephen F. Technical Education and Social Change
Allen & Unwin 1958
Curtis, S. J. History of Education in Great Britain. 5th edn
University Tutorial Press 1963
Dancy, J. B. Public Schools and the Future Faber 1963
Dent, H. C. The Educational System of England and Wales
London University Press 1961
 Editor. Year Book of Technical Education and Careers
in Industry For 1964 Black 1964
Douglas, J. W. B. Home and School MacGibbon & Kee 1964
Education Committees Year Book, 1963-64
Councils and Education Press 1964
Lester Smith, W. O. Education: An Introductory Survey
Penguin Books 1962
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education in
the United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations Annual
National Institute of Adult Education 1964
Pedley, Robin. The Comprehensive School Penguin Books 1963
Peers, R. A. Adult Education Routledge 1959
Taylor, William. The Secondary Modem School Faber 1963
s. d.
3 6
2 6
6 6
8 6
8 6
4 o
free*
1 3
2 o
1 6
5 6
4 1
25 o
105 o
12 6
7 6
5 o
25 o
25 o
18 o
i5 °
40 o
36 o
35 o
3 6
8 6
3 6
35 °
32 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Reports
Ministry of Education for England and Wales
Education in 1963 Cmnd 2316 jfflVASO 1964
Statistics of Education [in three parts]
Part I (1963) HMSO 1964
Part II (1963) HMSO 1964
Part III (1962) HMSO 1963
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland
Education in Northern Ireland 1962-63
Cmd 463 Belfast, HMSO 1964
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in 1963 Cmnd 2307 HMSO 1964
Better Opportunities in Technical Education
Cmnd 1254 HMSO 1961
The Certificate of Secondary Education. Some Suggestions
for Teachers and Examiners. Examinations Bulletin No. 1
HMSO 1963
Day Release. Report of a Committee set up by the Minister of
Education [Henniker-Heaton Report] HMSO 1964
15 to 18: Report of the Central Advisory Council for Education
(England) [Crowther Report]: Vol. I HMSO 1959
Vol. II (Surveys) HMSO i960
The Future Pattern of the Education and Training of Teachers:
8th Report of the National Advisory Council for the
Training and Supply of Teachers HMSO 1962
Half our Future. Report of the Central Advisory Council for
Education (England) [Newsom Report] HMSO 1963
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Ministry of Education Biennial
For i960 and 1961 HMSO 1962
Higher Education [Robbins Report] Cmnd 2154 HMSO 1963
Higher Education. Government Statement on the Robbins
Report Cmnd 2165 HMSO 1963
Public Education in Scotland, rev. edn HMSO 1961
Secondary Education for All: A New Drive Cmnd 604 HMSO 1959
Technical Education in Scotland: The Pattern of the Future
Cmnd 1245 HMSO 1961
University Grants Committee
Annual Return from Universities and University Colleges
For 1961—62 Cmnd 2135 HMSO 1963
University Development 1957—62 Cmnd 2267 HMSO 1964
Women and Teaching. Report of an Independent Nuffield
Survey [Kelsall Report] HMSO 1963
Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 4751/64 HMSO 1964
Technical Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5169 HMSO 1962
Teacher Training in Britain Reference Paper R.5279 COI 1962
Universities in Britain Reference Paper R.5520 COI 1963
527
s. d.
8 6
i5 °
27 6
8 6
8 6
8 6
1 3
10 o
3 °
12 6
8 6
2 6
8 6
15 °
15 °
8
4 °
9
1 3
6 o
i5 o
4 °
4 °
3 °
free*
free*
Youth Services
Brew, J. Macalister. Youth and Youth Groups Faber 1957
Cooke, Douglas, Editor. Youth Organisations of Great
Britain Jordan 1963
King George’s Jubilee Trust. Opportunities for Service 1964
Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth
Organisations. Young People Today: An Account of
Young People in Voluntary Organisations NCSS i960
 Annual Report and Directory, 1962-63 NCSS 1963
18 o
19 6
6
2 o
2 6
528 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme: Report for 1960-61
Duke of Edinburgh's Award Office
Development of the Youth Service Cmd 424 Belfast, HMSO
Working Party on the Training of Part-time Youth Leaders
and Assistants [Bessey Report] HMSO
Youth Service in England and Wales [Albemarle Report]
Cmnd 929 HMSO
Youth Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5506 COI
7. PLANNING AND HOUSING
Annual Reports
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1963 Cmnd 2338 HMSO
Scottish Development Department
For 1963 Cmnd 2326 HMSO
Ministry of Health and Local Government (Northern
Ireland) For 1961 Cmd 444 Belfast, HMSO
Town and
Country Planning
Abercrombie, Sir Patrick. Town and Country Planning.
3rd edn Oxford University Press
Abrahams, Harold M., Editor. Britain’s National Parks
Country Life
Burns, Wilfred. New Towns for Old. The Technique of
Urban Renewal Leonard Hill
Gibberd, Frederick. Town Design. 4th edn
Architectural Press
Heap, Desmond. An Outline of Planning Law. 4th edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Keeble, Lewis. Principles and Practice of Town and Country
Planning. 2nd edn Estates Gazette
London County Council. London Plan, First Review LCC
 The Planning of a New Town LCC
Nicholson, E. M. Britain’s Nature Reserves Country Life
Osborn, Sir Frederic J. and Whittick, Arnold. The New
Towns: the Answer to Megalopolis Leonard Hill
Town and Country Planning Association. Town and
Country Planning Monthly T and CPA
Annual Reports
Commission for the New Towns For 1962-63 HMSO
Development Corporations of the New Towns
England and Wales
Scotland
National Parks Commission
Nature Conservancy
Belfast Regional Survey and
Conclusions
The Green Belts
National Park Guides
For 1962-63 HMSO
For 1962-63 HMSO
For 1962-63 HMSO
For 1962-63 HMSO
Plan: Recommendations and
Cmd 451 Belfast, HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Nature Conservation in Northern Ireland [Report of the
Committee approved by the Minister of Home Affairs]
Cmd 448 Belfast, HMSO
Planning Bulletins
1. Town Centres: Approach to Renewal HMSO
2. Residential Areas: Higher Densities HMSO
3. Town Centres: Cost and Control of Redevelopment
HMSO
4. Town Centres : Current Practice HMSO
1962
1961
1962
i960
1963
1964
1964
1962
1959
1960
1963
1963
1963
1959
1960
1961
1958
1963
1963
1963
1963
1963
1963
1963
1962
1962
1962
1962
1963
1963
s. d.
5 ©
1 3
1 6
6 o
free*
5 6
7 °
7 °
10 o
25 o
42 o
73 6
32 6
50 o
50 o
50 o
30 o
63 o
2 o
4 6
25 6
12 o
7 o
11 6
3 6
4 o
5 °
1 6
5 °
2 o
4 °
7 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Housing
The South-East Study, 1961-81 HMSO 1964
South-East England Cmnd 2308 HMSO 1964
Town and Country Planning in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5355 HMSO 1962
The New Towns of Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4506 COI 1964
529
s. d.
15 °
8
3 °
free*
Ashworth, Herbert. Housing in Great Britain
Councils and their Houses: Management of Estates
Flats and Houses 1958: Design and Economy
Homes for Today and Tomorrow
Housing in England and Wales Cmnd 1290
Housing Cmnd 2050
 Design Bulletins Nos. 1-8
Skinner
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
Housing Policy, Scotland Cmd 8997 HMSO
Housing Return, England and Wales
Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
Housing Return, Scotland Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
Housing Return for Northern Ireland Quarterly Belfast HMSO
London. Employment: Housing: Land Cmnd 1952 HMSO
The Rent Act and You
Questions and Answers for Landlord and Tenant [England
and Wales] HMSO
A Simple Guide for Scotland HMSO
Housing in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4500 HMSO
1957
1959
1958
1961
1961
1963
1962
to
1964
1953
1963
1957
1957
1961
7 6
2 6
10 o
4 °
1 o
1 3
1 3
to
8 6
6
1 3
1 6
1 9
2 o
6
6
3 6
8. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union. Baptist Handbook: edited and published
under the direction of the Council of the Baptist Union of
Great Britain and Ireland. For 1964 Carey Kingsgate Press
Catholic Directory, 1964 Burns, Oates
Church Assembly. Report by the Board of Social Responsi¬
bility on the Task of the Church in relation to Industry
Church Information Office
Church of England. Official Yearbook, 1964. For the
Church Assembly Church Information Office
Church of Ireland. The Irish Church Directory and Year
Book. For 1964 Church of Ireland Printing & Publishing
Company
Church of Scotland. Year Book
For 1964 Church of Scotland Committee of Publications
Church in Wales. Official Handbook
Representative Body of the Church in Wales, Cardiff
Congregational Union of England and Wales. Congrega¬
tional Year Book 1964—65 The Union
Episcopal Church in Scotland. The Scottish Episcopal
Church Year Book and Directory For 1964-65 Representative
Church Council of the Episcopal Church in Scotland
Mayfield, Guy. The Church of England. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual Conference of the
Methodist Church, 1964 Methodist Publishing House
1964 15 o
1964 21 o
1959 1 6
1964 30 o
1964 12 6
1964 10 o
1959 15 o
1964 42 o
1964 9 6
1963 12 6
1964 15 o
53° BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Paul, Leslie. The Deployment and Payment of the Clergy
Church Information Office 1964
Presbyterian Church of England. Official Handbook
For 1964-65 Presbyterian Church of England 1964
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book
For 1964 Presbyterian Church of Wales 1964
Salvation Army, Year Book
For 1964 Salvationist Publishing & Supplies 1964
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Year Book of the
General Assembly For 1964 Lindsey Press 1964
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook
For 1964-65 United Free Church of Scotland 1964
9. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Sciences British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great
Britain: A Handbook compiled from Official Sources.
61 st edn Allen & Unwin 1964
Directory of British Scientists Benn 1964
Federation of British Industries. Industrial Research in
Manufacturing Industry FBI 1961
Hailsham, Lord. Science and Politics Faber 1963
Hartley, Sir Harold. The Royal Society: Its Origins and
Founders Royal Society i960
Hudson, Derek and Luckhurst, K. W. The Royal Society of
Arts, 1754-1954 John Murray 1954
Jaramillo-Arango, Dr. Jaime. The British Contribution to
Medicine Livingstone 1953
Jay, K. E. B. Nuclear Power Today and Tomorrow Methuen 1961
Jewkes, J., Sawers, D. and Stillerman, R. The Sources of
Invention Macmillan 1958
Payne, G. L. Britain’s Scientific and Technical Manpower
Oxford University Press i960
Turrill, W. B. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Past and
Present Jenkins 1959
Annual Reports
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
For 1962-63 Cmnd 2163 HMSO 1964
Agricultural Research Council
For 1961-62 Cmnd 2089 HMSO 1963
Atomic Energy Authority Tenth Report For 1963-64 HMSO 1964
Medical Research Council For 1962-63 Cmnd 2382 HMSO 1964
National Research Development Corporation
For 1962-63 HMSO 1964
Nature Conservancy For 1962-63 HMSO 1963
Research Council of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research For 1963 Cmnd 2394 HMSO 1964
Committee of Enquiry into the Organisation of Civil Science
[Trend Report] Cmnd 2171 HMSO 1963
Register of Research in the Human Sciences HMSO 1963
Report of Committee on Management and Control of Research
and Development HMSO 1961
Research for Industry, 1962 HMSO 1963
Science Museum: The First Hundred Years HMSO 1957
Scientific and Technological Manpower in Great Britain, 1962
Cmnd 2146 HMSO 1963
Scientific Research in British Universities and Colleges,
1963-64 HMSO 1964
s. d.
12 6
8 6
6 o
5 °
6 o
2 6
45 o
168 o
40 o
13 6
35 o
30 o
25 o
25 o
31 6
45 o
25 o
4 °
5 6
6 6
16 6
2 6
11 6
4 6
4 °
20 o
7 o
7 o
15 °
3 6
35 °
The Arts
Visual Arts
Literature
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Medical Research in Britain
COI Reference Paper R.5578 HMSO 1963
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151 HMSO 1962
Agricultural Research in Britain Reference Paper R.5431 CO/ 1962
British Research and Developing Countries
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5516 COI 1963
British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Reference Paper R.8320 COI 1963
Industrial Research in Britain Reference Paper R.4631 COI 1961
Notes on Science and Technology in Britain
Reference Paper R.5476/Series COI 1962
to
1964
Some British Records and Achievements in Science, Industry
and Technology Reference Booklet RF.P.5446 COI 1962
Arts Council of Great Britain. The First Ten Years.
Eleventh Annual Report 1955-56 Arts Council 1956
  Ends and Means. Eighteenth Annual Report 1962-63
Arts Council 1963
British Council. Annual Report 1962-63 British Council 1963
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Help for the Arts:
Report to the Foundation The Foundation 1959
Directory of Museums and Art Galleries in the British Isles
Museums Association 1948
Gardner, A. H. Outline of English Architecture. 3rd edn
Batsford 1949
Hoar, Frank. An Introduction to English Architecture Evans 1963
Museums Calendar Annual For 1964 Museums Association 1964
Rothenstein, Sir John. An Introduction to English Painting
Cassell 1952
 British Art Since 1900 Phaidon Press 1962
Who’s Who in Art. 12th edn Art Trade Press, Eastbourne 1964
Annual Reports
Ancient Monuments Boards for England, Scotland and Wales
For 1963 HMSO 1964
Export of Works of Art 1962-63 Cmnd 2174 HMSO 1963
Historic Buildings Council for England For 1963 HMSO 1964
Historic Buildings Council for Scotland For 1963 HMSO 1964
Historic Buildings Council for Wales For 1963 HMSO 1964
Royal Fine Art Commission For 1960-62 Cmnd 1927 HMSO 1963
Tate Gallery For 1962-63 HMSO 1963
Government and the Arts 1958—64 HMSO 1964
Report of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland
Cmnd 2395 HMSO 1964
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries
Report for 1954-58 HMSO 1959
Survey of Provincial Museums and Galleries HMSO 1963
British National Bibliography Annual
For 1963 The Council of the British National Bibliography 1964
Library Association Year Book 1964 Library Association 19^4
Sampson, George. The Concise Cambridge History of
English Literature. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press 1962
Inter-library Co-operation in England and Wales HMSO 1962
Standards of Public Library Service in England and Wales
HMSO 1962
531
s. d.
4 °
7 °
free*
free*
free*
free*
free*
free*
2 6
2 6
2 6
3 °
21 o
15 °
35 °
15 °
21 o
60 o
84 o
2 O
3 o
i 6
1 3
8
1 6
7 °
3 °
1 6
4 °
30 o
190 o
28 o
25 o
3 °
7 °
532 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Structure of the Public Library Service in England and
Wales Cmnd 660 HMSO 1959
Drama The Stage Year Book, 1963 Annual Carson & Comerford 1963
Who’s Who in the Theatre, edited by Freda Gaye. 13th rev.
edn Pitman 1961
Films Manvell, Roger. The Living Screen Harrap 1961
Rotha, Paul. The Film Till Now Vision Press i960
 Film Faber 1958
Spottiswoode, Raymond. Grammar of the Film. 2nd edn
Faber 1955
Stork, Leopold. Industrial and Business Films Phoenix House 1962
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency For 1962-63 HMSO 1964
British Film Institute. Thirtieth Annual Report BFI 1964
Cinematograph Films Council For 1963-64 HMSO 1964
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of
Accounts) For 1963-64 Cmnd 2453 HMSO 1964
Music, Opera and Ballet Annual 1964, edited by Arnold L. Haskell and
Ballet M. Clarke Black 1964
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book
British Federation of Music Festivals 1964
Walker, Ernest. A History of Music in England. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press 1952
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Clapham, Sir John. A Concise Economic History of Britain:
From Earliest Times to 1750 Cambridge University Press 1949
 An Economic History of Modern Britain. 3 vols
Cambridge University Press 1938
Deane, Phyllis and Cole, W. A. British Economic Growth
1688-1959 Cambridge University Press 1962
Devons, E. An Introduction to British Economic Statistics
Cambridge University Press 1956
Dow, J. C. R. The Management of the British Economy
Cambridge University Press 1964
Mitchell, B. R. and Deane, P. Abstract of British Economic
Statistics Cambridge University Press 1962
Morgan, E. V. The Structure of Property Ownership in
Great Britain Oxford University Press i960
Political and Economic Planning. Growth in the British
Economy Allen & Unwin i960
Scottish Council (Development and Industry). Inquiry
into the Scottish Economy 1960-61 [Toothill Report]
The Council 1961
Stamp, L. Dudley and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a
Geographic and Economic Survey Longmans 1963
Thomas, Brinley. The Welsh Economy University of Wales 1962
Worswick, G. D. N. and Ady, P. H. The British Economy in
the Nineteen Fifties Oxford University Press 1962
Youngson, A. J. The British Economy 1920-1957
Allen & Unwin 1964
Economic Review Bi-Monthly from January 1959
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. British War Economy, by W. K. Hancock and
M. M. Gowing Longmans & HMSO 1949
s. d.
3 6
17 6
105 o
15 o
105 o
30 o
18 o
35 o
8
free
8
1 6
30 o
6 6
45 o
30 o
172 6
60 o
22 6
60 o
52 6
35 o
30 o
25 o
65 o
30 o
42 o
18 o
12 6
30 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
533
Organisation
and Production
Growth of the United Kingdom Economy to 1966. National
Economic Development Council HMSO
Incomes Policy: The Next Step Cmnd 1626 HMSO
National Income and Expenditure 1963 (prepared by the
Central Statistical Office) HMSO
Northern Ireland Economic Survey
Cmd 453 Belfast, HMSO
Report on the Growth of the Economy. National Economic
Development Council HMSO
Report of the Joint Working Party on the Economy of
Northern Ireland [Hall Report] Cmnd 1835 HMSO
Scottish Development Department. Report for 1963
Cmnd 2326 HMSO
Annual Abstract of Statistics. No. 100. 1963 HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice Yearly from April 1953
HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice Yearly from
March 1954 Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics Annual from 1954 HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
Statistics on Incomes, Prices, Employment and Production
Quarterly HMSO
Economic Trends. Published monthly for the Central Statisti¬
cal Office HMSO
11. INDUSTRY
Allen G. C. The Structure of Industry in Britain Longmans
British Standards Institution. Year Book BSI
Burn, Duncan, Editor. The Structure of British Industry: A
Symposium. Vol. I Cambridge University Press
Vol. II Cambridge University Press
Dunning, J. H. ajid Thomas, C. J. British Industry. 2nd edn
Hutchinson
Grove, J. W. Government and Industry in Britain
Longmans
Hanson, H. A. Parliament and Public Ownership Cassell
Robson, W. A. Nationalised Industry and Public Ownership
Allen & Unwin
Council of Industrial Design. Annual Report 1963-64
HMSO
Development Plans
Central Scotland. A Programme for Development and
Growth Cmnd 2188 HMSO
The North East. A Programme for Regional Development
and Growth Cmnd 2206 HMSO
The South East Study, 1961-1981 HMSO
South East England Cmnd 2308 HMSO
The Financial and Economic Obligations of the Nationalised
Industries Cmnd 1337 HMSO
Monopolies, Mergers and Restrictive Practices
Cmnd 2299 HMSO
Registrar of Restrictive Trading Agreements. Report for the
period 1st July 1961 to 30th June 1963
Cmnd 2246 HMSO
Report of the Company Law Committee [Jenkins Report]
Cmnd 1749 HMSO
Review of Highland Policy Cmnd 785 HMSO
s. d.
1963 8 6
1962 8
1963 6 o
1963 5 o
1964 8 6
1962 5 6
1964 7 o
1963 22 6
5 °
7 6
8 o
7 o
15 o
6 o
1961 16 o
1964 15 o
1958 45 °
1958 50 o
1963 15 o
1962 42 o
1961 30 o
1962 50 o
1964 3 6
1963 5 o
1963 5 o
1964 15 o
1964 8
1961 1 o
1964 1 o
1964 3 o
1962 12 6
1959 9
534
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fuel and Power
Coal
Petroleum
Electricity and
Gas Supply
Water Supply
Development and Growth in Scotland
For 1963-64 Cmnd 2440 HMSO
Wales and Monmouthshire: Report on Developments and
Government Action 1963 Cmnd 2284 HMSO
Nationalised Industries in Britain Reference Paper R.5629 COI
Ministry of Power Statistical Digest Annual
For 1963 HMSO
National Coal Board. Fifty Questions and Answers on
British Coal NCB
 Revised Plan for Coal NCB
Challinor, A. S. and Corbin, E. G., Editors. Guide to the
Coalfields Colliery Guardian
Annual Report and Accounts
National Coal Board
Vol. I. Report For 1963-64 HMSO
Vol. II. Accounts and Statistical Tables For 1963 HMSO
Safety in Mines Research 1962 HMSO
The Coal Industry in Britain Reference Paper R.5610/64 COI
Longhurst, Henry C. Adventure in Oil Sidgwick & Jackson
United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Advisory Committee.
UK Petroleum Industry Statistics Relating to Consumption
and Refinery Production Annual
Petroleum Information Bureau
The Oilfields of Britain The British Petroleum Company
Electricity Council. Power forthe Future Electricity Council
Gas Council. The Rise of the Gas Industry in Britain
Gas Council
 Fuel for the Nation Gas Council
Sleeman, J. F. British Public Utilities Pitman
Annual Reports and Accounts
Central Electricity Generating Board for 1962-63 HMSO
Electricity Council For 1962-63 HMSO
Gas Council For 1962—63 HMSO
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board For 1963 HMSO
South of Scotland Electricity Board For 1963-64 HMSO
Reports from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries;
The Electricity Supply Industry
Vol. I Report and Proceedings HMSO
The Gas Industry
Vol. I. Report and Proceedings HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Electricity Supply
Industry [Herbert Committee] Cmd 9672 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Hydro-Electric Development in
Scotland Cmd 6406 HMSO
The Second Nuclear Power Programme Cmnd 2345 HMSO
Town Gas: Its Manufacture and Distribution HMSO
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151 HMSO
Hobbs, A. T., Editor. The Manual of British Water Supply
Practice Institute of Water Engineers/Heffer
Annual Reports
British Rainfall For 1958 HMSO
Department of Health for Scotland
For 1961 Part II Cmnd 1652 HMSO
s. d.
1964 3 6
1964 8 6
1964 free*
1964 27 6
1961 free
1959 3 6
1962 25 o
1964 5 6
1964 13 o
1963 s o
1964 free*
1959 21 o
1964 free
1964 free
1960 free
1949 15 o
1960 free
1953 20 o
1963 13 o
1963 13 o
1963 12 6
1964 5 6
1964 6 6
1963 11 6
1961 8 o
1956 6 6
1942 9
1964 5
1958 5 6
1962 7 o
1954 55 o
1963 37 6
1962 4 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Construction
Manufacturing
Industries
Annual Reports—contd.
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1962 Cmnd 1976 HMSO
Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain 1961-62 HMSO
Water Pollution Research Laboratory, 1963 HMSO
Central Advisory Water Committee. Report of Sub-
Committee on Information on Water Resources HMSO
  Sub-Committee on Growing Demand for Water
Final Report HMSO
Water Conservation, England and Wales Cmnd 1693 HMSO
The Water Service in Central Scotland HMSO
Report on the Water Resources of Wales Cmnd 1331 HMSO
Hydrological Surveys (Series, by Regions) HMSO
Norrie, C. M. Bridging the Years Arnold
Roskill, O. W. The Building Industry—1962 Onwards
The Builder Ltd.
Annual Reports
Building Research, 1963 HMSO
Hydraulics Research, 1963 HMSO
The Construction Industry. National Economic Development
Council HMSO
Building Research and Information Service HMSO
British Construction Work Overseas
Reference Paper R.5445 COI
British Iron and Steel Federation. Annual Report 1963
BISF
Burn, D. L. Economic History of Steelmaking 1867-1939
Cambridge University Press
 The Steel Industry 1939-1959
Cambridge University Press
Cornwell, E. L. Commercial Road Vehicles Batsford
Donnithorne, Audrey G. British Rubber Manufacturing
Duckworth
Dunning, J. H. American Investment in British Manufactur¬
ing Industry Allen & Unwin
Glass Manufacturers’ Federation. The British Glass
Industry GMF
Hague, Douglas C. The Economics of Man-Made Fibres
Duckworth
Maxcy, G. and Silberston, A. The Motor Industry
Allen & Unwin
Parkinson, J. R. The Economics of Shipbuilding
Cambridge University Press
Robson, R. The Cotton Industry in Britain Macmillan
 The Man-Made Fibres Industry Macmillan
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. The Motor
Industry of Great Britain 1964 SMMT
Development in the Iron and Steel Industry: Special Report,
1961 HMSO
Report of the Iron and Steel Board For 1963 HMSO
Research in the Iron and Steel Industry. Special Report, 1963
HMSO
The British Agricultural Engineering Industry
Reference Paper R.5501 COI
535
s. d.
1963 4 6
1964 27 6
1964 8 6
1959 1 3
1962 3 6
1962 1 3
1963 7 6
1961 5 o
1959 9 6
to to
1964 30 o
1956 21 O
1963 147 O
1964 8 6
1964 6 6
1964 2 o
1964 2 6
1962 free*
1964 free
1940 50 o
1961 80 o
i960 30 o
1958 25 o
1958 35 °
1963 free
1957 30 o
1959 25 o
1960 40 o
1957 60 o
1958 21 O
1964 55 °
1961 7 o
1964 5 6
1964 5 6
1963 free*
s
53^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture
Fisheries
The British Motor Vehicle Industry
Reference Paper R.5374 COI 1962
United Kingdom Pharmaceutical Industry
Reference Paper R.4957 COI 1961
United Kingdom Steel Industry
Reference Paper R.4930 COI 1961
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Allen, G. R. Agricultural Marketing Policies Blackivell 1959
Crossley, E. L. The United Kingdom Dairy Industry
United Kingdom Dairy Association 1959
Digby, M. and Gorst, S. Agricultural Co-operation in the
United Kingdom. 2nd edn Blackivell 1957
Digby, M., Editor. Year Book of Agricultural Co-operation
Blackwell 1962
Ernle, Lord. English Farming Past and Present. New edn by
G. E. Fussell and O. R. McGregor Frank Cass/Heinemann 1961
Hirsch, G. P. awJHuNT, K. E. British Agriculture: Structure
and Organisation Evans 1958
McCrone, Gavin. The Economics of Subsidising Agriculture
Allen & Unwin 1962
Self, P. and Storing, H. J. The State and the Farmer
Allen & Unwin 1962
Symon, J. A. Scottish Farming Past and Present Oliver & Boyd 1959
Watson, Sir James Scott and More, J. A. Agriculture: The
Science and Practice of British Farming, nth edn
Oliver & Boyd 1962
Williams, H. T., Editor. Principles for British Agricultural
Policy Oxford University Press i960
Agricultural Improvement Council. Fifth Report 1959-62
HMSO 1963
Agricultural Statistics, United Kingdom 1961-62 HMSO 1964
Annual Reports
Agricultural Marketing Schemes For 1962-63 HMSO 1964
Animal Health Services in Great Britain
For 1961 and 1962 HMSO 1964
Crofters Commission: Report For 1963 HMSO 1964
Department of Agriculture for Scotland
Agriculture in Scotland 1963 Cmnd 2281 HMSO 1964
Ministry of Agriculture, Northern Ireland
Cmd 468 Belfast, HMSO 1964
National Food Survey Committee: Domestic Food Con¬
sumption and Expenditure 1961 HMSO 1963
Annual Review and Determination of Guarantees
For 1964 Cmnd 2315 HMSO 1964
Cattle of Britain HMSO 1963
Guides to Official Sources, No. 4. Agricultural and Food
Statistics HMSO 1958
Long-term Assurances for Agriculture Cmnd 23 HMSO 1956
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual For 1961 HMSO 1963
Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Fatstock and Carcase
Meat Marketing and Distribution Cmnd 2282 HMSO 1964
Agricultural Research in Britain. Reference Paper R.5431 COI 1962
Farming Britain, by A. N. Duckham. rev. edn COI 1961
Fisheries Year Book and Directory 1964
British Continental Trade Press 1964
s. d.
free*
free*
free*
42 o
21 o
15 °
37 6
50 o
3 6
25 o
30 o
42 o
30 o
18 o
1 9
10 6
7 6
7 °
4 °
5 6
5 6
8 6
3 °
6 o
4 6
8
8 6
18 o
free*
free*
30 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Forestry
Shipping
Scottish Salmon and Trout Fisheries Cmnd 2096 HMSO
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For 1963 Cmnd 2332 HMSO
Herring Industry Board For 1963 Cmnd 2860 HMSO
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1963-64 HMSO
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For 1963 HMSO
Sea Fisheries For 1963 HMSO
The Fishing Industry Cmnd 1453 HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Fishing Industry
Cmnd 1266 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries
Cmnd 1350 HMSO
Faber
Forestry Commission
For 1962-63 HMSO
For 1962-63 HMSO
HMSO
Edlin, H. L. England’s Forests
Forestry in Scotland
Annual Reports
Forestry Commissioners
Forest Research
Britain’s Forests [6 booklets']
Census of Woodlands 1947-49: Summary Report HMSO
Forestry, Agriculture and Marginal Land, Report by the
Natural Resources (Technical) Committee HMSO
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission Guides HMSO
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Bird, James. The Major Seaports of the United Kingdom
Hutchinson
Blake, G. Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, 1760-1960
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Bown, A. H. J., Dove, C. A. andToom, E. S. Port Operation
and Administration. 2nd edn Chapman Hall
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual
Report 1963-64 Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom
Corporation of Lloyd’s. Lloyd’s List Annual Review 1963
Supplement to Lloyd’s List and Shipping Gazette
Corporation of Lloyd’s
Course, Capt. A. G. The Merchant Navy To-day
Oxford University Press
Maxwell, Donald, Editor. Shipping World Year Book and
Who’s Who 1964 Shipping World
Political and Economic Planning. The British Shipping
Industry PEP
Port of London Authority. 55 th Annual Report PL A
 The Port of London PLA
Rees, Henry. British Ports and Shipping Harrap
Thornton, R. H. British Shipping Cambridge University Press
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Major Ports of
Great Britain [Rochdale Report] Cmnd 1824 HMSO
Commercial Ports of the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.4539 CO I
537
s. d.
1963 3 6
1964 8 6
1964 3 o
1964 4 o
1964 5 6
1964 5 o
1961 1 o
1961 8 o
1961 8 o
1958 30 o
1963 free
1964 7 o
1964 14 o
1948 6
to to
1958 x 3
i95i 9
1957 4 °
1946 1 6
to to
1961 5 o
1963 105 o
i960 42 o
i960 45 o
1964 free
(limited)
1963 free
(limited)
1956 15 o
1964 70 o
1959 4 o
1964 free
1963 21 o
1959 18 o
1959 21 o
1962 15 o
1960 free*
538
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Inland Transport
Railways
Roads
London Transport
Inland Waterways
Foster, C. D. The Transport Problem Blackie
Jackman, W. T. The Development of Transport in Modern
England. 2nd edn Frank Cass
Sargent, J. R. British Transport Policy
Oxford University Press
Proposals for a Fixed Channel Link Cmnd 2146 HMSO
Re-organisation of the National Transport Undertakings
Cmnd 1248 HMSO
The Transport Needs of Great Britain in the Next Twenty
Years HMSO
Allen, G. Freeman. British Railways Today and Tomorrow
Ian Allan
Ellis, C. Hamilton. British Railway History 1877-1947
Allen & Unwin
Nock, O. S. The Railways of Britain Batsford
Simmons, Jack, The Railways of Britain Routledge
British Railways Board: The Re-shaping of British Railways
(Part 1: Report; Part 2: Maps) HMSO
 Annual Report 1963 HMSO
British Transport Commission: Proposals for the Railways
Cmd 9880 HMSO
  Re-appraisal of the Plan for the Modernisation and
Re-equipment of British Railways Cmnd 813 HMSO
Report from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries:
British Railways HMSO
British Road Federation. Basic Road Statistics BRF
Buchanan, C. D. Mixed Blessing: The Motor in Britain
Hill
Davies, E., Editor. Roads and their Traffic Blackie
Political and Economic Planning. The Cost of Roads PEP
Road Research Laboratory. Research on Road Safety
HMSO
The Highway Code, including Motorway rules HMSO
Road Pricing: the Economic and Technical Possibilities
(Smeed Report) HMSO
Survey of Road Goods Transport, 1962. Final Results. Part I
HMSO
Traffic in Towns (Buchanan and Crowther Reports) HMSO
 (Shortened edition) Penguin
Transport Holding Company: Annual Report 1963 HMSO
Barker, T. C. and Robbins, M. A History of London Trans¬
port. Vol. I. The Nineteenth Century Allen & Unwin
Jackson, A. A. and Croome, D. F. Railways through the Clay:
A History of London Tube Railways Allen & Unwin
London Transport Executive. London General: The Story
of the London Bus 1856 to 1956 LTE
Annual Reports
London and Home Counties Traffic Advisory Committee:
London Traffic 1962 HMSO
London Transport Board, 1963 HMSO
Edwards, L. A. The Inland Waterways of Great Britain and
Ireland. 2nd edn Imray, Laurie, Norie & Wilson
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals: An Illustrated History,
rev. edn Phoenix House
s. d.
1963 40 o
1962 140 o
1958
1963
i960
1963
1960
1962
1961
1963
1964
1956
1959
1960
1964
1958
1960
1961
1963
1963
1964
1963
1964
1964
1956
1963
1964
15 °
6 6
1 o
2 6
1963 30 o
35 °
5 °
30 o
20 o
10 o
1 9
3 o
5 6
1 o
30 o
35 °
3 6
42 o
6
1964 4 6
7 o
50 o
10 6
5 6
1963 40 o
1963 45 o
5 o
1 6
7 o
1962 45 o
1962 36 o
Public Transport in
Northern Ireland
Civil Aviation
The Post Office
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rolt, L. T. C. The Inland Waterways of England.
Allen & Unwin
British Waterways Board. The Future of the Waterways
HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Inland Waterways
[Bowes Report] Cmnd 486 HMSO
Ulster Transport Authority. Annual Report For 1962-63
Belfast, UTA
British Independent Air Transport Association. Annual
Report For 1962-63 BIATA
Jackson, A. J. British Civil Aircraft, 1919-1960
Volume I Putnam
Volume II Putnam
Pudney, John. The Seven Skies Putnam
Taylor, John W. R. ABC of British Airports Ian Allan
Wheatcroft, Stephen. Air Transport Policy Michael Joseph
Aeroplane Directory of British Aviation Annual Temple Press
Annual Reports
Air Transport Licensing Board. For year ended 31st March
1964 HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1963-64 HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1962-63 HMSO
Aviation Safety Cmnd 1695 HMSO
Civil Aerodromes and Air Navigational Services
Cmnd 1457 HMSO
Crow, Duncan. The Post Office HMSO
Annual Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. (with Report of Directors)
For 1963-64 HMSO
Post Office Report and Accounts For 1963-64 HMSO
Communication Satellites Cmnd 2436 HMSO
Monarchs of All They Surveyed: The Story of the Post Office
Surveyors HMSO
Post Office Prospects 1964-65 Cmnd 2302 HMSO
The Status of the Post Office Cmnd 989 HMSO
300 Years of the GPO COIIHMSO
Britain and Commonwealth Telecommunications
Reference Paper R.5525 COI
14. FINANCE
Armstrong, F. E. The Book of the Stock Exchange. 5th edn
Pitman
Brittain, Sir Herbert. The British Budgetary System
Allen & Unwin
Chubb, B. The Control of Public Expenditure: Financial
Committees of the House of Commons
Oxford University Press
Clapham, Sir John. The Bank of England: A History,
1694-1914. 2 vols. Cambridge University Press
Crombie, Sir James. H.M. Customs and Excise
Allen & Unwin
Dacey, W. Manning. The British Banking Mechanism.
4th edn Hutchinson
1962
1964
1958
1964
1964
i960
i960
1959
1964
1964
1964
1964
1964
1963
1962
1961
1962
1964
1964
1964
1952
1964
1960
1961
1963
1957
i960
1952
1959
1962
1962
539
s. d.
35 °
7 6
6 6
1 o
free
63 o
63 °
30 o
2 6
25 o
42 o
3 o
9 6
7 o
2 6
9
2 o
1 6
8 6
1 6
2
free
free*
45 °
25 o
35 °
63 o
30 o
18 o
O' 00 ON
54°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Gibb, D. E. W. Lloyd’s of London Macmillan
Henderson, R. F. The new Issue Market and the Finance of
Industry Bowes & Bowes
Hicks, Ursula K. British Public Finances: Their Structure
and Developments, 1880-1952 Oxford University Press
Hobson, Sir Oscar. How the City Works. 7th edn
Dickens Press
Macrae, Norman. London Capital Market, and edn
Staples Press
Morgan, E. V. and Thomas, W. A. The Stock Exchange: Its
History and Functions Elek Books
Peacock, A. T. and Wiseman, J. The Growth of Public
Expenditure in the United Kingdom Oxford University Press
Powell, J. Enoch. Saving in a Free Society Hutchinson
Raynes, H. E. Insurance Oxford University Press
Rose, H. B. The Economic Background to Investment
Cambridge University Press
Sayers, R. S. Modern Banking. 6th edn
Oxford University Press
Bank of England : Quarterly Bulletin Bank of England
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Customs and Excise
For 1962-63 Cmnd 2216 HMSO
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1962-63 Cmnd 2285 HMSO
Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Royal Mint
For 1962 HMSO
Report of the Committee of Inquiry on Decimal Currency
(Halsbury Report) Cmnd 2145 HMSO
Report of the Committee on the Working of the Monetary
System [Radcliffe Committee] Cmnd 827 HMSO
Report of the Company Law Committee [Jenkins Report]
Cmnd 1749 HMSO
Control of Public Expenditure [Plowden Report]
Cmnd 1432 HMSO
Estimates 1964-65: Memorandum by the Financial Secretary
Cmnd 2290 HMSO
Estimates for Northern Ireland 1964-65 HMSO
Finance Accounts of the United Kingdom for the Financial
Year Annual For 1962-63 HMSO
Financial Statement Annual For 1964-65 HMSO
Financial Statistics Monthly HMSO
Government Expenditure Below the Line 1964-65
Cmnd 2295 HMSO
National Debt Annual For 1962-63 Cmnd 2262 HMSO
Northern Ireland Financial Statement Annual
For 1964-65 Belfast, HMSO
Public Expenditure in 1963-64 and 1967-68
Cmnd 2235 HMSO
Public Investment in Britain Cmnd 2177 HMSO
Reform of the Exchequer Accounts Cmnd 2014 HMSO
British System of Taxation
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5271 HMSO
British Financial Institutions
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5162 HMSO
Britain’s Financial Services for Overseas
Reference Paper R.4881 COI
s. d.
1957 25 o
1951 25 o
1954 10 6
1962 8 6
1957 25 o
1962 50 o
1961 30 o
i960 21 o
i960 10 6
1960 45 o
1964 30 o
free
1964 12 6
1964 16 o
1963 7 o
1963 15 o
1959 15 °
1962 12 6
1961 2 3
1964 6 6
1964 17 6
1964 4 6
1964 2 o
8 o
1964 1 6
1964 2 6
1964 1 3
1964 1 o
1963 2 6
1963 1 6
1962 4 6
1961 3 6
1961 free*
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Overseas Trade
and Payments
Internal Trade
The British Banking System
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5655 COI 1964
Rates of Import Duty and Purchase Tax in Britain
Reference Paper R.5281/64 COI 1964
Short Guide to Taxes in Britain
Reference Paper R.5590 COI 1963
15. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Camps, Miriam. Britain and the European Community
1955-63 Oxford University Press 1964
Conan, A. R. The Rationale of the Sterling Area Macmillan 1961
Feavearyear, A. E. The Pound Sterling
Oxford University Press 1963
Gillett Brothers Discount Company. The Bill on London
Chapman & Hall 1959
McMahon, Christopher. Sterling in the Sixties
Oxford University Press 1964
Overseas Development Institute. Development Guide
Allen & Unwin 1963
Political and Economic Planning. Commonwealth Pre¬
ference in the United Kingdom Allen & Unwin i960
Scott, M. FG. A Study of United Kingdom Imports
Cambridge University Press 1963
British Travel and Holidays Association Annual Report
For 1962-63 BTHA 1963
Aid to Developing Countries Cmnd 2147 HMSO 1963
United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1964 HMSO 1964
Accounts Relating to the Trade and Navigation of the
United Kingdom Monthly HMSO
Board of Trade Journal Weekly HMSO
Report on Overseas Trade Monthly HMSO
Britain and the European Communities
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5643 HMSO 1963
Financial and Technical Aid from Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5619 HMSO 1963
Britain as a Market for Developing Countries
Reference Paper R.5667 COI 1964
Britain’s Commodity Markets Reference Paper R.5362 COI 1962
Borrie, G. and Diamond, A. L. Consumer, Society and the
Law Penguin 1964
Fulop, Christina. Competition for Consumers
Institute of Economic Affairs/Deutsch 1964
Harris, R., Naylor, M. and Seldon, A. Hire Purchase in a
Free Society Institute of Economic Affairs 1961
Political and Economic Planning. Consumer Protection and
Enlightenment PEP i960
Stacey, N. and Wilson, A. The Changing Pattern of Dis¬
tribution Business PublicationslBatsford 1961
Yamey, B. S. Resale Price Maintenance and Shoppers Choice
Institute of Economic Affairs 1964
Co-operative Independent Commission Report
Co-operative Union 1958
Census of Distribution in 1961. In 13 vols. HMSO 1964
Family Expenditure Survey. Report for 1962-63 HMSO 1963
Final Report of the Committee on Consumer Protection
[Molony Report] Cmnd 1781 HMSO 1962
541
s. d.
free*
free*
free*
55 o
21 o
42 o
21 O
8 6
25 o
7 6
55 °
free
3 °
6 o
30 o
1 6
3 6
3 4
4 o
free*
free*
5 o
30 o
30 o
3 6
45 °
6 o
6 o
Various
15 o
18 o
542
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumer Protection and Guidance in Britain
Reference Paper R.4031 /64 COI
The Co-operative Movement in Britain
Reference Paper R.5434 COI
The Distributive Trades in Britain
Reference Paper R.5495 COI
16. LABOUR
Bayliss, F. J. British Wages Councils Blackwell
Clegg, H. Trade Union Officers Blackwell
Cotton, John. Trade Unions and the Law PEP
Feather, Victor. The Essence of Trade Unionism
Bodley Head
Greenfield, Cyril. Trade Unions and the Individual in
English Law. Institute of Personnel Management
International Labour Office. The Trade Union Situation
in the United Kingdom ILO
Ivens, Michael. Factors of Industrial Communication
Business Publications
Jephcott, P. with Seear, Nancy and Smith, John. Married
Women Working Allen & Unwin
McCarthy, W. E. J. The Closed Shop in Britain Blackwell
Marsh, John. Partners in Works Relations
Industrial Welfare Society
National Institute of Industrial Psychology. Joint
Consultation in British Industry Staples
Felling, Henry. A History of British Trade Unionism
Penguin
Political and Economic Planning. Trade Unions in a
Changing Society PEP
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. Building
Regulations Handbook. 5th edn RSPA
Silberston, D. M. Youth in a Technical Age Parrish
Thomson, D. Cleghorn. Management, Labour and Com¬
munity Pitman
Wellens, J. The Training Revolutions Evans Bros
Williams, Gertrude. Recruitment to Skilled Trades
Routledge
Annual Reports
Chief Inspector of Factories For 1963 Cmnd 2450 HMSO
Chief Inspector of Mines and Quarries For 1962 HMSO
Industrial Health. Report by the Chief Inspector of
Factories For 1962 Cmnd 2129 HMSO
Directory of Employers’ Associations, Trade Unions, Joint
Organisations, etc. HMSO
Employment Policy Cmd 6527 HMSO
Guides to Official Sources, No. 1. Labour Statistics HMSO
Industrial Relations Handbook, rev. edn HMSO
Organisation of the Industrial Health Service HMSO
People at Work HMSO
Report of the Committee on Selection and Training of
Supervisors HMSO
Report of the Industrial Safety Sub-Committee of the
National Joint Advisory Council HMSO
Report of the National Youth Employment Council on the
Work of the Youth Employment Service 1959-61 HMSO
Time Rates of Wages and Hours of Labour HMSO
s. d.
1964 free*
1962 free*
1963 free*
1963 25 o
1961 32 6
1964 45 o
1963 10 6
1963 12 6
1961 7 6
1963 45 o
1962 35 o
1964 37 6
i960 5 o
1952 21 o
1963 5 o
1963 5 o
1959 10 o
1959 21 o
1957 35 °
1963 12 6
1958 23 o
1964 8 o
1963 4 o
1963 4 o
1960 21 o
1944 I o
1958 s °
1961 5 6
1962 2 o
1963 2 6
1962 3 o
1956 1 6
1962 2 o
1964 21 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
543
Training for Skill //MS’O
Ministry of Labour Gazette Monthly HMSO
Labour Relations and Conditions of Work in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5120 HMSO
Health at Work Ministry of Labour I CO I
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4972 COI
Trade Unions in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5682 COI
1958
1962
1961
1962
1964
17. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
Beadle, Sir Gerald. Television; a Critical Review
Allen & Unwin 1903
Briggs, Asa. The History of Broadcasting in the United
Kingdom: Vol. 1 The Birth of Broadcasting
Oxford University Press 1961
British Broadcasting Corporation. British Broadcasting:
A Bibliography BBC 1958
 BBC Handbook 1964 BBC 1964
 The Public and the Programmes BBC i960
Crozier, Mary. Broadcasting Oxford University Press 195
Himmelweit, Hilda T. and others. Television and the Child:
an Empirical Study of the Effect on the Young
Oxford University Press 1958
Independent Television Authority. ITV 1964 A Comp re-
hensive Guide .... ITA 1,64
National Book League. Broadcasting in Britain
Cambridge University Press 1961
Paulu, Burton. British Broadcasting: Radio and Television in
the United Kingdom
University of Minnesota!Oxford University Press 1956
 British Broadcasting in Transition Macmillan 1961
Ross, Gordon. Television Jubilee W. H. Allen 19 1
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation
For 1962-63 Cmnd 2160 HMSO 1963
Independent Television Authority For 1962—63 HMSO 1963
Report of the Committee on Broadcasting [Pilkington]
Cmnd 1753 HMSO 1962
 Memorandum on the Cmnd i77° HMSO
 Further Memorandum Cmnd 1893 HMSO 1962
The Future of Sound Radio and Television [Short version of
the Pilkington Report] HMSO 192
Sound and Television Broadcasting in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5531 COI 1963
18. THE PRESS
Abrahams, Gerald. The Law for Writers and Journalists
Jenkins 1958
Dodge, J. D. and Viner, G. The Practice of Journalism
Heinemann 1963
Leaper, W. J. Copyright and Performing Rights Stevens 1957
Mansfield, F. J. The Complete Journalist. 3rd edn (revised
by Denis Weaver) Pitman 19 2
National Council for the Training of Journalists.
Training in Journalism. 5th edn The Council 1964
s. d.
2 6
2 6
3 6
free
free*
free*
21 o
42 o
5 °
6 o
8 6
10 6
50 o
7 6
3 6
48 o
35 °
21 o
11 6
4 6
18 o
1 3
1 o
2 o
free*
21 o
30 o
25 o
35 °
5 6
544
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Political and Economic Planning. The Work of Newspaper
Trusts PEP
Press Council. The Press and the People: Tenth Annual
Report The Council
Robbins, Alan Pitt. Newspapers To-day
Oxford University Press
Taylor, H. A. The British Press Barker
Williams, Francis. Dangerous Estate Longmans
 Journalism as a Career Batsford
Business and Specialised Publications of Great Britain
Council of Trade I Technical Press
The National Readership Survey
Institute of Practitioners in Advertising
Advertisers’ Aid. Bi-annual The Newspaper Society
Newspaper Press Directory 1964 Annual Benn Bros.
Willing’s Press Guide 1964 Annual Willing's Press Service
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book 1964 Annual Black
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press 1947-49
Cmd 7700 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press (1961-62)
[Shawcross Report] Cmnd 1811 HMSO
Training of Journalists UNESCO /HMSO
The British Press Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5572 COI
s. d.
1959 3 6
1963 2 6
1956 15 o
1961 21 o
1957 30 o
1962 12 6
1958 free
(limited)
1963 315 °
21 o
1964 80 o
1964 50 o
1964 12 6
1949 is 6
1962 13 o
1958 10 o
1963 free*
19. SPORT
Achilles Club. Modern Athletics, edited by H. A. Meyer
Oxford University Press
Altham, H. S. and Swanton, E. W. A History of Cricket.
5th edn Allen & Unwin
Golesworthy, Maurice. The Encyclopaedia of Association
Football Hale
Green, Geoffrey. The Official History of the F.A. Cup
Heinemann
Lonsdale, Lord, and Parker, Eric, Editors. The Lonsdale
Library [vols. on various sports'] Seeley Service
Owen, L. O. History of the Rugby Football Union Rugby Union
Amateur Athletic Association Handbook For 1964 AAA
Amateur Swimming Association Handbook ASA
Badminton Association of England Annual Handbook BA of E
English Bowling Association Official Year Book EBA
Football Association Year Book For 1964-65 Heinemann
The Golfers Handbook 1964 Golfers Handbook, Glasgozv
Horse and Hound Year Book 1962-63 Odhams
Lawn Tennis Association Handbook 1964 LTA
Official Rules of Sports and Games 1964-65 Kaye
Playfair Rugby Football For 1962-63 Playfair Books
Royal Automobile Club Guide and Handbook RAC
Ruff’s Guide to the Turf For 1964 Sporting Life
Wisden’s Cricketers’ Almanack Sporting Handbooks
Yachting World Annual 1963 Iliffe
1958 21 o
1962 35 o
1963 15 o
i960 21 o
1929 15 o
to to
1964 35 o
1956 18 o
1964 10 6
1964 8 6
1964 2 11
1964 2 6
1964 4 o
1964 30 o
1962 19 o
1964 7 6
1964 30 o
1962 7 6
1964 15 o
1964 50 o
1964 25 o
1963 55 o
Most of the organisations concerned with sport publish year books covering
results and records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or
monthly periodicals on sport are also published. In addition, some newspapers
issue annual surveys of sport.
INDEX
545
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references
As the main purpose of this book is to inform readers overseas about Britain,
organisations and societies are generally indexed under their subject matter rather than
under Association of, British, National, Royal, etc. (i.e. Accidents, Royal Society for
the Prevention of; Anglers, National Federation of). In cases where the first word is not
separable, however (e.g., Royal Air Force, Royal Society) entries will be found
appropriately.
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where
they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the
relevant subject headings.
Page
\ AAA see Athletics, Amateur Athletic
Association
ASLIB see Libraries, Association
of Special
Aberdeen:
industry . . . . . . • • 258
port . . . . • • • • 344
press . . .. . . • • 488
research . . 212, 215, 309, 343
studios (television) . . . . 481
University .. . . . . . . 165
Aberporth . . . . . . . . 115
Aberystwyth . . . . . . • • 165
Abingdon . . . . . . • • 280
Academic Awards, Council for
National . . . . . • • • 167
Accepting houses . . .. 406-7
Accession Council . . . . 3°> 34
Accident Prevention Movement . . 459
Accidents:
industrial . . . . . . 458-62
road users . . . . . . 372_3
Royal Society for the Prevention
of .. .. 373»459-6o
Accrington . . . . . . • • 256
Administrative Staff College . . 271
Administrative tribunals . . 91-2
Admiralty:
Board .. .. 112,117,260
constabulary .. .. . . 107
Court . . . . . . . . 86
tankers .. .. •• •• 353
See also Research, defence
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising . . . . . . 185, 440-1
Advisory Committee . . 478, 482
Association . . . . • • 44°
Institute of Practitioners in . . 440
Standards Authority . . . . 44°
Advisory bodies (to Government
Departments) . . . • • • 49
Advisory Committees and Councils
see relevant subject matter
Advocates .. .. .. 94. 95. 96
Aerodromes .. .. . • 382-3
Page
Aero-engines see Aircraft
Aerosol dispensers . . .. . . 44°
After-care:
Association, Central .. . . 102
prisoners . . . . .. 102, 103
young offenders . . .. 104, 105
After-Care Council . . .. 102-3
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
Advisory Council . . .. 343-4
Advisory Service, National . . 342
Colleges . . . . . . . . 343
Engineering, National Institute of 332
Executive Committees 332, 333, 334
Executive Officers. . .. ••334
Improvement Councils . . • • 334
Land Service . . . . • • 342
Land Tribunal . . . . • • 34°
Loans Fund . . . . • • 338
machinery industry 255, 298, 331-2
Mortgage Corporation . . 337, 408
Research Council 202, 203, 214, 342,
343
Research in Progress, Index of
Securities Corporation, Scottish
219
337,
408
469
wages boards
workers:
earnings . . . . • • 455. 469
numbers 242, 332, 445, 446, 447
protective legislation . . 460-1
Agriculture . . . . 242, 322-51
advisory services ..
animal disease control
annual reviews
area available for . .
artificial insemination (ai)
breed societies
chemicals, toxic
credit facilities for
crofts and crofters
crops 322, 323,
dairying
342-3
• • 34i
332, 334
• • 322
• • 328
..325
• •342
337- 8
338- 9
324, 325, 327, 330
323, 325, 327-8,
33L 335, 344
economics service and advice 218, 343
education and training . . 325, 343~4
546
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Agriculture—contd.
expenses and income . . 331-2
exports . . . . . . . . 328
farm tenure 322, 323, 324, 331, 337,
338, 339-40
farmers’ organisations . . 324-5
farms, number, size and types 6, 322-3
feedingstuffs 325, 327, 328, 336
fertilisers 309-10, 327, 330, 336, 343,
346
food supplies, home grown 242, 326,
333
fruit growing . . . . 330, 343
glasshouse crops . . . . . . 330
government support for 324, 332—41
grants see subsidies
grass 6, 322, 323-4, 325, 328, 336
hill farming . . 322, 336, 337
horticulture 330-1, 337, 34i» 344
land drainage . . . . 337, 339
ley farming . . . . 323-4, 336
lime  334
livestock . . 324, 325, 328-30, 331,
332, 335, 336, 337, 34i
machinery syndicates .. 331, 337
manpower see Agricultural workers
market gardening . . .. • • 33°
marketing boards and schemes 328,
335, 340-1
mechanisation .. 298,331-2,337
milk production and distribution 325,
327-8, 335
pedigree stockbreeding . . . . 332
pest clearance . . . . 341-2
plant health service . . . . 341
policy of Government 322-3, 334-5
price guarantees . . . . 332, 334-5
production . . 322, 323, 324-31
research see Research
rough grazing . . .. 322, 323
safety in . . . . . . 342, 400-1
smallholdings . . . . . . 338
soils . . . . .. 6, 322, 349
subsidies and grants 333, 334, 335,
336-7, 343
veterinary services 215, 341, 343
winter keep . . . . . . 336
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
Ministry of 51, 54, 145, 206, 214,
215, 263, 271, 328, 333, 334, 337,
338, 342, 343, 346, 347, 349, 461
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air:
Department see Defence, Ministry
of (Air)
Force see Royal Air Force
Board .. .. . . .. 124
operators’ certificate . . . . 384
pollution, prevention of 73, 145, 185
Registration Board 378, 384, 461
safety . . . . 378, 383-4, 461
Traffic Control Services . . 384-5
Training College . . . . . . 384
Air—contd.
Training Corps
Transport see Civil Aviation
Transport Licensing Board
Airbrokers Association
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry
Page
127,177
52, 378,
382
. . 382
and Armament
Establishment
carriers
civil
Service
255, 256,
304, 305-6
Experimental
 US
 ii7
305, 306, 379, 380, 385
1, 116, 118, 124-5, 306, 385
• • 375
Aire and Calder Navigation
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Airwork Services Training
Albemarle Committee
Albert Hall, Royal
Aldeburgh Festival
Aldermaston
Aldermen
Aliens
Almoners
Alpine Club
Ambulance services
Amenities preservation societies
Amersham
Anancaun field station
Ancient Monuments Advisory
Council
Ancient Monuments Boards
Anglers, National Federation of
Anglesey .. .. .. 1, 115,
Anglican Communion
See also Church of England
Animal Health
Animals, import of . .
Antibiotics
Anti-Locust Research Centre
Antiquities, National Museum of . .
Antrim
Appellate courts 44, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89,
90, 93
Apprenticeship . . . . 449, 473
Approved schools (young offenders) 62,
103, 104
Approved Woodlands Scheme . . 350
Aquatic Sports . . . . 504-5
Arbitration boards and tribunals 469, 471
Archbishops . . 34, 46, 194, 198, 200
Architects . . . . . . . . 229
in Scotland, Royal Incorporation of 229
Institute of British .. . . 229
Institute of Registered .. . . 229
Architecture .. .. .. 228-31
Archives, National Register of ..231
Ardglass . . . . .. . . 344
Ardingly . . . . .. .. 206
Area Boards:
electricity . . . . 259, 280, 281
gas . . . . . . 259, 286, 287
384
175
239
240
216
7i
15, 16, 54
133, 149, 154, 155
..501
129, 150, 152
185-6
. 216
. 218
229
228
504
349
196
34i
5i3
220
221
225
312
INDEX
Page
Area Colleges see Colleges, technical
Area Consultative Councils:
electricity . . . . . . . . 281
gas . . .. . . . . . . 286
Armagh . . . . .. . . 225
Armed Forces .. 117-27, 130
chaplains . . . . . . . . 193
commissioned ranks in .. .. 114
equipment, see Defence
national service in .. 113-4, 120
overseas commitments and deploy¬
ment 111-2, 113, 117, 121, 124, 125
participation in civil defence . . 130
pay and pensions .. .. .. 114
police of . . . . . . . . 107
pre-Service organisations 120, 124, 127
recruitment and training 113-4, 119-2°>
122-3, i26, 130
research and development, see Defence
reserves .. 114, 120, 123, 127, 130
resettlement service .. .. 114
staff colleges . . . . . . 115
strength . . . . . . . . 114
voting at elections . . . . 36
Arms and ammunition import con¬
trols .. .. .. •• 423
Army .. .. .. 114, 120-4, 13°
Board . . . . . . 112, 120
Cadet Force . . . . 124, 177
Emergency Reserve . . . . 123
Staff College . . . . . . 115
Arrest, law relating to . . . . 34
Art:
and Artists’ societies . . . . 226
collections and exhibitions 224-6
colleges and schools . . 224-7
Exhibitions Bureau . . . . 226
galleries . . . . . . . . 224
National Exhibition of Children’s 226
Royal College of . . . . . . 226
Society for Education through . . 227
Arthur D. Little Research Institute 213
Arts:
Council of Great Britain 222, 223, 224
547
Page
Arts—contd.
Council of Northern Ireland 223, 224
Institute of Contemporary . . 226
promotion of . . . . . . 222
Royal Society of . . .. . . 207
Ashford .. .. .. .. 182
Ashmolean Museum . . . . 225
Ashridge College . . .. . . 272
Assay Offices . . . . .. 308
Assizes . . . . . • • • 83
Associated British Picture Corpora¬
tion .. . . •. •• 236
Associated Press . . .. . . 491
Association football see Football
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy . . . . . . . . 218
Athletics .. . . .. 5OI_2
Amateur Athletic Association 5°1-2
British Amateur Athletic Board . . 502
Athlone Fellowship Scheme . . 173
ATLAS computer . . . . . . 217
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
Atomic Energy Authority (UK) 58, 113,
115, 119, 205, 216, 219, 220, 259,
283, 301, 43i
Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment (aere) . . . . •• 216
Attendance centres (young offenders)
104-5
Attorney-General . . 46, 56, 84
Audience research (broadcasting)48o, 483
Auditor General see Comptroller
Authors, Society of . . . . . • 232
Automation 269-70, 303, 387, 388, 389,
437
Automobile Association (aa) . . 389
Automobile Club, Royal (rac) . . 509
Auxiliary Fire Service .. 129, 130
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Aviation, Ministry of 51-2, 79, H3, 115,
205, 215, 260, 263, 306, 378, 379,
382, 383, 384, 385, 461
Avonmouth . . .. • • 297> 358
Aycliffe . . . . • • . . 182
BBC see British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration
BCG see Vaccination
BEA see British European Airways
BOAC see British Overseas Airways
Corporation
Babies see Maternity Services
Bach Choir . . . . . . . . 239
Bacon Curing . . . . ..316
Bacteriological laboratory services . . 149
Badminton . . . . . . . . 510
Badminton Park . . . . . . 507
Bail 85
Bakerian lectureship .. . . 207
Balance of payments 252-3, 352, 427-33
Ballet and ballet companies. . 239, 241
Ballistic Missile Early Warning
Station .. .. .. 112, 126
Ballylumford
Baltic Exchange
Bangor
Bank Holidays
Bank notes
Bank of England
Bank rate
Banking system
British Bankers’ Association
Baptist Church
Barristers
Barrow
. . 281
355, 382, 426
165, 218
 458
403, 405, 5ii
259, 392, 402-4, 407,
408, 422, 426
251,402
402-7
Basildon
Basket-ball
Bath . .
Batley. .
Beauty, areas of natural
• 405
• • 197
• • 94, 95, 96
. . 256
.. 182
..510
223, 240, 255
. . 256
. . 184
548
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Beaverbrook Newspapers
Bedford .. 115
Beer, consumption of
Belfast:
airport
art, drama and music
Page
486, 487,
488
256, 306, 318, 383
..317
382, 383
. 224, 225,
234, 239
Corporation . . 78, 80, 282, 376
electricity supply . . . . 281, 282
Fire Brigade . . . . . . 80-1
Harbour Commissioners . . • • 359
housing . . . . .. . . 186
industries . . 254, 258, 279, 306,
3i7, 334
Museum and Art Gallery
Newspaper Society
police
population . .
225
481
no
20
489
359
9i
186
34i
481
376
343
233
35°
284, 286
272, 375
497. 506, 507
• 35°
316-7
press
port. .
Recorder of
Regional Survey
research
studios (broadcasting)
transport (passenger)
University . . 165, 210, 230, 231
Belgrade Theatre, Coventry
Benmore
Berkeley
Berkhamsted . .
Betting .. . . 23,
Betws-y-Coed
Beverages industries
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billiards
Bills, parliamentary
Money Bills
Private Bills
procedure ..
Public Bills
Royal Assent to
Bingo . .
Biology
Institute of
Birds . .
Birkenhead
Birmingham:
art, drama and music
39,
. • 510
39-40
39, 40
40, 72
39, 4°, 51
39-40
3i, 40
• • 23
206, 215
. . 206
7, 26, 503, 513
.. 256
College of Technology
housing
Industrial Safety Groups
industries . .
Mosque
museums . .
newspapers
population ..
studios (broadcasting)
telephone services. .
transport ..
University ..
Birth rate
225, 233, 234,
239, 240
.. 168
. . 189
•• 459
255, 264, 308
.. 199
219, 225
.. 486
16, 20, 182
.. 481
•• 389
368, 372
165, 209, 210
9-11, 12, 156
Page
Births, registration of . . 8, 9-10
Biscuit industry . . .. ..315
Bishops . . 34, 46, 194, 196, 198
Blackburn . . .. . . . . 256
Blackpool . . . . .. . . 233
Blaenau Ffestiniog . . . . 283, 284
Blairgowrie . . . . .. .. 330
Bletchley .. . . . . . . 182
Blind:
broadcast receiving licences for . . 475
employment and training. . 452, 453
National Library for .. 140, 231
Royal National Institute for the
132, 140
welfare  132, 140-1
Blood Transfusion Service, National 149
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Board of Trade see Trade
Bodleian Library .. . . . . 230
Boilers and boilerhouse plant . . 300
Bolton . . . . . . 233, 256
Book League, National .. . . 232
Book Society .. .. .. .. 232
Books . . . . .. 232, 319—20
See also Libraries
Booksellers’ Association . . . . 232
Borough Councils see Local Govern¬
ment, councils
Borstal institutions . . 99, 100, 101,
103, 105
Boston Spa .. .. .. 219, 230
Botany . . .. . . . . 206
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew .. 206
Bothamsell . . . . . . . . 278
Boundary Commissions . . . . 35
Bournemouth . . . . 239, 255
Bowls . . . . . . . . . . 501
English Bowling Association . . 501
Boxing . . . . .. 507-8
Amateur Boxing Association . . 508
British Boxing Board of Control. . 508
Boy Scouts Association . . 176, 501
Boys’ Brigade .. .. .. 176
Boys’ Clubs, National Association of
176-7
Bracknell . . . . . . 192, 205
Bradford . . 16, 20, 168, 233, 256
Bradwell . . .. . . .. 284
Bread and flour confectionery indus¬
try  315
Bretby . . .. . . .. 278
Brewing industry . . . . 316-7, 330
Brickmaking . . . . . . ..3x8
Bridges and tunnels . . . . 73, 370
Bridleways . . .. .. .. 184
Brighton . . . . 165, 225, 255, 383
Bristol:
art and drama . . 225, 234, 235, 236
College of Technology .. .. 168
design exhibition . . . . . . 227
INDEX
549
Bristol—contd.
industries . .
museum and art gallery
Physics Laboratory
population ..
port of
Steamship Owners’ Association
studios (broadcasting)
telephones
Page
255, 306, 317
. . 225
. . 210
. . 19, 20, 255
354, 358, 359
354
481
389
University . . . . 165, 210, 235, 236
Zoo  219
Britannia Royal Naval College . . 119
British Academy . . . . . . 232
British Army of the Rhine (BAOR)
121, 123
British Association for the Advance¬
ment of Science . . . . 206, 208
British Broadcasting Corporation 171-2,
186, 236, 239, 259, 475, 476, 477,
478, 479-8i, 482, 483, 484
orchestras . . . . . . ..231
Television Enterprises . . . . 481
See also Broadcasting and Television
British Council 173, 222, 230, 233, 235
British European Airways 259, 377,
378, 380, 381
British Isles . . . . . . . . i~7
area.. .. .. •• •• 1
climate . . . . . . 4~5» 6
definition of . . .. . . 1
fauna . . . . • • • • 6-7
flora . . .. . • • • 6
geology and topography .. . . 1-4
languages .. .. .. 8, 20-1
soil and vegetation . . 6, 322
See also Population
British Legion . . . . . . 139
British Museum . . 220, 224, 230
Natural History . . 219, 224, 230
British Overseas Airways Corpora¬
tion . . 262, 377, 378, 379-80, 381
British Railways Board 362, 363,
364, 365-7
workshops .. .. . . . . 3°5
See also Railways
British Standards Institution 270, 441
British Travel and Holidays Asso¬
ciation . . . . •• 4I9> 512
British United Press. . .. • • 491
For other organisations with British
as first word of their title see rele¬
vant subject
Broadcasting . . 171-2, 259, 475-84
advertisements . . .. • • 482
advisory councils and committees
477, 478, 482, 483
Page
Broadcasting—contd.
audience research . . . . 480, 483
colour transmission . . .. 483
educational 171-2, 476, 479, 482, 484
Eurovision .. . . . . 481, 484
international relations . . 480, 483-4
line definition . . . . .. 481
monitoring. . . . . . 477, 480
National Broadcasting Councils . . 477
political .. . . . . 479, 482
relations with Government depart¬
ments 475, 476, 477, 480, 482, 483
religious . . 476, 478, 479, 482
research .. .. .. 211,483
transcription service . . . . 480
transmission systems . . 481, 483
wire .. . . . . . . 482
See also Employment, Licences
and Television
Bromley . . . . . . . . 233
Brush Manufacturers’ Research
Association . . .. . . 212
Buchanan medal . . . . . . 207
Buckingham Palace art gallery . . 225
Buddhist Community .. 199, 200
Budget . . . . 395-9, 4°°, 4°!
Building:
Agency, National .. . . .. 292
and civil engineering 188, 189, 212,
247, 261, 263, 291-4
contractors’ plant . . .. . . 299
employment in . . . . 261, 292
by local authorities 188, 190-1, 292
new towns, progress in . . 182-3
overseas .. . . . . 293-4
private . . 188, 190, 191, 292, 293
production . . . . . . 292, 293
reconstruction . . . . • • 183
Research Station . . 189, 212, 294
societies .. .. . . 196, 411-2
See also Education, Housing and
Research
Buildings:
Record, National .. . . .. 228
Society for the Protection of
Ancient . . . . .. 186, 229
Burghs see Local Government
Burnham Committees .. . . 162
Burnley .. . . .. .. 256
Burton . . . . . . . . 283
Bury . . . . .. . . .. 256
Bus and coach services 362, 363, 370,
372, 375
Buxton .. .. . • .. 460
By-elections . . . . .. 35, 36
By-laws .. .. .. .. 54
CDC see Commonwealth Develop¬
ment Corporation
COI see Information, Central Office of
CRO see Commonwealth Relations
Office
Cabinet  47-8, 112
Cabinet—contd.
Office . . .. . . . . 50
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . 388, 390
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated) industry 304
Cairngorms . . .. . . 184, 501
55°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Calder Hall . . . . 216, 283, 284
Caledonian Canal . . . . . . 374
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation . . 223
Cambridge University 44, 119, 122,
165, 166, 193, 210, 218, 344
Cavendish Laboratory . . . . 210
dramatic society .. . . .. 235
Institute of Criminology . . . . 106
Library . . .. .. . . 230
museums . . . . . . . . 225
Observatory . . . . 217, 218
Press . . . . . . . . 232
sport . . . . . . 498, 504
Cambridgeshire Village Colleges . . 171
Canals . . . . 256, 359, 374-5
See also Inland waterways
Cancer research . . 144, 155, 213
British Empire Cancer Campaign
155, 213
Canning industry
Canteens . . . .
Canterbury, Province of
Canterbury (University of Kent)
Canvey Island
Capenhurst . .
Capital Issues Committee
Capital punishment . .
Caravans
Cardiff
colleges
Mosque
museums
population
port. .
studios
Carlisle
198, 257,
. 316
• 464
• 194
• 165
. 288
. 216
■ 43°
98-9
22
366, 459, 489
165, 168
• • 199
• • 225
20
355, 359
. . 481
368, 370, 481
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 186,
210, 223, 226, 240
Carpets industry . . 256, 258, 314
Catering trades . . 439, 462, 464
Catholic:
Child Welfare Council . . . . 143
Church see Roman Catholic
Marriage Advisory Council . . 132
Young Men’s Society . . . . 176
Youth Clubs, National Council for 176
Cats    25,513
Cavendish Laboratory see Cambridge
Cement industry . . . . 318-9
Censorship:
films . . . . . . . . 238
British Board of Film Censors 238
Plays . .  234
Census of Distribution 434, 435, 436,
437, 438, 439
8, 9, 15, 17,
19-21, 193
260, 295
83, 84
Censuses of Population
Census of Production
Central Criminal Court
Central Institutions (Scotland) 168, 209
Central Statistical Office . . 50, 266
Central Treaty Organisation (cento)
hi, 112, 173
Page
Cephalosporins . . . . . . 220
Chamber of Shipping . . 353, 354
Chambers of Commerce . . . . 263
Association of British . . . . 263
Council of Scottish . . . . 263
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
45, 94
Chancellor of the Exchequer 45, 50,
52, 393, 395
See also Finance, Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court) 86
Channel Islands:
airports . . . . . . . . 382
area. . . . . . . . . . j
bailiwicks . . . . . . • • 33
holidays (statutory) . . . . 458
language 21
legislature . . . . . . 27, 33
population . . . . . . 9, 18
press . . . . .. . . 489
relationship with UK and Crown 27,
30, 33, 44, 45, 54
388
22
54
telephone system
tourists to . .
war pensioners
See also Guernsey and Jersey
Channel Tunnel . . . . . . 367
Chapelcross . . . . . . 216, 283
Charitable Societies see Voluntary
Organisations
Charities, Central Register of . . 131
Charity Commission .. . . 131
Charter services (aircraft) . . 378, 380-2
Chatham . . . . . . . . 118
Cheltenham 223, 232, 240, 255, 278, 506
Chemical Laboratory, National . . 211
Chemical plant industry . . 300-1
Chemicals industries 211, 255, 308-10
Chemistry, Royal Institute of . . 206
Cheshire 210, 218, 254, 256, 288,
3i4, 389
Chessington . .
Chester
Chest Radiological Service
Chichester
Chief of the Defence Staff
Chief Rabbi ..
Chiefs of Staff Committee
Child Care Inspectorate
Children:
adoption of . . . . 83, 143-4
allowances for . . . . 134, 136-7
art, drama, films and music 226, 234,
238-9, 240
219
219
149
233
112
199
112-3
• M3
child guidance centres
Children’s Homes, National
Council of Associated . .
cinema attendance and clubs
deprived of home life, care of
employment
foster homes
163
handicapped
• 143
• 238
142-3
457, 462-3
. . 142
150, 154, 160-1
INDEX
551
Page
Children—contd.
National Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to . . . . . . 143
nurseries . . .. . . . . 151
orphans . . . . i39> I42, 143
See also Education, Health, Juven¬
ile Courts, Probation, Welfare,
and Youth
Children’s Film Foundation . . 238
China manufacture . . . . 255, 3i8
Chiropodists . . . . • • • • i55
Chocolate and Confectionery 257, 315
198
200
Christian Scientists
Christians and Jews, Council of
Church
Army
Assembly . .
Commissioners
in Ireland (Presbyterian)
in Wales (Anglican)
Lads’ Brigade
of England.
appointment of senior clergy 46, 194
archbishops
bishops . .
Children’s Society
colleges . .
Convocations
Council for Social Wor
dioceses . .
Ecclesiastical Courts
finance . .
relations with Monarch
relations with State
schools . . . . 158,
Youth Council ..
of Ireland (Anglican)
of Scotland (Presbyterian)
. . 132
194-5
196, 322
• • i97
. . 196
. . 176
193-6. 200
46, 194
46, 194
132, 143
• • i95
• • 194
. • 132
194, I95
• • i95
195-6
193-4
• 194
63, 193, 195
176
196
196—7, 200
3L
Committee on Social Service 132, 143
of Wales (Presbyterian) .. 197
Churches . . . . • • 193—200
British Council of. . . . . • 200
co-operation between .. . . 200
Council of Christians and Jews . . 200
Industrial Council. . . . • • 451
of Christ . . . . • • • • i98
preservation of historic . . . . 230
welfare work . . . . 132, 143
See also Clergy and the individual
denominations
c.i.f. (definition) . . . • • • 4I4
Cinemas . . . • • • 24, 236-9
Cinematograph Films Council . . 238
Cirencester . . . . • • ■ ■ 344
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux . . . . 132
Citizenship . . .. • • 16, 52
Civic Trust . . . . ■ • • • 229
Civil Aviation . . S1-2, 259, 377-85
aircrew qualifications . . • ■ 384
airmail services .. . • • • 387
airports . . . . 205, 382-3, 384
British European Airways 377, 378,
380
Page
Civil Aviation—contd.
British Overseas Airways
Corporation . . 377, 378, 379_8o
charter operations. . . . 378, 380-2
corporations 259, 377, 378-80, 381
Eurocontrol . . . . • • 385
helicopter service . . . . • • 383
independent airline companies 380-2
licences . . . . • • • • 378
ministerial responsibility for 378, 379,
382, 383, 384
navigational aids . . . . 384-5
private flying . . . . . . 382
safety measures . . . . 383-5
traffic control . . . . 205, 384-5
training . . . . • • • • 384
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil Courts . . . . . . 86-8, 90
Civil Defence . . . . 127-30
Corps .. .. 128,129,130
Regional Commissioners . . . . 128
School . . . . •• •• I3°
Staff College . . . . • • 13°
Civil Engineering . . . . 291-4
Contractors, Federation of • • 459
Research Association . . . . 294
See also Building
Civil Service . . .. • • 64-9, 115
Arbitration Tribunal . . • • 471
Commission . . . • . . 64
conditions of service .. . . 68
earnings 68, 456
staff associations . . 68, 467, 471
Clarendon Laboratory and Press see
Oxford
Clearways . . . • • • • ■ 373
Clergy.. 46, 193, W4, *95, 196, 198-9
disqualified for House of Commons 36,
194
in House of Lords . . 34, W4
Clerk:
of the House of Commons . . 35
of the Justiciary. . . • • • 93
of the Parliaments . . . • 35
of Session . . . . • • • • 93
Climate . . . . • • 4-5, 6
Climbers’ Club . . • ■ • • 501
Climbing Clubs, Association of
Scottish . . . . • • • • 501
Clinical Research Board . . • • 155
Clinics .. ..150,151,152,153
Clock and watch industry . . . . 302
Clothing industry . . 256, 295, 314
Clubs:
social . . . • • • 24-5
sports see Sports
youth . . . • •• 176-8
Clyde Navigation Trust . . • • 359
Clydeside 16, 20, 257-8, 306, 344, 505
See also Glasgow
Coal:
British Coal Utilisation Research
Association . . . . . . 278
552
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Coal—contd.
coalfields and mines 2, 244, 255, 256,
257, 273, 275-8
consumers’ councils . . . . 275
consumption . . 273, 275, 276-7
exports and imports . . 276-7
industry . . .. . . 263, 275-8
mechanisation .. . . . . 276
National Coal Board 212, 259, 268,
275-6, 277, 278, 322, 460, 472
production and manpower . . 276
research .. . . .. . . 278
Research Establishment . . . . 278
Tar Research Association . . 278
Utilisation Council . . .. 288
See also Gas and Mines and quarries
Coalminers:
earnings 455
numbers employed 277, 445, 446
safety and welfare. . . . .. 460
Coastal Shipping . . . . . . 364
Coastguard Service . . . . . . 356
Cockenzie . . . . . . .. 283
Co-education see Education, schools,
types of
Coffee bars .. . . . . . . 25
Coinage .. . . 403, 404, 511
Coke consumption and production 287
Colchester (University of Essex) . . 165
Coleshill . . .. . . . . 288
Collective Agreements .. . . 454
Colleges:
Advanced Technology 164, 167, 168,
169, 170, 209, 211, 271, 294
Agricultural . . .. 343-4
Air Training
Art . .
Imperial
National
•• 384
226-7
166, 167
.. 168
Residential (adult education) . . 171
Services .. 119-20, 122-3, I26
Staff . . .. .. 115, 130
Teacher Training 157, 162-3, I64, 167
Technical . . 168, 169-70, 209
Theological .. .. . . 195
within Universities .. 165-6
Village .. . . . . .. 171
See also Education
Colombo Plan . . 60, 173, 432, 450
Colonial Development and Welfare
Acts .. .. . . .. 432
Colonial Office 45, 46, 52, 213, 351
Combine harvesters . . 227, 331
Combined Cadet Force 124, 127, 177
Commercial Education see Education
Commercial premises, health and
welfare in . .
Commission for New Towns
Commissioners:
of Irish Lights
of Northern Lighthouses
of Police
Committees see relevant subjects
462-4
. . 182
•• 356
•• 356
109, no
.. 221
• • 15
450-1, 514
Page
Commodity markets .. . . 426
Common Market see European
Economic Community
Commons see House of Commons
Commons, Open Spaces and Foot¬
paths Preservation Society . . 186
Commonwealth:
aid to   431-3
Agricultural Bureaux and Institutes 219,
221, 343
British Commonwealth Scientific
Committee
citizens
employment of . .
co-operation:
broadcasting . . . . . . 483
defence .. in, 112, 115, 121, 124
education 60, 172-4, 222, 433
financial and trade 408, 420-1,
426, 427, 430, 431-2
research 213, 214, 219, 220, 221,
222, 223
social service agreements 133-4
technical. . . . .. 60, 432-3
See also research above
Development Corporation . . 432
Development Finance Company
Limited . . .. .. 408, 430
Education Conference . . .. 173
Education Liaison Unit . . • • 173
Games .. .. 502, 507, 508
Geological Liaison Office .. 221
immigration 15, 450-1, 513, 514
Institute . . .. . . . . 230
member nations .. .. . . 28
Press Union . . . . . . 491
Queen as Head of. . .. 28-30
Relations and Colonies,
Secretary of State for see Colonial
Office and Commonwealth
Relations Office
Relations Office 45, 46, 52, 66, 213
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 173
Society, Royal .. . . . . 230
Sugar Agreement .. .. • • 336
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Community Associations, National
Federation of .. . . .. 171
Community centres . . . . 174, 175
Comptroller and Auditor General . . 394
Computers . . . . . . 220, 303
Concert halls . . . . . . 239
Confectionery industries see Food
Congregational Church . . . . 197
Conservative Party . . .. 37, 38
Consolidated Fund . . .. 392, 401
Constabulary, Inspectors of . . 108
Construction equipment . . . . 297,
299, 300
Construction industries . . 291—4
Consumer expenditure see Expen¬
diture
INDEX
Page
553
Page
Consumer goods industries see
individual industries
Consumer protection .. 441"2
Consumers’ Association .. . . 441
Consumers’ Councils and Com¬
mittees (nationalised industries) 168,
275
Contemporary Art Society . . . . 266
Contractors’ plant .. . . ... 299
Conurbations.. .. .. 18, 19-20
Convalescent homes . . 148, 154
Convocations (Church) . . . . 194
Coolkeeragh .. .. .. . . 281
Co-operative:
banks .. .. .• •• 4°6
marketing organisations . . . . 340
Party . . . . . . • • 37
societies 406, 434, 435, 437, 438-9
Union .. . . .. • • I71
Wholesale Society. . 258, 406, 439
Copley medal . . . . • • 207
Corby  182, 256
Coronation . . . . 3°> S1. I94
Coroners’ Courts .. . . 9T> 95
Corporation of Trinity House 356, 359
Corporations, public see Public cor¬
porations
Corrective training . . 98, 100, 102
Correspondence courses . . . . 170
Cost of living see Price, relation to
income
Cottam . . . . .. • • 283
Cotton Board . . . . . . 311
Cotton Exchange, Liverpool . . 311
Cotton industry . . . . 256, 311
Cotton, Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association . . . . 311
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research see Research
Councils of Counties, boroughs, etc.,
see Local Government
Councils, Other, see relevant subject
Counsel see Law, legal profession
Counsellers of State . . . . . • 32
Counties .. . . L 7°> 72
Country planning see Planning
Country sports .. . . 5°2-4
County:
Agricultural Executive Com¬
mittees . . 332, 333-4
Court Rule Committee . . . . 93
courts . . . . • • .. 86
Court:
of Appeal . . .. 86, 87, 90, 94
of Common Council . . 107, 108
of Criminal Appeal 84, 90, 97
Court—contd.
of the Presbytery .. .. .. 196
of Session (Scotland) 88, 90, 92, 93,
94, 97
of the Synod .. .. • • 196
Courtauld Institute .. . . .. 227
Scientific and Educational Trust
Fund .. . . • • • • 210
Courts-martial .. 57, 92-3, 95
Courts of Inquiry (Labour) . . 470
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden Market . . 341, 434
Covent Garden Opera .. .. 241
Coventry 20, 225, 233, 240, 255, 306
University of Warwick .. .. 165
Cranwell . . .. • • • • I26
Crawley .. • • • • . . 182
Crewe . . • • ■ • • • 3^6
Crick 368
Cricket  389, 498-9
Criminal:
Courts . . . . 83-6, 88-9, 90, 91
Injuries Compensation Board . . 92
investigation departments 109,110
records . . .. • • .. no
Criminals, treatment of .. 97, io6
Crofters’ Commission . . 334, 338
Croonian lectureship .. • • 207
Cross-channel services . . 359, 3^3
Crown:
Agents for Oversea Governments
and Administrations .. . . 67
Courts . . • • • • 83-4
Dependencies . . • • 1, 27, 30
Estate Commissioners . . • - 185
Land .. • • • • I85,322
Office  63
Crown, The see Monarchy
Croydon . . .. •• •• 233
Cruachan . . . • • • •• 283
Crusade of Rescue . . . • . . 132
Crystal Palace .. • • 49^, S02
Culbin .. • • • ■ • • 349
Culham research centre . . . . 216
Cumbernauld . . • • 182, 258
Currency transactions 402—5, 422, 424—5,
426, 427-3L 511
Customs and Excise, Board of 49, 52,
238, 396, 398, 399, 513
Customs and Excise duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 257, 307
Cwmbran . . . • • • • • I82
Cycle and motor cycle industry . . 305
Cycling . . • • • • • • 599
British Cycling Federation . . 5°9
Cyclists’ Touring Club .. .. 5°9
D DSIR see Research, Scientific and
Industrial, Department of
Dagenham .. .. . • • • 255
Daily Mail and General Trust 486, 487
Dale (Henry) Research Professorship 207
Dancing . . .. 24, 241, 495, 502
Dancing—contd.
English Folk Dance and Song
Society .. • • • • • • 240
Royal Academy of Dancing . . 241
Royal Ballet and School . . . . 241
Danesbury .. . • • • • • 217
554
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
257, 36s, 37°
319, 370
.. 119
256
208
207
182
293
141
132
Darlington
Dartford
Dartmouth
Darwen
Darwin lectureship
Darwin medal
Dawley
Davyhulme . .
Deaf
Royal National Institute for the
Death:
causes of .. .. .. 10-11
duty see Taxation, estate duty
benefit and grant .. 136, 137, 138-9
rate   10-n
sentence .. .. .. 98-9
Deaths, registration of . . . . 8-9
Decca Air and Marine Navigational
System . . . . .. .. 385
Deer stalking .. .. . . 503
Defence .. .. .. in—130
bases 112, 117, 118, 121, 124
Civil see Home Defence
Committee on, and Oversea Policy 112
Council . . .. 112, 117, 120, 124
expenditure .. .. 111,113
manpower .. .. 113-5, 119, 121
Ministry of 45, 52-3, 79, 112, 113,
US, 117, 120-1, 124, 130, 204,
205, 215, 384
Air Department 53, 112, 113, 124
Army Department 53, 112, 113,
120-1
Navy Department .. 53,112,
113, 117
nuclear in, 112, 113, 115-6, 118,
119, 125, 127, 128
overseas commitments and deploy¬
ment 111-2, 117, 121, 123, 124
policy . . . . .. 111-3
research .. .. .. 115-6, 119
Research Policy Committee . . 204
Secretary of State for see Ministry
of above
Strategic Reserve .. .. ..112
US co-operation 111-2, 115-6, 118,
122, 126
weapons and equipment . . 111,112,
115-6, 117-8, 119, 121-2, 124-6
See also Armed Forces and
Research
Delegated legislation .. 41-2
Demography . . . . . . 7-26
Dental services .. 146, 147, 163
General Dental Council . . 154, 163
Dentists ,. . . 149-50, 153, 154
British Dental Association . . 154
Departments, see Government,
departments of, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and individual titles
Derby   19, 256
Derby, The . . . . . . . . 506
Derbyshire village college . . . . 171
Page
.. 227
. . 227
227, 270, 441
98, 103, 105
.. 310
Design:
and Industries Association
Centres
Council of Industrial
Detention centres
Detergents
Development:
areas and districts . . 264-6, 447
bonds, national . . ., . . 405
Corporation for Wales .. 266, 423
Corporations of New Towns 181-3
councils . . .. .. .. 266
See also Economic Development
Council, National
Organisations see Industry
plans (towns) . . .. 182-3
Devonport .. . . .. . . 118
Dewsbury .. .. .. 256,314
Didcot . . . . .. .. 366
Diesel traction see Railways, reorgan¬
isation
Dioceses see Church of England
Diphtheria see immunisation
Diplomatic Service . .
Director of Public Prosecutions
Disabled:
Central Council for the
employment of 141, 451, 452,
rehabilitation of ..
Welfare Services for
Disablement:
benefit
pensions
Resettlement Service
Disarmament
.. 66
56, 84
.. 132
453
. . 148
140-1
57, 138
57, 139
148, 451-2,
453
.. in
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies 102
Discount houses . . .. . . 437
Discount market . . . . .. 407
Distributive trades . . . . 433-42
District Councils (Scotland) 70, 71, 72
Divorce Court . . . . 87, 90
Dock and Harbour Authorities’
Association .. .. .. 360
Dock workers . . ., 360, 455
National Dock Labour Board .. 360
Docks see Ports
Dockyards, naval .. 115, 117, 118
Doctor Barnardo’s Homes .. .. 143
Doctors:
Appointed Factory .. 462, 463
British Medical Association . . 154
General Practitioner Services .. 147
in industry . . .. .. 463
in National Health Service 146, 147-8,
153, 154-5
in Navy . . . . .. . . 119
Doggett’s Coat and Badge . . .. 504
D°gs  25, 513
Domesday Book . . . . . . 224
Domestic electrical appliances in¬
dustry .. . . .. .. 304
Domestic help 22, 141, 151-2, 446, 450
INDEX
555
Domestic proceedings (court)
Doncaster
Dorking
Dounreay
Dover
Dracones
Dragon (reactor)
Drainage boards
Drama
Associations, Standing Conference
of
Central School of Speech Training
and Dramatic Art
League, British
Page
83, 492
283, 506
. . 213
117, 119, 216
255, 368, 481
. . 220
. . 216
• • 339
232-6
Page
Drinks industries .. .. 295,316-7
Duchy of Cornwall . . . . . . 185
Duchy of Lancaster . . .. 45, 94
Dudley . . . . . . . . 219
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme 177
Duke of Edinburgh’s Prize for
235
235
235
Royal Academy of Dramatic Art . . 235
Dramatists, League of British
235
Elegant Design
Dumbarton . .
Dundee
Dungeness
Dunnet Head
Dunstable
Durham
University ..
Dyestuffs
. . 227
. . 281
165, 258, 299, 313,
422, 488
284, 285
. . . . 1
••255
•• 257,314
165, 193, 236
. . 308
Eakring . . . . .. .. 278
Ealing  235
Early English Text Society . . . . 232
Earnings . . 22, 23, 24, 249-50,
25L 252, 454-7
East and West Friendship Council . . 174
6, 255, 323, 327, 345
 165
 233
182, 211, 258
• • 343
(Parlia-
• • 195
• • 195
Council,
Committee
East Anglia . .
University of
Eastbourne
East Kilbride. .
East Mailing
Ecclesiastical
ment)
Ecclesiastical Courts. .
Economic Development
National . . 252, 267, 446, 448
Economic integration with Europe
see European Free Trade Associa¬
tion
Economy, national .. .. 242-53
incomes and prices . . 251-2
investment . . . . 246-9
personal incomes and expenditure
249-Si
structure .. .. .. 244-53
See also Balance of payments,
Employment, Finance, Industry,
Nationalisation and Trade
Edinburgh . . 258, 308, 341, 370
administrative departments in . .61-3
assay office .. . . . . 308
International Festival .. 223, 240
museums and art galleries .. 225
music .. . . 239, 240, 241
National Library of Scotland . . 230
population
port of (Leith)
press
Royal Observatory
TWI Centre
University . .
Zoo
Education
administration
adult
agricultural
72
20, 257
• • 359
488, 490
217, 218
• • 459
106, 165
.. 219
73, 156-74
156-7
73, 170-1
343-4
Education—contd.
and Science, Department of 45, 53,
66, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 168,
171, 172, 175, 186, 203, 204, 208,
211, 213, 215, 216, 217, 218, 221,
226, 231, 263, 271, 494, 495, 496
architectural .. . . . . 229
art . . .. .. . . 168, 226-7
broadcasting to schools 171-2, 476, 479,
482, 484
building programme . . 163, 164
business studies . . . . . . 170
Certificate of Secondary . . . . 162
colleges see Colleges
commerce and management . . 170
curricula and courses 157, 158-9, 164,
166, 169, 170, 172, 227
day release .. . . 169, 449
dramatic . . .. . . 235-6
evening institutes . . . . 170, 171
examinations 161-2, 166, 167, 229, 240
finance of 156, 157-8, 162, 164, 166-7,
168-9, 172, 173, i74, 397, 400
forestry . . . . . . 35°-i
‘further’ . . . . . . 156, 168-9
General Certificate of see examinations
grants see finance, above
Higher . . .. .. 164-70
Inspectorate . . 157, 158, 172
local education authorities 72, 73, 101,
156-62, 168, 171, 174, 175
Management Studies . . 170, 271-2
music . . . . . . . . 240
National Certificates . . 169, 170
national colleges . . . . .. 168
National Institute of Adult Edu¬
cation .. .. .. .. 171
physical . . . . . . 163, 494-6
prisoners . . . . 100, 101, 105
religious . . .. 163, 195, 199
research on . . . . . . 172
sandwich courses . . . . . . 169
scholarships 158, 159, 160, 167-8, 169,
173, 174
schools .. .. 157-84, 195, 199
approved .. .. .. 104
T
55^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Page
Education—contd.
schools—contd.
building . .
Council for Curriculum
Examinations. .
health and welfare
leaving age
163-4
and
• • 157
. . 168
• • 157
National Sea Training Schools 355
pupil numbers . . 156, 157, 164
special . . . . .. 160-1
types of . . 157-8, 159-62, 164, 165,
168
voluntary 156, 157-8, 164, 193
secretarial courses . . . . 170
special educational treatment 160-1
teachers .. 157, 158, 162-3, I67
National Union of . . .. 467
training . . 157, 162, 164, 167, 168
technical and technological 164, 167,
168, 169-70, 209, 210,
211, 449
See also Industry, education and
training
trade unions and . . . . 467, 468
visual aids in . . . . . . 172
Audio-Visual Aids, National
Committee for .. . . 172
vocational . . 448-9, 450, 451, 452
See also Universities
Educational Research, National
Foundation for . . .. . . 172
Eggborough .. .. .. .. 283
Egg Marketing Board, British 335, 341
Egmanton . . . . . . . . 278
Eisteddfodau . . . . 232, 240
Elections:
local government . . . . 55, 71-2
parliamentary . . . . 35-6, 36-8
Electric Traction, British . . . . 372
Electrical:
and Allied Industries Research
Association, British . . . . 285
and Allied Manufacturers’ Asso¬
ciation, British . .
appliances industries
engineering see Engineering
machinery industry
Electricity:
Board for Northern Ireland
Board, South of Scotland
• • 3°2
22, 304
302-4
259, 281
280, 281,
282, 285
consumers, number of . . . . 285
Council 259, 280-1, 285, 286, 472
Generating Board, Central 212, 259,
280, 281, 284, 285, 286
grids   284-5
hydro-electric 258, 273, 281, 283
Board, North of Scotland 280, 281,
282, 283, 285
nuclear power stations . . 216, 283-4
pumped storage .. . . . . 284
research . . . . . . 285-6
Supply Research Council . . 285
Electronic equipment:
defence
digital computers
industry
post office . .
Ellesmere Port
Emigration
Employers’ organisations
15.125
. . .. 220
295. 302, 303-4
205, 387, 389
. . 256
.. 15
261-2, 354-5.
465-6, 471
British Employers’ Confederation 262,
465-6
Federation of British Industries 262,
466
National Association of British
Manufacturers .. . . 262, 466
Employment 244, 251, 260, 261, 264-5,
268-71, 277, 292, 295, 297, 298, 299,
300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 306, 307,
308, 310, 313, 314, 315, 316, 319,
320, 322, 352, 356, 385, 443-74
Council, National Youth .. 451
foreigners . . . . . . 450-1, 514
older workers
permits
prisoners . .
safety in
• • 443, 448
45°, 451, 5i4
. . 100
458-62
services (Ministry of Labour) 447-53,
473-4
sheltered . . . . . . . . 453
terms and conditions of . . 453-64
training centres . . 449-50, 473-4
vocational guidance and training 448-9,
450, 451, 452
women 22, 443, 444, 445, 446, 454,
456-7, 462-3
young persons . . 451, 457, 462-3
See also individual industries,
Labour, Unemployment and
Work, hours of
Engineering 210, 255, 261, 291-4, 295,
297-307
aeronautical . . . . 305-6
Chemical Engineers, Institution of 206
civil.. .. .. .. 261,291-4
Engineering Research Associa¬
tion .. .. . . . . 294
Engineers, Institution of . . 206
electrical . . . . .. 302-4
Engineers, Institution of . . 206
marine . . . . . . 306-7
mechanical . . . . 297-302
Engineers, Institution of . . 206
National Engineering Laboratory 211
Engines, industrial . . . . .. 299
England:
area .. . . .. .. 1
Council for the Preservation of
Rural . . . . . . . . 185
North-east . . . . 257, 296, 306, 314
See also Newcastle upon Tyne
and Tyneside
North-west . . 2, 6, 296, 306
See also Lancashire
INDEX
557
England—contd.
population, figures
South-east region . .
South-west region
English Association . .
Page
8-i i, 16-20
182, 254-5, 265
255,330
. . 232
English Speaking Union . . .. 174
Entertainment see Leisure Activities
Episcopal Church in Scotland 196, 200
Equal pay .. .. . . 456-7
Equity see Law
Essex, University of . . . . 165
Estate duty see Taxation
Estimates (Exchequer) 392-$, 399, 400
Committee . . . . 41, 394-5
Eurocontrol . . . . . . .. 385
European:
Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) . . .. 216, 220
Broadcasting Union . . . . 483
Economic Community 417, 420, 421
Free Trade Association (efta) 417, 421,
430
Launcher Development Organisa¬
tion (eldo) . . . . . . 217
Monetary Agreement . . . . 419
Space Research Organisation
(esro) . . .. . . . . 217
Eurovision . . . . . . . . 484
Page
‘Ever-Readies’ see Territorial Army
Emergency Reserve
Evidence (rules) . . . . 85, 89
Exchange control . . 52, 422, 426, 430
Exchange Equalisation Account .. 403,
427
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. 490
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Exeter.. .. .. .. 233, 236
University . . . . . . 65, 236
Expectation of life . . . . 10, n
Expenditure:
consumer . . . . 245, 249-50, 251
public authorities 245, 246, 249-50,
252, 392-402
See also Defence, Finance, Re¬
search, Agriculture, subsidies
and Housing, subsidies
Export 243, 245, 413-7, 421-5, 426,
427, 428
controls . . . . .. 422-3
Council, British National . . 425
Council for Europe .. . . 425
councils . . . . . . .. 425
Credits Guarantee Department 424, 431
re-exports . . . . . . . . 417
See also Trade and individual industries
Factories:
building . . . . . . 264, 265
Inspectorate . . 458, 459, 462
legislative provisions 458-9, 462, 463,
464
See also Employment and indivi¬
dual industries
Faculty of Advocates . . . . 96
Families:
average size of . . . . 11-12, 21
welfare services for 43, 151, 152
See also Households
Family Allowances 133,134, 137, 387, 514
Family Service Units . . 132-143
Family Welfare Association . . 132
Farm institutes, county . . . . 343
Farmers’ Unions, National . . . . 324
Farming see Agriculture
Famborough . . 115, 205, 217, 383
Farnham . . . . . . • • 35i
Fawley . . . . 279, 280, 283, 360
Federation of British Industries 262, 270,
425, 466
Fen district . . . . . . 6, 323, 327
Ferrier lectureship . . . . . . 207
Ferrybridge .. . . . . . . 283
Fertilisers 309-10, 327, 330, 336, 343,
346
Fertility trends see Population
Festivals (arts) . . . . 223, 240
Fiddler’s Ferry . . . . . . 283
Field Sports Society, British . . 502
Fighting Vehicles Research and
Development Establishment . . 15
Film:
and Television Arts, Society of . . 237
and Television, Society for Educa¬
tion in .. .. .. .. 237
Archive, National . . .. . . 237
Associated British Picture Corpora¬
tion .. .. .. .. 236
British Commonwealth Inter¬
national Newsfilm News Agency
Trust . . . . . . . . 483
Censors, British Board of . . 238
Children’s . . . . . . 238-9
Council, Scottish . . . . . . 237
Federation of Specialised Film
Associations . . . . .. 236
Finance Corporation, National . . 237
Fund Agency, British . . 237, 238
Institute, British . . . . .. 237
Library, Central . . . . . . 237
Makers, Federation of British . . 236
Producers Association, British . . 236
production. . . . . . 236-9
Rank Organisation . . 236, 483
Scientific Film Association . . 237
Theatre, National. . . . . . 237
University Film Council . . . . 237
Films of Scotland Committee .. 237
Finance . . . . .. 391-412
aid from overseas countries . . 429
aid to overseas countries . . 253, 431-3
banks . . .. .. 402-7
bills of exchange . . . . . . 407
capital issues . . .. 407, 408
Church of England .. 195-6
558
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
F inance—con td.
corporations . . . . 407, 408
Currency reserves. . 253, 427, 429
Exchequer.. 391, 392, 395, 400, 401
See also Treasury
Northern Ireland . . 401-2
financial institutions (other than
banks) . . . . .. 406-12
financing of international trade 405,
407, 419, 423, 424, 425, 426-7
inflation, counter-measures 244,
251, 252, 396
local government 75-7, 248, 250, 391
in Northern Ireland . . 401-2
parliamentary control of public
finance . . 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 391-5
public corporations 268, 277, 285,
287
See also Balance of payments,
Budget, Estimates, Exchange
control, Expenditure, Income,
Investment, National Debt,
Sterling, Taxation and Trade
Fines (penalties) . . . . 98, 103
Finnart . . . . . . • . 360
Fire:
Brigades Advisory Councils, Cen¬
tral . . . . . . .. 78
Brigades, National Joint Council
for Chief Officers of Local
Authorities’ . . . . . . 78
Brigades, National Joint Council
for Local Authorities’ . . . . 78
Offices’ Committee . . 80, 211
prevention research . . . . 80
Research Organisation, Joint 80, 211
Service College . . . . . . 80
Service Training Centre . . 80, 130
Fire Services . . . . • • 73> 78-81
Fishing:
fleets . . . . . . . . 345
freshwater . . . . . . . . 346
grounds . . .. . . . . 344
Herring Industry Advisory Council 347
Herring Industry Board . . 346, 347
industry . . . . . . 316, 344-8
ports . . . . • • 257, 344
research . . .. . . . . 212
sport . . . . . . 5°3~4
White Fish Authority . . . . 347
White Fish Industry Advisory
Council . . . . . . . . 347
Fitzwilliam Museum . . . . 225
Fleet see Royal Navy
Fleet Air Arm . . . . 118-9
Fleetwood . . . . . . 344> 345
Float glass .. .. .. . •
f.o.b. (definition) . . .. . . 414
Folkestone . . . . . . 255, 359
Food:
biscuits . . . . . . • • 3X5
bread .. .. . . •• 315
chocolate and confectionery . . 315
Page
Food—contd.
consumer expenditure on . . 251
consumption . . . . . . 326
exports . . . . . . 316, 417
home grown supplies . . 326, 332
Hygiene Laboratory . . . . 149
imports . . . . 242, 413, 414, 415
industries . . • • 315-6, 443
ministerial responsibility for . . 51
purity   73, 145
research .. .. .. ..215
Advisory Committee .. ..215
sales 434, 435, 436, 437, 439, 440
See also Agriculture, Fishing,
School Meals Service and
Welfare Foods Service
Food and Agriculture Organisation,
(fao)
Football:
Association
Association, Irish . .
Association of Wales
Association, Scottish
League
Scottish . .
pools
rugby . .
seven-a-side
Footpaths and Bridleways
Footwear industry
51, 220
22, 497-8
497
497
497
497
497
497
498
498
184
3i4, 315, 320
23
Shoe and Allied Trades Research
Association . . .. • • 315
Ford Foundation . . . . .. 210
Forecasting Research Station . . 205
Foreign:
Affairs, Secretary of State for 45, 46,
53, 66, 67
Exchange Market . . . . .. 426
Office see Affairs, Secretary of
State for
Service see Diplomatic Service
Foreigners:
employment of . . . . 450-1, 514
naturalisation of . . . . . . 16
visitors .. .. •• 4I9> 5II_4
See also Overseas Students
Forensic Science . . . . . . no
Forest:
area . . . . . . .. 6, 184
nature reserves . . . . .. 185
Parks . . . . . • 184, 187
Products Research Laboratory 211,
294, 35i
Research Station . . . . • • 351
Forestry .. . . .. 348-51
Commission 6, 53-4, 184, 215, 348,
349, 35°, 35i
committees and societies . . • • 35°
education and research
Fund
Institute, Imperial
Society, Royal
timber imports
215, 350-1
• • 349
215, 35i
• • 350
• • 348
INDEX
559
Page
Forth:
bridge
river and firth
293, 370
. 2, 257, 278, 359,
360, 370
Formby .. . . • • • • 278
Foulness . . . . . . • • 216
Foundation for Material Assistance
in Africa (fama) 433
Foundry, National College .. . . 168
Fox hunting . . .. . • • • S02
Fraserburgh . . . . . . • • 344
Free Churches . . . . i97-8
Freezing (food) .. .. •• 3^
Fruit, production and distribution
330, 434
Page
Fruit and Vegetable products and
preserves .. . . . . • • 316
Fuel and Power . . . . 273-8
consumption 273, 276-7, 279,
285, 287
efficiency . . .. . . • • 288
sources of . . . . .. •• 273
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas,
Petroleum and Research
Fulbright travel grants . . . • 174
Fulmer Research Institute . . .. 213
Furniture Development Council . . 320
Furniture industry . . . . 320, 440
Furzebrook research station .. 218
Fylingdales Moor . . . . 112, 126
GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic..
Mod, National
Gainsborough
Gambling see Betting
Game Research Association
Game Shooting
Games:
Highland ..
Indoor
Outdoor
See also Sports
Gardens see Horticulture
Gas:
.. 21
.. 240
.. 278
• • 503
• • 503
.. 502
• • 5ro
496-501
Area Boards
by-products
consumption
Council
production . .
pipeline system
research
supply
.. .. 286, 287
. . 287
. . . . .. 287
212, 259, 286, 287, 288
286-7
 288
 288
286-8
Gas Turbine Establishment, National 115
Gateshead .. .. • • • • 257
Gatwick airport see London, airports
Gauges industry . . . • • • 3°°
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(gatt) . . . . 4l9> 420, 422
Assembly (Church of Scotland) . . 196
Post Office see Post Office
Register Division, Northern Ireland 8
Register Office . . . • 8, 54
Registry Office, Edinburgh 8, 65
Geographical Society, Royal (library) 231
Geological Museum . . 211, 219, 291
Geological Survey 51, 203, 211, 219, 291
Geology
Geophysics . .
Georgian Group
Gin industry . .
Girls’ youth organisations
Glasgow:
airport and air services
art gallery and museum
burgh court
. . 227
.. 78
183, 189
257, 298, 314, 3i7
• • 199
240, 241
486, 488
16, 20, 257
358, 359
• • 387
366, 372
• • 370
• • 293
. . 481
•• 45°
106, 165, 210
2-4, 219
53, 205
. . 229
. • 316
176, 177
382, 383
. • 225
.. 88
Glasgow—contd.
design centre
fire service . .
housing and rebuilding
industry
Mosque
music
newspapers
population . .
port of
postal service
public transport ..
roads and tunnel ..
sewerage scheme . .
studios (broadcasting)
training college
University ..
See also Clydeside
Glass industry 210, 256, 317, 318
Research Association, British . . 318
Glenrothes .. . . • • 182, 258
Gloucester . . 240, 255, 370, 374, 375
Glyndebourne (opera) .. .. 241
Godaiming . . . . • • • • 280
Gold and foreign currency reserves 253,
403, 428, 429
Gold and silver ware . . . . 308
Gold Market (London) .. 426-7
Gold  499-500
Goods and services see Industry,
production
Goods transport see Road haulage
Government . . . . . . 27-81
Actuary, Department of . . .. 49
Chemist, Laboratory of . . 203, 211
composition of . . • • • • 45_7
departments of . . . . 28, 49-64
Employment and Training Ser¬
vices . . . . 447-53, 473-4
Loans Fund (NI) . . . • • • 19°
relations with industry 258-9, 261,
262-8
Training Centres . . .. 448-5°
See also Civil Service, Expenditure,
Finance, Local Government,
Ministers, Monarchy, Parlia¬
ment, Privy Council and Research
560
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Grail, The . . .. . . .. 176
Gramophone:
records .. . . .. 240, 241
Societies, National Federation
of . . .. .. .. 240
Grand Union Canal . . .. 375
Grangemouth . . 358, 359, 360
Grantham . . . . . . . . 255
Granton . . . . . . . . 344
Grants see Education, finance,
Housing, finance, and Local
Government, finance
Graphical Association, National . . 492
Gravesend . . .. . . ..319
Great Britain:
area . . . . . . . . 1
definition .. .. . . . . 1
population.. .. .. ..8,18
Great Seal . . . . .. 31, 34, 56
Greater London Council see London
Green Belts .. . . .. . . 181
Greenock .. . . . . 359, 489
Greenwich Observatory, Royal
Greyhound racing
Club, National
Grid, electricity
Grid, gas
Grimsby
Page
1, 201,
205, 218
506-7
.. 506
284-5
.. 287
258, 344, 345
Grocery trade 433, 434, 435, 436, 437
Ground Control Approach (gca) .. 384
Group medical schemes (factories). . 463
Guardian’s allowance .. . . 137
Guernsey:
family allowances . . .. .. 134
language .. .. . . .. 21
population . . . . . . .. 18
States of . . . . . . • • 33
See also Channel Islands
Guided weapons .. 115, 116, 118
Early Warning Stations .. .. 112
Establishment . . .. .. 115
Guild of British Newspaper Editors 492
Guildford . . . . . . . . 283
H
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus . . . . 85, 89
Haham . . . . . . . . 199
Halifax . . . . 256, 314, 463
Hall-mark (gold and silver) . . 308
Handicapped persons see Welfare
Hand tools industry . . . . 308
‘ Hansard ’ . . . . . . • • 39
Harbours see Ports
Harleian Society .. . . .. 232
Harlow . . . . . . 182, 463
Harmondsworth .. .. .. 211
Harpenden .. . . . . . . 215
Hartlepools 257, 359
Harwell:
Atomic Energy
lishment
Research
Estab-
115, 216
Rutherford High Energy Labora¬
tory .. .. .. .. 217
• • 359, 5°5
. . 240
.. 182
144-55
Standing
..463
Harwich
Haslemere
Hatfield
Health
Advisory Committee,
Industrial
centres .. .. .. . . 153
control of infectious diseases 144,
149. 152
home nursing .. .. 73, 151
in industry . . . . 462-4
in prisons . . . . .. . . 101
Laboratory, Central Public . . 149
Ministrv of
54, 128, 144, 145, 146,
149, 213, 215, 228, 263
144
151
public
research
school children
Services Council, Central
Services Council, Scottish
visiting . . 150, 151
152,
163
146
146
154
Health—contd.
See also National Health Service
Health Services (Northern Ireland)
64, 153
Heating appliances . . . . . . 301
Hebrides see Highlands and Islands
Helicopters .. 118, 122, 125, 126, 383
Hemel Hempstead . . .. . . 182
Henley on Thames . . . . 271, 505
Herbarium . . . . . . . . 206
Herbert Art Gallery and Museum . . 225
Hereford . . . . .. . . 240
Herring Industry Advisory Council 347
Herring Industry Board . . 346, 347
Hexton .. .. .. .. 213
Heysham . . . . . . . . 359
High Court of Justice 83, 86, 87, 93
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) . . . . . . . . 90
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland) 88,
9°
High Wycombe . . .. 320, 370
Highgate Wood exchange . . 205, 389
Highland Games . . . . . . 502
Highlands and Islands, Scotland 2, 4,
5, 6, 8, 21, 258, 281, 329, 338,
349, 380, 502
Highway Code .. .. 373,514
Highway construction 73, 212, 367-70,
372
Hinkley Point . . . . .. 284
Hire purchase . . . . 440, 441
finance companies. . .. 440,441
H.P. Information Ltd. . . • • 441
Historic buildings 185, 228, 229, 230
bureau . . . . .. .. 229
councils . . . . 59, 185, 229
Historic Churches Preservation
Trust .. . . .. .. 230
Historical Manuscripts Commission 231
INDEX
56l
Historical Monuments, Commission
on
Hobbies
Hockey
Women’s
Page
228
25
500
All England Women’s Hockey
Association .. .. .. 500
Association .. . . . . 500
Holidays .. .. .. 22, 458
Hollow-ware industry . . 3°7-8
Holyhead . . . . .. .. 359
Home Affairs, Ministry of see North¬
ern Ireland
Home Counties (definition) . . 306
Home Defence .. 113,127-30
Home Office and Home Secretary 33,
45, 54, 72, 78, 79, 80, 92, 93, 100,
102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109,
128, 130, 143, 205, 213, 215, 238,
347, 45°, 5i4
Homicide see Murder
Honours . . . . . . 31, 47, 54
330-1
233
507
507
506
34i
25, 330-1, 337, 341
Hop growing
Hornchurch ..
Horsemanship
British Horse Society
Horse-race Betting Levy Board
Horticultural Marketing Council
Horticulture . .
Hosiery
and Allied Trades Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. •• 3I3
and knitwear industry .. . . 313
Hospital:
Boards, Regional . . . . . . 146
Car Service .. .. . . 152
Schools .. . . . . . . 160
Service Reserve, National . . 129
Hospitals .. 147, I48, ^o, 152, 154
confinements in . . . . . . 151
Northern Ireland
number of . .
psychiatric
Scotland
staff..
teaching
voluntary ..
voluntary help in
Hotels and Restaurants
- • 153
.. 148
149-50
. . 148
. . 148
146, 148
. . 148
• • 154
439, 462,
512
House of Commons 32, 35-43, 46, 47,
213, 39i, 392, 393, 394, 395
disqualification
election to . .
financial control
officers
party composition
privileges . .
Page
House of Commons—contd.
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 32, 34“5, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 42, 46, 47, 194, 213
84, 86, 87, 88,
9°, 93
• • 34
• • 34
• • 34
• • 34
30, 34
3°, 34
35, 38-9
. . 36
..21-2
22, 443
73, 187-92, 247, 293
.. 191
188, 190
73, 190-2
.. 190
190-2, 411-2
.. 192
247, 4i1-2
as Court of Appeal
eligibility . .
hereditary peers .
life peers . .
Lords of Appeal .
Lords Spiritual
Lords Temporal .
officers
privileges
Households
Housewives
Housing
agricultural
associations
authorities .
Corporation
finance
furnished . .
investment
. . 36
• • 35-6, 36-8
38, 39, 4°, 4L 43
35, 38-9, 394
..36-8
. . 36
local authorities’ responsibilities 75-6,
187-92
ministerial responsibilities for 55, 187
new building 182, 183, 185, 188, 293
number of dwellings 21-2, 187-8, 293
privately owned 187, 190, 191, 293
progress in building 182, 183, 188
purchase loans . . .. . . 190
rent control .. . . . . 192
slum clearance . . 187, 188, 189-90
standardised . . . . . . 188
subsidies and grants .. 190-2
town development schemes . . 183
Housing and Local Government,
Ministry of 55, 7°, 72, 75, 76, 77,
180, 181, 183, 185, 187, 188, 189,
191, 192, 205, 215, 228, 263, 267,
289, 290, 291, 337, 494, 496
Hovercraft . . .. .. • • 220
Huddersfield . . . . . . 239, 256
Hughes medal . . . . • • 207
Hull 20, 236, 257, 344, 358, 359, 388
University .. .. .. • • 165
Human relations in industry 454, 472-4
Human and Social Sciences 205-6, 474
Humber Conservancy Board .. 359
Hungerford . . . . .. .. 182
Hunterston . . .. .. . . 284
Hunting . . .. . . 5°2-3
Hunt Committee, National 505, 506
Hydraulics Research Station 211, 294
Hydro-electric power see Electricity
Hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell . . . . 220
ITA see Independent Television
Authority
ITV see Independent Television
Identity cards .. .. ..513
Immigration .. 15, 450-1, 511, 514
Immingham . .
Immunisation
Imperial:
Chemical Industries Ltd.
• • 359
.. 152
210, 258,
260-I
562
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Imperial—contd.
College of Science and Technology 166,
167, 271
Defence College . . . . . . 115
Forestry Institute . . 215, 351
War Museum . . . . . . 224
Imports . . 242, 413-7, 419-23, 428
licensing . . . . .. 422-3
See also individual industries and
Trade
Improvement grants:
agricultural .. . . 336-7
housing . . . . . . 190-1
Income:
Government 249, 250, 391-402
personal .. 23, 249-52, 396, 398
See also Earnings
Income Tax see Taxation
Independent schools . . 157, 161
Independent Television:
Authority 172, 259, 475, 476, 477-8,
481, 482, 483, 484
Companies Association . . 478, 483
News .. .. . . . . 478
programme companies . . 171-2, 478
Indictable offences . . 84, 85, 88, 89
Industrial
and Commercial Finance Corpora¬
tion Ltd . . . . .. 408
and Trade Fairs . . . . . . 425
Artists, Society of . . . . 227
association . . .. . . 261-2
building . . 179, 182, 264-5, 291-4
Civil Defence Service .. 128, 129,
130
Councils, Joint . . 468, 469, 470,
47i
Court .. .. 469, 470, 471
design   . . 227
Council of Industrial Design 227,
270, 441
disputes . . . . . . 454, 470
Editors, British Association of . . 492
engines manufacture . . . . 299
films .. .. 236, 237, 440
Fuel Efficiency Service, National 271.
288
Health Advisory Committee,
Standing . . . . . . 463
information . . . . 440-1
injuries insurance . . . . 133, 138-9
Organisation, National . . 262, 466
plant and steelworks manufacture 300
relations . . . . 454, 464-73
service . . . . 270-1, 469, 473
Industry 242, 244-5, 246-7, 254-321
advisory councils . . 267, 460, 473
association . . . . .. 261-2
Central Training Council . . 473
development areas and districts 264-6,
447
development organisations 266, 423
distribution policy . . 181, 264-6
Page
Industry—ronifi?.
education and training 169-70, 448,
449-50, 451-2, 453, 473-4
health and welfare services 462-4
human relations in . . 454, 472-4
investment in see Investment
location . . . . 181, 254-8, 264-5
management . . 170, 271-2, 472-3
British Institute of . . . . 271
Education, Advisory Council on 170
Institute of Office . . . . 272
Institute of Personnel .. . . 272
Institution of Works Managers 272
studies, diploma . . . . 271
manufacturing 246, 248, 260-1,
294-321
National Association of British
Manufacturers . . .. 262, 466
National Joint Advisory Council 267,
460, 471
organisation . . . . 254-73
ownership . . . . . . 258-61
production and productivity in 244-6,
268-71
British Productivity Council . . 270
National Production Advisory
Council on . . . . .. 267
Regional Boards for . . . . 267
relations with Government 262-8,
470-1
272-3
. . 267
258-61
459, 473-4
267
restrictive practices, control of
Scottish Board for
structure
training centres . . 453,
Welsh Board for . .
See also Employment, Exports,
individual industries, Public
corporations, Research and
Trade
Infectious diseases:
control of . . . . . . 144, 152
mortality from . . . . . . 11
Inflation see Finance
Information, Central Office of 49, 55, 65,
205, 236-7
Information services (telephone) . . 389,
512
Injury benefit (industrial injuries) . . 138
Inland Revenue:
Board of 55, 76, 249, 396, 456, 512
sources of . . . . . . 250, 396-9
Inland transport
Inland waterways
Board of Survey
development
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland
Inns see Public Houses
Inns of Court
Inquests
Insecticides . .
Inspectorates:
constabulary .. .. 108, no
factory . . . . 458, 459, 462
360-77
360, 361, 374-5
••375
375
96
95
9i
440
INDEX
Page
Inspectorates—contd.
mines and quarries .. . . 460
public health . . . . . . 144
railway employment . . . . 461
schools . . .. . . . . 158
Institutes and Institutions see
relevant subjects
Instrument Landing System (ils) 384
Insurance .. . . . . 80, 410-1
export credit . . . . 424-5
marine • • 354, 4io-i
See also National Insurance
Interferon .. .. .. 220,3x0
Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission . . . . . . 220
Internal Trade see Trade
International:
Affairs, Royal Institute of . . 230
Atomic Energy Agency . . . . 220
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (ibrd) . . . . 433
Bowling Board . . . . . . 501
Convention for Prevention of
Pollution of Sea by Oil . . 356
Council of Scientific Unions (icsu) 207,
220
Development Association (ida) . . 433
Finance Corporation . . . . 433
Geophysical Year . . . . . . 207
Labour Organisation (ilo) 56, 450,
466
Lawn Tennis Federation . . 499
Machine Tools Exhibition . . 298
Monetary Fund . . . . 253, 429
Police Commission (Interpol) .. no
Publishing Corporation 486, 487, 488
Research and Development Com¬
pany . . . . .. •• 213
Telecommunication Union . . 484
Years of Quiet Sun . . . . 207
Investment . . . . . . 246-9
in fuel and power industries 277-8, 285,
287
in transport . . 354, 368, 375
overseas . . 253, 278, 429, 430-1
trusts . . . . . . 409-10
Page
I nvestment—con td.
United States and other in Britain 253,
429-30
See also individual industries and
Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich .. .. .. .. 255
Ireland see Irish Republic and North¬
ern Ireland
Irish Central Library . - . . 231
Irish Republic . . . . ..1,8
census .. . . . . 8, 15, 16
citizens’ employment in UK 451, 5i4
citizens’ status in UK . . 15, 16
citizens’ voting rights in UK 36, 71
insurance reciprocity . . 133-4
population . . . . . . . . 18
relations with UK Government . . 52
war pensioners . . . . 54, 57
Iron and Steel:
Board . . .. .. .. 297
Federation, British . . . . 297
Holding and Realisation Agency 260,
296
industry . . 256, 257, 258, 260, 295,
296-7, 300
Research Association, British 212, 296
Iron Castings . . . . . . 297
Isaac Newton optical telescope . . 218
Isle of Grain . . . . 279, 288, 360
Isle of Man:
airport . . . . .. .. 382
area. . .. .. .. • • 1
fisheries . . . . . . . . 345
language .. .. .. 8, 21
legislature .. . . .. 27, 33
national insurance. . .. 133,134
newspapers . . . . . . 489
population .. . . . . . . 18
races (tt) .. . . . . .. 5°9
relationship with UK Government
and Crown . . 27, 30, 33, 45, 54
Tynwald Court . . . . . . 33
war pensioners .. . . • • 57
Isle of Wight. . . . 1,4, 306, 505
Isotope School, Harwell . . . . 216
Jams and marmalades industry . . 316
Jarrow . . . . . . 257, 370
Jersey:
language .. . . . . .. 21
national insurance agreement with
UK  133
population . . . . . . . . 18
States of . . . . . . • • 33
temperature . . . . .. 5
See also Channel Islands
Jewellery industry . . . . . . 308
Jewish:
Board of Guardians . . . . 132
schools . . . . . . . • 199
Youth, Association of . . . . 176
Jewry . . . . . . .. . . 199
Jewry—contd.
Council of Christians and Jews . . 200
Jockey Club 5°5> 506
Jodrell Bank radio telescope 210, 218
Jodrell Laboratory . . . . . . 218
Joint Exchequer Board . . . . 402
Joint Services Staff College. . .. 115
Journalists:
Institute of . . . . 49 L 492
National Council for the Training
of . . .. •• •• 491
National Union of . . 491, 492
See also Press
Judge Advocate General’s Depart¬
ment . . . . . . 56, 93
Judge Advocate of the Fleet 57, 93
5^4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Judges . . .. 86, 94-5, 456
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council . . . . .. 44“5
Judicial procedure .. .. 83, 93
Judiciary see Law
Judo . . .. . . . . .. 508
British Judo Association .. . . 508
Jury, trial by see Law
Page
Justices of the Peace . . 88, 94
Jute industry . . . . . . 258, 313
British Jute Trade Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. . . 313
Juvenile Courts . . 83, 88, 91, 103
Juvenile delinquency . . 98, 103-6
Standing Advisory Council on . . 103
Juvenile Organisations Committees 174
K Keele University . . . . . . 165
Kelvin lectureship . . . . . . 208
Kent .. . . 19, 3i9, 323, 33°, 343
University . . .. . . . . 165
Kew:
Observatory . . .. . . 5
Royal Botanic Gardens . . . . 206
Kidderminster .. .. 256,314
Kilkeel . . . . . . . . 344
Kilmarnock . .
Kimmeridge ..
King George’s Jubilee Trust
King’s Lynn ..
Kingsnorth . .
Kingston upon Hull see Hull
Kirk Session ..
Kirkintilloch . .
Knitwear
• • 3i4
. . 278
US, 177
223, 240
.. 283
. . 196
. . 284
258, 313
L Labour:
arbitration and conciliation 468-70,
471-2
deployment of . . . . 444-7
industrial relations 454, 464-73
Ministry of 49, 55-6, 102, 114, 140,
141, 148, 2x3, 215, 260, 266, 267,
270, 360, 444, 445, 447, 449-50,
45L 452, 453, 458, 459, 462, 469,
470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 5i4
protective legislation 453, 454, 458-64
unemployment .. 142, 264-5, 446-7
working conditions . . 453-64
See also Employment, Trade Unions,
Wages and Work, hours of
Labour Party. . .. .. 37, 38, 468
National Council of Labour
Colleges . . . . . . .. 468
Lacrosse .. .. .. .. 500
All England Ladies Lacrosse
Association .. . . . . 500
English Lacrosse Union . . . . 500
Lake District.. . . .. . . 2, 6
Lambeth Conference .. . . 196
Lamesley .. .. .. .. 366
Lampeter, St. David’s College . . 165
Lanarkshire . . . . . . . . 258
Lancashire 16, 19, 20, 256, 276, 283,
296, 298, 306, 311, 314, 315
See also coalfields, cotton, Liver¬
pool and Manchester
Lancaster:
Duchy of . . . . .. 45, 46, 94
University .. .. .. .. 165
Land:
Registry . . . . . . 57, 63
Settlement Association .. . . 338
use . . . . 6, 180, 181, 322, 494
See also Agriculture
Lands:
Improvement Company . . • • 338
Tribunal . . . . . . 76, 92
Valuation Appeal Court . . 76, 97
Language .. .. .. 8, 20-1
Larne . .
Lasswade
Laundries
Law . .
arrest, law of
Common . .
courts
criminal appeals
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Board
criminal proceedings
equity system
evidence, rules of . .
General Council of the Bar
of Northern Ireland
Habeas Corpus
judges rules
judiciary
jury..
• • 3°3
215, 34i
• • 439
82-98
84-5, 89
82
83-8
84, 88
.. 92
84-6, 88-9
.. 82
84-5, 89
• • 95
. . 96
85, 89
84, 89
28, 31, 87, 90, 93, 94
85-6, 88, 89, 91, 94, 95
legal aid and advice
legal profession
Council of Legal Education
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Departments
Officers of the Crown
penalties
press (legal requirements)
prosecutions
Reform Committee
Society
Society of Scotland
sources of ..
Statute
subpoena
Lawes Agricultural Trust .
Lawn Tennis..
Association
Lawyers
Lea Valley
Learned societies
Leather industry
British Leather
96-8
95-6
• 95
56, 63
45-6, 56, 63
98-9
492-3
84, 88-9
• • 93
96, 97
96, 97
82
82
85
214
499
499
95-6
 330
202, 206-8, 219
314-5
Manufacturers’
Research Association
Leatherhead ..
3i5
285
INDEX
565
Page
Lee Conservancy .. .. .. 289
Lee, river .. .. . . . . 375
Leeds 16, 20, 223, 225, 240, 256, 314,
368, 374, 387, 459, 499
University . . . . 165, 210, 288
Leeuwenhoek lectureship . . . . 207
Legal aid see Law
Legal system .. .. .. 82-93
Legislation see Parliament
Leicester . . 20, 175, 225, 233, 256,
299, 3i5
University . . . . . . . . 165
Leicestershire . . . . 171, 278
Leisure activities . . .. 22-6
See also Arts, promotion of and
Sports
Leith 359
Letch worth . . . . . . . . 450
Leverhulme Fellowships . . . . 210
Leverhulme Tercentenary medal . . 207
Liberal Party. . . . . . 37, 38
Libraries . . 206, 208, 219-20, 222,
227, 229, 230-2
Association of Special Libraries
and Information Bureaux
(aslib) 219, 231
Library:
Associations .. .. 231,232
National Central .. .. ..231
National:
for the Blind .. . . 140, 231
of Scotland . . .. . . 230
of Wales. . . . . . . . 230
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft . . . . 378
broadcast receiving 23, 387, 475, 477
broadcast transmitting . . 475> 476,
477, 478
cinemas and films .. . . . . 238
dog  387,513
driving   373, 5I3-4
export . . . . . . . . 423
gun and game . . . . 387, 503
import . . . . .. 422-3
issue of, by Post Office . . .. 387
motor vehicles . . 23, 370, 371, 372
telephone systems (local) . . . . 388
theatres and plays. . . . • • 234
Life:
assurance . . .. . . .. 410
expectation of .. .. 10, 11
imprisonment . . . . .. 99
peerages . . .. .. . . 34
Lifeboats . . . . .. . . 356
Royal National Life-boat Institution 356
Lighthouses .. .. . . .. 356
Lincoln .. .. .. .. 234
Lincolnshire 6, 255, 278, 296, 323, 327
Linen industry . . . . 258, 313
Research Association .. .. 313
Lister lectureship .. . . . . 208
Literary prizes .. . . .. 230
Literary societies . . .. .. 232
Page
Literature .. .. . . 230-2
Royal Society of . . . . . . 232
Liverpool:
commodity exchanges .. 311, 426
Court of Passage .. . . .. 86
Crown Court . . . . .. 84
Employers’ Association of Port of 354
housing .. .. .. 182, 189
John Moore’s Exhibition . . 226
museum and art gallery . . . . 225
music and drama . . 234, 239
newspapers . . 486, 488, 489
population .. . . .. 18, 20
port of . . 256, 358, 359, 360
post office services .. 387, 389
Recorder of .. . . . . 84
Steamship Owners’ Association . . 354
transport .. . . 365, 366> 386
• • 459
165, 210
182, 258
279, 360
. . 240
354, 4io-i
• • 354
28, 69-78
70-3
77-8
TWI Centre
University . .
Livestock see Agriculture
Livingston
Llandarcy
Llangollen
Lloyd’s, Society of . .
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Local Government . .
authorities, types of
Commissions
Councils:
borough
burgh
county and county borough 70, 72,
76, 77, 367
Greater London . . 71, 73
metropolitan borough . . 7°
parish .. . . • • 7°, 72
rural district . . . . 7°, 72
town . . . . • • 7°, 72
urban district .. . . 7°, 72
education authorities see Education
70, 72, 73, 76
.. 70, 72, 76
elections
employment in
• • 54, 7i-2
74-5, 445, 457, 47*
finance
75-7. 190, 39i, 400, 401
functions and services .. 72-3
grants .. .. •. • • 75
internal organisation . . 73-4
labour relations .. . . • • 471
National Joint Councils . . 75, 471
Officers Association, National and
(NALGO) .. 75, 466, 467
relations with central Government 55,
70
reorganisation . . .. 77_8
responsibility for:
aerodromes .. .. . . 382
amenities . . 72-3, I85
approved schools .. .. 104
arts, promotion of 222, 223, 227, 228,
231
blind and handicapped.. 140-1
child care .. . . I42“4
civil defence .. . . 72> 73
566
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Local Government—contd.
responsibility for—contd.
fire services . . 72, 73, 78-9
health 72, 73, 131, 144-5, 150-3,154
housing and planning 73, 179, 180,
183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188-9
licensing of films . . . . 238
mentally ill . . 73, 149-50
physical education . . 494-6
playing fields . . . . 494, 496
public libraries . . . . 73, 231
roads . . . . .. 73, 367
water supply, purity of 73, 289
welfare 140-1, 142-3, 150, 151, 152,
153. 154
youth services . . i74_6
See also Housing and Local
Government, Ministry of
Lockwood Committee . . . . 164
Locomotives:
industry . . . . . . . . 305
types in use .. .. .. 366
Locust research .. . . . . 221
London:
Academy of Music and Dramatic
Art  235
airports . . 279, 280, 382, 383
art, drama, music 226, 227, 232, 233,
234, 236, 239, 240, 241
assay office. . .. . . . . 308
City area .. . . . . • • 73
City of London Corporation 70, 73, 76
Colleges of Advanced Technology 168
commodity exchanges . . . . 426
Conference on Overseas Students 171
County Council (lcc) 70, 72, 78, 187
226, 496
Court of Common Council 107, 108,
187
courts of law . . . . 83, 84, 86
financial and trading centre 403, 404,
405, 406, 407, 409, 410, 411, 426-7
Fire Brigade . . . . . . 78
fish market.. .. .. 346,434
food markets . . .. . . 434
General Shipowners’ Society . . 354
Gold Market . . . . 426-7
government reorganisation 69, 77-8
Greater London 17, 20, 22, 76, 182,
254-5, 264, 290, 375, 389
Greater London Council 71, 73, 76, 187
Group . . . . . . . . 226
industries 236, 254-5, 297, 298, 307,
308, 314, 316, 317
libraries and museums 211, 219,224-5,
230
Metal Exchange . . . . . . 426
Page
London—contd.
Metropolitan boroughs . . . . 70
Metropolitan Police District . . 192
Metropolitan Water Board . . 289
police .. 107, 108, 109, no
population . . . . 17, 19, 182
port of and docks . . 356, 358, 359
press . . . . 485, 486, 487-8
School of Economics see
University, below
Stock Exchange . . . . 408, 409
tanker terminals . . . . . . 360
taxicabs . . .. . . . . 375
telephone information service 389, 512
television studios . . . . 481
traffic . . 22, 109, 368, 370, 373
Traffic Management Unit . . 373
transport 22, 92, 361, 362, 364, 375-6
Transport Board . . • • 363, 375-6
University . . 106, 124, 165, 166, 210,
227, 230, 235, 271, 344
water supply . . .. . . 289
Zoo . . .. . . . . 219
‘London Gazette’ .. .. .. 44
Londonderry 80, 91, 281, 282, 309, 376
Longannet . . . . . . . . 283
Lord Advocate . . 46, 63, 88, 89
Lord Advocate’s Department . . 63
Lord Chamberlain . . . . . . 234
Lord Chancellor 45, 56, 86, 87, 94, 96,
193, 195
as Speaker of the House of Lords 35,
38
Lord Chancellor’s Departments . . 56
Lord Chief Justice (England) 46, 86,
87, 94
Lord Chief Justice (Northern Ireland) 90
Lord High Commissioner . . 46, 196
Lord Justice Clerk . . . . 88, 90, 94
Lord Justice General . . 88, 94
Lord Lieutenants of Cotmties 46, 94
Lord President of the Council 45, 203
See also Education and Science,
Department of
Lord President of the Court of
Session . . . . 88, 90, 91, 94
Lord’s cricket ground . . . . 498
Lords, House of see House of Lords
Lords Commissioner of Justiciary . . 88
Lords Commissioners (Treasury) . . 50
Lords Justices of Appeal . . 87, 94
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary 34, 87, 94
Loughborough College of Technology 168
Lowestoft . . . . 344, 345, 505
Luncheon Vouchers . . . . .. 464
Lutheran churches . . . . . . 199
Luton . . . . . . . . 285
M MCC see Marylebone Cricket Club
Macaulay Institute . . . . 309, 343
Machine Tool Trades Association . . 298
Machine tools industry . . 257, 298
Maddermarket Theatre . . . . 235
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’ courts 83,
84, 85, 87, 91, 93, 94, 97, 104, 106
Maidenhead . . . . . . . . 368
Mail order sales . . . . . . 438
INDEX
Page
••344
316-7
205, 217, 218
170
382, 383
. . 210
.. 84
. . 227
233, 235
. . 189
256, 303, 3i4
.. 210
• • 230
• • 199
• • 225
239, 240
486, 487, 489
• • 499
16-20, 182
358, 359
366, 372
.. 84
256, 358, 359
. . 481
Mallaig
Malting industry
Malvern
Man see Isle of Man
Management see Industry
Management studies, diploma
Manchester:
airport (Ringway)
Chamber of Commerce
Crown Court
design exhibition
drama
housing
industries . .
Joint Research Council
library (John Rylands)
Mosque
museum and art gallery
music
newspapers. .
Old Trafford
population . .
port of
public transport
Recorder of
Ship Canal. .
studios (broadcasting)
University . . 165, 210, 211, 235, 271
Man-made fibres see Synthetic fibres
Manpower see Employment and
Labour
Manslaughter . . . . 91, 99
Manufacturers’ associations. . 262, 270
Manufacturing establishments, size
of . . . . . . .. 260-1
Manufacturing industries see indi¬
vidual industries
Marchwood . .
Marine engineering see Engineering
and Shipbuilding
Marine Survey
Maritime Board, National . . 355,
Maritime Museum, National
Market gardening see Agriculture
Market and street traders . .
Marketing and Sales Management,
Institute of. .
Marketing Boards, agricultural see
Agriculture
Markets:
commodity. .
discount
exchange . .
fish ..
food (London)
gold
insurance . .
Marriage:
Guidance Council
rates
registration
Marshall Scholarships
Marylebone Cricket Club
355:
284
355
357
224
435
272
.. 426
• • 4°7
382, 426
346, 434
• • 434
426-7
410-11
• • 132
. . 11
.. 8
• • i73
498, 499
Page
Master of Rolls .. 86, 87, 91, 94
Maternity allowance 136, 137, 138
Maternity services .. .. 150-1
Mayor’s and City of London Court. . 86
Mayors and Lord Mayors . . 43, 71
Meals, provision of:
for old people .. . . .. 141
for school children . . .. 163
Meat and fish products .. ..316
Mechanical engineering . . 297-302
handling equipment . . .. 299
Medical:
Bulletin, British . . . . . . 222
Council, General . . . . . . 154
Practices Committee . . . . 147
profession see Doctors
Research . . . . . . 213-4
Council 149, 151, 204, 213, 310
National Institute for . . . . 214
services:
in industry . . . . 462-4
in prisons . . . . . . 101
for ships . . . . . . 390
supplies see Pharmaceuticals
See also National Health Service
Mental health services . . 149-50
National Association for Mental
Health . . . . . . . . 132
Mercantile Marine Service Associa¬
tion .. .. .. .. 355
Merchant banks .. . . 406-7
Merchant Fleet . . . . 352-4
Merchant Navy 118, 120, 354, 356-7
and Airline Officers’ Association . . 355
National Union of Seamen . . 355
Training Board .. . . • • 357
Welfare Board . . . . . . 357
Merlewood Research Station . . 218
Mermaid Theatre . . . . . . 233
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board . . 359
Merseyside 16, 19, 20, 77, 256, 304
Metal manufacture 255, 256, 295-7
Metallurgists, Institution of . . 206
Meteorological Office 53, 203, 205, 291
Meteorology . . .. .. . . 205
Methodist Association of Youth
Clubs . . . . .. .. 176
Methodist Churches. . 101, 197, 200
Metropolitan boroughs see London
Metropolitan Police Force . . 107, 108,
109
Metropolitan Water Board . . . . 289
Middlesbrough 20, 233, 257, 358, 359
Midlands industrial area 16, 19, 77,
255-6, 280, 297, 298, 304, 307,
308, 312, 313, 314
Midwifery
Midwives:
Board Central
Royal College of
Migration
Milford Haven
73, 150-1, 154
• •154
..154
. . 15
257, 279, 344, 360
Military Courts see Courts-martial
568
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Milk:
bars.. .. .. .. ..25
for children and mothers . . 150
marketing and subsidy . . 335, 341
production .. .. 327-8
in schools .. .. . . .. 163
Mineral ore refining equipment 300-1
Mines and quarries:
employment statistics . . 260, 445
industry . . 185, 260, 273, 274-8
Inspectorate . . .. . . 460
research . . .. . . 278, 460
safety measures .. . . . . 460
See also Coal
Mining Research Establishment . . 278
Ministers (of the Crown) 28, 40, 42,
46, 68
of State .. .. . . .. 46
ministerial responsibility 31, 48, 63
See also Prime Minister and in¬
dividual Government depart¬
ments
Ministers of Religion see Clergy
Ministries see Government, depart¬
ments of
Missiles see Defence, weapons
Moderator of the Church of Scotland
Modular Society
Molony Report
Monarchy
accession . .
ceremonial
coronation . .
relations with:
armed forces
churches. .
Commonwealth
Home Office
judiciary
Parliament 31, 32
196
. . 229
441-2
27, 28, 30-32
3°, 33
• • 32
..30-1
Privy Council . .
Royal Prerogatives
Royal Proclamations
Royal title . .
succession . .
.. 31
3i, 193-4, 196
. . 28, 30, 32
54, 99
3i,9i
33, 34, 35, 36,
37, 40, 42, 44
30, 32, 42, 44
31-2, 54, 99, 102
30, 44
28, 30
28, 29, 30, 32
See also Royal Family
Page
Monk’s Wood Research Station . . 218
Monmouthshire 1, 6, 18, 182, 257,
296, 358
Monopolies .. . . .. 272-3
Monopolies Commission . . 272, 273
Moor House field station .. . . 218
Moravian Church . . .. . . 198
Morley . . .. .. . . 256
Mortality see Death, causes of
Moslem community .. .. 199
Motor:
Manufacturers and Traders,
Society of (smmt) .. .. 304
racing see Racing
Show . . .. .. . . 304
vehicles:
industry . . 255, 304-5, 439
numbers licensed 23, 370, 371, 372
post office mail vans . . . . 387
regulations for visitors 513-4
taxation .. . . 397, 399, 402, 514
tests  373
See also Roads, transport
Motorways .. .. 367, 368-70
Mountaineering .. . . .. 501
Council, British . . . . .. 501
Mountains, heights of .. . . 2
Mullard Radio Astronomy Observa¬
tory .. .. .. .. 218
Murder .. .. .. 91, 98-9
Museums . . 206, 219, 224-6, 230
and Galleries, Standing Commis¬
sion on . . .. . . . . 225
Association .. . . . . 226
Music  26, 239-41
Amateur Standing Conference for 240
239
240
240
241
239
240
240
240
239
240
213
Council, National
County, Committees
festivals
Library, Central ..
orchestras . .
Royal Academy of
Royal College of . .
Schools Association, Rural
Societies, National Federation of
Musicians’ Societies
Musselburgh
N NASA see Space Research
NIRNS see Research
NSPCC see Children
Natal care see Welfare: children,
mothers
National:
Assembly see Church Assembly
Assistance . . 57, 64, 133, 140, 141
Board . . . . 57, 133, 14°, 142
Board for Northern Ireland 63, 64,
133, 140
Associations see relevant subjects
Coal Board see Coal
Debt  392, 401
Commissioners .. . . .. 406
N ational—contd.
Debt—contd.
Northern Ireland .. . . 402
Office . . . . .. .. 49
Development Bonds . . .. 405
Economic Development Council 252,
267, 446
Economy see Economy and Finance
Grid . . .. . . 284-5
Health Service 54, 62, xoi, 136, 141,
144, 145-53, 5i4
administration .. . . 145-7
charges .. .. .. .. 147
finance .. . . 135, 136, 146-7
general practitioner services 147-8
INDEX
Page
N ational—contd.
Health Service—contd.
hospital services 147, 148-50, 151,
153, 154
local health services . . 150-3
mental health services . . . . 149
Northern Ireland . . 153-4
problems .. .. •• 153
specialist services .. 148-9
income see Economy
Incomes Commission . . . . 252
Insurance . . . . 133, 134-9
benefits .. .. .. 135-8,514
‘ contracting out ’ . . . . 134
contributions .. 135, 136, 249
graduated pension scheme 134, 137
Ministry of Pensions and 57, 133,
139, 143, 150, 39i, 5i4
reciprocal agreements .. 133-4,514
stamps, sale by Post Office 135, 387
391,401
.. 486, 487-8
244, 249, 352
49, 248, 401, 405-6
. . 113-4, 120
186, 229-30
28, 259-60, 267-71
of nationalised
471-2
268
Insurance Fund
newspapers
product, gross
Savings
Service
Trusts
Nationalisation
labour relations
industries
Select Committee on the Nation¬
alised Industries
See also individual industries
Nationalised Transport Advisory
Council . . . . . . . . 364
Nationality .. .. ..15, 16,54
dual . . . . . . . . 16
Natural History, British Museum of
219, 230
Natural Resources (Technical) Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 204
Naturalisation .. .. 15-16,54
Nature:
Conservancy . . 185, 202, 203, 218
Conservation . . . . 185-6, 218
Privy Council Committee for . . 218
185, 218
. . 210
• • 384-5, 390
Ministry of and
Reserves
Naval architecture
Navigational Aids
Navy see Defence,
Merchant Navy
Navy League
Nelson
Netball  
All England Netball Association.
120
256
500
500
New Forest
New towns
Newburgh
Newbury
Newcastle upon Tyne
184
.. 181-3, x88
.. 281
.. 182
16, 20, 227, 239,
257, 3i7, 358, 37°, 481, 488
University . . . . 165, 213, 227
See also Tyneside
Newhaven . . .. .. .. 255
569
Page
Newport (Mon) 257, 296, 358, 368
News agencies . . .. 490-1
Newspaper:
owners . . .. .. 485-6
Press Directory . . . . . . 485
Proprietors’ Association . . . . 491
Society .. . . .. .. 491
Newspapers . . .. .. 485-93
Newsprint, supply of .. 319,485
Nonconformists, definition of . . 197
Non-ferrous metals industry . . 297
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(nato) in, 113, 116, 117, 121, 124,
125, 127
North Eastern Association for the
Arts . . . . .. .. 223
North of England Shipowners’ Asso¬
ciation .. .. .. •• 354
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board see Electricity
Northampton . . . . 168, 256
Northern Ireland {see also subject
headings)
area and counties . . . . .. 1
Boundary Commission . . .. 35
Civil Service . . . . . . 65
Council of Social Service . . 132
Courts of Law . . .. . . 90
reserved powers . . . . 93
Development Council . . . . 266
Electricity Board .. . . 259, 281
Fire Authority . . .. . . 78
Fire Services . . 78, 80-81
Football League . . . . . . 497
General Health Services Board 64,
153
Government 27, 43-44, 66, 97, 98,
101, 176, 186, 225, 263, 419
Exchequer and Audit Depart¬
ment .. . . . . .. 63
Ministry of Agriculture 63, 328,
334, 335, 338, 339, 342, 343, 346,
35i
Ministry of Commerce 63, 187, 263,
265, 377, 423, 447
Ministry of Education 63, 156, 159,
168, 271, 494, 495, 496
Ministry of Finance 8, 63-4, 76, 228,
401, 402
Ministry of Health and Local
Government 64, 70, 77, 144, 145,
153, 186, 187, 205, 228, 289, 291
Ministry of Home Affairs 63, 78,
91, 93, 98, 100, 101, 103, 104, 106,
107, no, 128, 129, 143, 144, 333,
377
Ministry of Labour and National
Insurance 63, 64, 133, 141, 447,
449, 450, 45i, 472
Governor . . . . • • 3°, 43, 93
Grand Opera, Society of . . 241
holidays, statutory . . . . 458
Hospitals Authority .. 152,153
57°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Northern Ireland—contd.
Housing Trust .. 188, 190, 191
Industry . . 186-7, 258, 263, 265,
281-2, 299, 303, 306, 312, 317
Irish Ballet Company in . . . . 241
Joint Electricity Committee 281-2
Land Registry . . . . . . 63
language . . . . . . 8, 20-21
new city . . . . . . 182, 186
Newspapers, Associated
Parliament
Parliamentary Draftsmen, Office
of
population . .
press
public finance
Public Record Office
Registers
relations with UK Government 43,54
representation in UK Parliament 27,
43
Road Fund . . . . .. 377
rural districts .. . . 19, 70
Tourist Board . . . . . . 512
university see Queen’s University
‘Workers’ .. .. .. ..451
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . . . 177
See also Belfast and Ulster
Norwich 19, 223, 225, 235, 240, 255,
3i5. 459, 481
TWI Centre . . . . . . 459
University (East Anglia) . . . . 165
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire . . 20,
225, 227, 233, 234, 256, 299,
3U, 499
491
27, 43-4
64
8, 17, 18, 19
489, 490, 491
.. 401-2
.. 63
8, 63-4, 143
Page
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire—contd.
University . . .. .. 165, 210
Nuclear energy:
establishments . . .. . . 216
international agencies . . 216, 220
for marine propulsion 115, 119, 215
power stations . . 216. 283-4, 301
reactors . . .. . . 215, 284
research . . .. 116-7, 215-7, 285
responsibility for . . . . 58, 215-6
weapons and equipment see
Defence
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nuclear test ban treaty .. .. 116
Nuffield:
Foundation . . 155, 172, 210
Radio Astronomy Observatory see
Jodrell Bank
Nurseries . . . . . . . . 151
Nursing and nurses 148, 151, 154-5,
448, 463
associations .. .. 151, 154-5
General Nursing Council . . 154
home .. . . . . . . 151
in armed forces 114, 120, 123, 126
in civil defence . . . . . . 129
in industry . . . . . . 463
Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service . . . . 126
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army
Nursing Corps . . . . 123
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval
Nursing Service . . . . 120
Royal College of Nursing . . 154
Nylon industry . . . . ..312
o OECD see Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development
Oban . . . . . . .. 344
Observatory:
Royal Edinburgh .. 217, 218
Royal Greenwich . . . . 1, 201, 205,
218
Obstetricians . . . . . . 151
Occupational therapists . . . . 155
Oceanography, National Institute of 205
Offenders, treatment of . . 98-106
Advisory Council on, Scottish 99-100
See also After-Care and Prison
System
Office machinery industry . . . . 300
Officer Cadet School .. . . 120
Oil:
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by . . 356
Old Bailey . . . . . . . . 84
Old people:
National Corporation for the Care
of .. .. .. .. 141
proportion in population . . 12
welfare . . . . . . 141, 142
in work . . . . . . 443, 448
See also Pensions
Old People’s
National
Old Vic Theatre
Oldbury
Oldham
Olympic Games
Welfare Council,
 Hi
 233
.. 284
 256
495, 5°2, 504, 507,
508, 509, 510
British Olympic Association . . 495
Opera and opera companies .. 241
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden 241
Ophthalmic services
Opposition, parliamentary
Opticians
General Optical Council ..
Order of St. John
Orders in Council
Orders of Chivalry . .
Ordnance Survey Department
Orfordness
Organisation for Economic
operation and Development (oecd) 216,
220, 419
Orkney Islands . . . . 1, 338
Orthodox Churches (Christian) . . 199
Otter hunting . . . . . . 502
Output see Industry, production
146, 147-8
37, 38, 39,
42
146, 148
•• 155
•• 154
3i, 44
• • 3i
• • 5i
.. 216
Co-
INDEX
571
Page
Outward Bound Trust .. . . 177
Overseas:
constructional work . . 293-4
dependent territories, public ser¬
vices . . . . . . 66-7
League, Royal .. . . . . 174
Liaison Group of DSIR . . . . 221
Research Council . . . . . . 205
Scientific Relations . . .. 221
Standing Committee on . . 221
students .. .. . . i7I-4
Trade see Trade
Overseas—contd.
Travel allowances
Oxford, industry
Oxford University
44j
106,
166,
Bodleian Library . .
Clarendon Laboratory
dramatic society . .
Imperial Forestry Institute
museums . .
Press (and Clarendon Press)
sport . . . .
Page
.. 422
• • 255
122, 165,
173, 193
. • 230
.. 210
• • 235
215.35i
225, 227
. • 232
498, 504
135. 398
3i9, 440
• • 310
• • 3i9
see
194, 195
• • 350
• • 373
183-4
183, 184
PAL see Broadcasting, colour trans¬
mission
PAYE (income tax scheme)
Packaging . . . . 309
Paint industry
Paper and board industry . .
Parish councils and meetings
Local Government
Parishes (Church of England)
Parkend
Parking, street
Parks, National
Commission
Scotland . . . . . . . . 184
Scottish National Parks Direc¬
tions .. .. .. .. 184
Parks, National Forest . . 184, 187
Parliament 27, 28, 32-44, 47, 48, 49,
82, 85, 94, 95, 112, 117, i94> 195,
203, 206, 268, 391-5
committees 40-1, 195, 206, 268,
392-3, 394-5
control of:
armed forces . . . . . . 112
finance . . 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 392-5
Government in power
local authorities
public corporations
37,
dissolution of
duration of. .
elections
functions . .
legislation 32-3,
Northern Ireland
opposition . .
party system
private members
private bills
privileges . .
procedure . .
prorogation of
questions to ministers
relations with Monarchy
34, 35, 36, 37, 4°, 42, 43
relationship with the Church I93_5>
196
secret sessions . . . . . . 39
sessions . . . . . . • • 34
standing orders . . . . . . 38
State opening of . . .. 32, 33
37,
42
• • 70
258, 268
3L 33
33-4
35-6, 36-7
.. 38
38, 39-40, 41-2, 50
43-4
38, 42
36-8
• • 39
39, 40
. • 36
38-42
3L 33-4
42-3, 46
3L 32, 33,
Parliament—con td.
Statutory Instruments .. .. 42
Whips . . . . . . 37-8, 50
See also House of Commons and
House of Lords
Parliamentary and Scientific Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 206
Parliamentary Counsel, Office of .. 51
Parliamentary Secretaries 46, 48, 50, 61
Parochial church councils . . . . 195
Parsons and Marine Engineering
Turbine Research and Develop¬
ment Association (Pametrada) . . 307
Passports . . . . . . 512-3
Patent Office Library . . . . 220
Pay-television . . . . . . 482
Paymaster-General’s Office . . 45, 57
Peers  34, 36, 71, 87
Pembrey . . . . . . . . 349
Penal system . . . . . . 98-106
Pensions:
appeal tribunals . . . . . . 92
for dockers.. .. .. .. 360
graduated pension scheme 134, 137
Ministry of, and National Insur¬
ance . . 57, 133, 139, 143, 150,
39L 5i4
old age . . . . . . . . 133
payment of, by Post Office . . 388
public service .. .. 57, 68
retirement . . 135, 136, 137, 138
war  57, 92, 133, *39
widows . . 136, 137, 138, 139
Periodical Proprietors Association . . 491
Periodicals . . . . 486, 489-90
Permanent Boundary Commissions 35
Personnel management . . 272, 472-3
Perth 234, 384
Peterborough.. .. .. 171,256
Peterhead . . . . . . . . 344
Peterlee . . . . . . . . 182
Petroleum and petroleum products 273,
278-80, 301, 309, 358, 359, 360, 397
chemicals industry . . . . 309
equipment industry . . . . 301
imports and consumption 278, 279
indigenous production . . . . 278
pipelines . . . . . . 279-80
refineries and refining 255, 256,
279, 3°9, 360
572
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Petroleum—contd.
research
tankers
terminals . .
Pharmaceutical
Britain
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmacists . .
Physical:
Laboratory, National . . 211, 306
Recreation see Recreation
Physics, Institute of, and Physical
Society .. .. . . . . 206
Physiotherapists .. .. 148,155
Pig Industry Development Authority 329
. . 280
278, 307, 353, 354, 360
. . 360
Society of Great
 154
 310
147, 154
Pig Marketing Board
Pilgrim Trust
Pilotage
Pipelines:
gas 
oil . .
Pirbright
Pitlochry
Planning:
Regional
town and country
Plant health . .
Plastics
Playing fields:
Association, National
provision of
Plimsoll line . .
Plungar
Plymouth
Poetry:
festivals
societies
Polaris vessels
Police . .
Authorities. .
cadets
Council for Great Britain
Gazettes
Political and Economic
(pep)
Political party broadcasts
Political party system
Pollution, prevention of:
air . .
sea (by oil)..
water supply
Polo . .
Hurlingham Polo Association
Pomeroy Forestry School ..
Pontypool
Pony Club 
Population
age distribution
birth and death rates
censuses
density
expectation of life . .
• • 335
186, 223
. . 356
287, 288
279-8
• • 214, 343
215, 284, 350
180-1, 264-5
55, 73,179-83,
205, 263
. . 215, 341-2
• • 309, 440
177, 495, 496
75, 495, 496
• • 355
. . 478
117, 481, 505
. . 232
. . 232
in, 116, 118
73, 106-10, 130
107-8
.. .. 109
108
. . no
Planning
. . 262
• • 479, 482
36-8
75, 145, 185
• • 356
290, 291, 339
500
500
35i
312
507
7-26, 242, 443
io-ii, 12, 443
• • 9-“, 443
8, 9, 15, 17, 193
8, 9-10, 13, 179
io-ii
Page
Population—contd.
fertility trends .. .. 11-12
households. . .. .. 21-2
increase in . . . . . . 8, 9, 16-20
leisure . . .. . . 22-6
migration .. . . .. .. 15
mortality, causes of .. .. 11
nationalities . . . . .. 16
regional distribution . . 16-20
Royal Commission on .. . . 9
sex ratio . . . . . . 12, 15, 443
social organisation . . 22-6
trends .. 9-10, 14-20, 187, 445-6
urbanisation . . . . 16-20
vital statistics . . . . 8-14
working . . .. 19, 22, 443-7
Port of London Authority . . 291, 359
Port Talbot .. .. . . .. 366
Port Transport Industry,
National Joint Council for the
Portavogie
Portland
Portpatrick
Ports:
and Docks
360
344
119
344
120, 254, 255, 256, 257,
344, 357-6o
Council, National . . . . . . 357
Portsdown .. .. .. .. 119
Portsmouth 19, 117, 118, 124, 182, 255
Post Office 57-8, 128, 205, 217-8,
260, 304, 385-90, 475, 483
Advisory Council and committees 385
broadcasting responsibilities 58, 475,
476, 477, 483
cable and wireless services 388, 390
counter services
factories
387
.. 260
385- 6
386- 7
• • 511
• ■ 389
• ■ 389
•• 385
finance
mail services
postage rates
private circuits
radio tower, London
relations with Exchequer.
research . . 58, 205, 217-8, 483
Savings Bank . . 58, 386, 405-6
statistics . . . . . . . . 386
vehicles . . . . . . . . 387
See also Telecommunications
Postmaster General 49, 57-8, 68,
385-90, 475, 476, 477, 482, 483
Potato Marketing Board . . 335, 341
Potteries see Stoke-on-Trent
Pottery industry . . . . 255, 318
Power, Ministry of 58, 204, 263, 273,
275, 280, 281, 285, 286, 460
Power stations 216, 281, 282, 283-4
Premium Savings Bonds . . 405, 406
Preparatory schools . . . . . . 161
Presbyterian Churches . . 197-8, 200
Preservation:
Councils . . . . . . 185-6
of rural amenities . . . . . . 185
societies (architecture) . . 229-30
INDEX
573
Press . .
Amalgamation Court
Council
employees’ and employers
isations . .
legal requirements
readership . .
Royal Commissions on
television and
training for journalism
Press Association Ltd.
Preston
Prestwick (airport) ..
Preventive detention
Price:
guarantees (agricultural)
Page
485-93
.. 486
.. 492
organ-
491-2
492-3
• • 485
485, 486
• • 485
.. 491
•• 490
256, 370, 384, 387
282, 384, 385
98, 102, 106
332, 333,
334-6
251-2, 455
271-2, 442
relation to income. .
restrictions by traders
Primates see Archbishops
Prime Minister 34, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46,
47, 50, 65, 93, 94, 112, 194
211,
Force
233
35i
126
492
492
492
102
-102
Prince Charles Theatre
Princes Risborough . .
Princess Mary’s Royal Air
Nursing Service ..
Printers and Assistants, National
Society of Operative (natsopa) . .
Printing and Kindred Trades Fed¬
eration
Printing industry . . 319-20,
Prison chaplains
Prison system . . • • 98
National Association of Prison
Visitors . . . . • • • • 101
Prisoners:
Advisory Committee on Employ¬
ment of Discharged . . ..100
After-Care Council (Scotland) . . 102
Aid societies . . • • . . 102
Central After-Care Association . . 102
National Association of Discharged 102
Private International Law Committee 93
Privy Council. . 30, 31, 32, 33, 44-5
Committees .. 44-5, 57, 213, 214
Quakers see Society of Friends
Quarantine regulations . . • ■
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying machinery industry . . 299
Quarter Sessions . . . . 83, 90
Queen see Monarchy
Privy Council—contd.
Counsellors
Probate, Divorce and
Division (High Court)
Page
44, 46
Admiralty
86, 87, 94
Probation
officers
Procurator General
Department of
Procurators Fiscal
98, 99, 103, 105-9
104, 105-9
.. 58
.. 58
88, 89, 91
RAC see Automobile Club, Royal
RAF see Royal Air Force
Racing:
boat.. .. •• •• •• 5°4
cycle
greyhound
horse
motor car
Production and productivity see
Industry
British Productivity Council . . 270
Professional and Executive Register 56,
447-8
Psychiatric social work 101, 106, 149
prison . . . . . . • • 101
Public:
Accounts Committee 41, 393, 394, 395
Building and Works, Ministry of. . 59,
113, 185, 189, 228, 229,
261, 263, 292, 294
corporations 258-9, 267-8, 471-2
See also Nationalisation and
individual corporations
houses
libraries
Prosecutions, Director of . .
Record Office
museum ..
Relations, Institute of
schools, Scotland . .
(independent) Schools
Services of Overseas Dependent
Territories . . . . . . 67
Trustee Office . . .. • • 57
utilities see Gas, Electricity and
Water
Works Loans Board
Publishers’ Association
Publishing
Puisne judges. .
Pumped storage (electricity)
Pumps and industrial valves
Purchase tax see Taxation
Purfleet
• • 25
. . 231
56, 88
57, 231
.. 224
.. 441
157, 158
.. 161
49, 77, Wo
• • 232
232, 319-20
86, 94
.. 284
.. 301
37o
Queen’s:
Bench Division (England and
Wales) 84, 85, 86
Bench Division (Northern Ireland) 90
Counsel . . . . . • • • 95
Proctor . . . . .. 56, 58
University, Belfast 165, 210, 230, 231
343
• • 509
506-7
23, 5°5-6
508-9
Racing—contd.
motor cycle
point-to-point
racecourses
Rackets
509
503
506
510
Radar 115, 116, 122, 125, 126, 205, 218
303, 384-5, 462
Establishment, Royal . . . . 115
574
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Radcliffe Observatory .. . . 218
Radio :
astronomy . . .. . . 217, 218
communications 203, 211, 217-8, 355,
389-90
See also Broadcasting, Naviga¬
tional aids and Satellites
equipment industry 303-4, 461-2
Officers’ Union . . . . . . 355
Research Station .. .. 211,217
telescopes . . . . 210-1, 217, 218
Radioactive Substances Advisory
Committee.. .. .. .. 216
Radiobiological Protection Service .. 216
Radiochemical Centre . . . . 216
Radiography . . . . . . 149, 155
Railways . .259, 361, 362, 363, 365-7
Northern Ireland . . . . 376-7
reorganisation . . . . . . 367
safety measures . . . . 459, 461
statistics . . . . . . 362, 365-6
underground (London) .. . . 375
vehicles industry . . 255, 260, 305
Rainfall . . . . . . . . 5
Ramblers’ Association . . .. 186
Ratcliffe . . . . . . . . 283
Rates . . . . 75-6, 249, 391
water . . . . .. 289, 290
Raw materials, trade in 242, 413, 414,
4i5, 4i7» 420, 433
Reactor School, Harwell .. .. 216
Reactors see Nuclear Energy
Reading University . . .. . . 165
Reciprocity (social services). . 133-4, 5T4
Recorders (law) . . 83, 84, 91, 94
Recreation:
Centres, National . . . . . . 496
Physical . . . . . . 494-6
Central Council of 177,495,496,502
Scottish Central Council of 177,
495-6
See also Sports
Red Cross Society, British .. 132, 152,
177
Red Deer Commission . . . . 334
Redditch . . .. . . . . 182
Rediffusion Ltd. . . . . 171-2, 478
Reference Library for Science and
Invention . . . . . . . . 220
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods . . . . . . 318
Refrigeration machinery 22, 258, 301
Regent, appointment of . . . . 32
Regional development . . 264-5
Registrar:
General . . . . . . 8, 54, 143
General of Shipping and Seamen 355
of Restrictive Trading Agreements 272
Registrars of births, deaths and
marriages . . .. . . . . 8-9
Registration of foreign nationals . . 513
Regular Forces Resettlement Service 449
Regular Reserve . . . . . . 123
Page
Rehabilitation see Disablement
Religion see Churches and also Broad¬
casting and Education
Religious freedom . . . . . . 193
Religious Orders . . . . . . 199
Remand homes and centres 103-4
Remploy Ltd. . . . . 260, 453
Rent control . . . . . . . . 192
Rent tribunals . . .. 92, 192
Repertory theatre companies .. 234
Resale Price Maintenance . . 273, 442
Rescue services:
civil defence . . . . . . 129
sea and air . . 125, 356, 389-90
Research, scientific and industrial 201-22
advisory councils and committees 203,
204, 209, 211, 215
agricultural 204, 214-5, 341, 343
aircraft . . 116, 205, 306, 383
applications of results . . 219-20
Associations . . .. . . 212
astronomy . . . . . . 217, 218
atomic see nuclear
biological . . . . . . 206, 215
botanical . . . . .. . . 206
building and civil engineering 212, 294
chemical . . 210, 211, 213, 309
climatological . . . . .. 53
Commonwealth . . . . 214, 221
communications . . . . 205, 390
Council . . . . 61, 209, 210
councils 202, 203, 204, 205, 209, 210,
213, 214, 215, 216, 219, 343, 463
criminology .. .. 106, no
defence .. .. 1x5-6, 119,217
Department of 59, 204, 210, 211-2,
217, 219, 221, 271, 278, 294, 463
Development Corporation, National
203, 210, 220
ecological .. . . . . 185, 218
electronics . . . . . . 211, 303-4
engineering .. 211,213,216,294
expenditure on .. .. 202,211
fellowships and studentships 173, 209,
213, 214, 218
fire prevention . . . . 80, 211
fisheries . . . . . . 212, 215
food .. . . . . 214, 215
forestry .. .. 211,215,350-1
fuel and power . . 204, 278, 280,
285-6, 288
geological .. .. 205,211,219
geophysical . . .. . . 53
Government responsibility for 45, 60,
61, 203-18
human sciences . . 106, 205-6, 474
industry . . 207, 211, 212, 213
See also individual industries
industrial health . . . . 58, 463
inventions . . . . . . . . 220
land use and planning . . . . 205
medical . . . . 155, 213-4, 222
meteorological .. . . 53, 205
INDEX
575
Page
Research, scientific and industrial—
contd.
mining . . . . 58, 204, 278
National Institute for Research in
Nuclear Science (nirns) . . 217
nuclear .. H5> 116—7, 2i5—
pest control . . • • . . 215
petroleum . . . . • ■ • • 28o
physical . . • • • • . . 211
plant . . • • 206, 212, 215
private institutes for . . . • 213
Privy Council Committees for 44-5>
213, 214, 218
psychiatric . . • • .. 106
radio . . 205, 211-2, 217, 483
radio-astronomy see Astronomy
results, information on . . 219-20
roads .. ■• •• 212, 37°
rockets .. •• H5>217
social . . • • • • • • 2°5
space .. •• 211,217-8
telecommunications . . 205, 218
tropical products . . .. . . 212
in universities and technical
colleges . . 166, 167, 208—11, 2x4
veterinary . . . . • • • • 2I5
water supplies . . 211, 212, 291
zoological . . . • • • • • 2I9
Residence in the United Kingdom 511-2
Restrictive Practices Court . . 272, 276
Retail prices index . . . . • • 455
Retail trade . . 433, 434, 435-9
Reuters Ltd. . . . . • • ■ • 49°
Revenue 249, 25°, 392, 395, 39M, 4°i-2
Riding . • • • •• •• 5°7
Rifle Associations:
National . . . ■ • • • • 5°9
National Small-Bore . . • • 5°9
shooting . . . . • • • • 5°9
Rights of way . . • • • • ^4
Risley . . • • • • • • 21^
River authorities . . . • 291, 339
River pollution, prevention of 291, 339
Road:
Freight Shipping Services . . 363
haulage .. 361, 362, 363, 371-2
Research Laboratory . . 212, 370
Services, British . . 363, 371, 372
Roads . . 61, 62, 367-74, 377
classification . . • • 367, 377
development and construction 212,
368-70
motorways 368-70
Northern Ireland . . . • • • 377
safety . . • • 61, 372—3, 461
transport . . 361-2, 363, 37(>-4
Rochdale .. . . • • • • 256
Rochdale Committee (ports) . ■ 359
Rocket Propulsion Establishment . . 115
Roman Catholic Church 36, 101, 193,
198-9, 200
schools . . • • io4> i58, 199
See also Catholic
Page
Rope-making .. .. 257,313
Rose Bruford College . . • • 235
Ross-on-Wye . . . . • • 368
Rosyth .. •• •• 1I7, II8
Rothamsted Experimental Station 214,
309, 343
Round Table . . . . • • 174
Rowett Research Institute . . . . 343
Rowing . . • • • • 5°4-5
Amateur Rowing Association . . 505
Royal:
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having Royal
as first word of their title
Academy . . . • • • 222, 227
Air Force . . 53, 112, 113, 114, 116,
124-7, 130
Colleges 115, 126
Reserve and Auxiliary Forces . . 127
Volunteer Reserve . . . . 127
Aircraft Establishments 115, 2°5,
217, 306, 383, 385
Armament Research and Develop¬
ment Establishment .. .. 115
Commissions:
Ancient and Historical Monu¬
ments . . .. •• •• 228
appointment and functions of . . 50
Fine Art • • • • 222, 228
Local Government in Greater
London . . . • • • 77
Population . . • • • • 9
Press . . • • • • 485, 486
Family:
ceremonial . • • • • • 32
genealogy and succession 29, 30
Fleet Auxiliary Service .. .. 118
Fleet Reserve . . • • . . 120
Household, political officers . • 38
Institution . . .. • • 207-8
Marine Forces Volunteer Reserve 120
Marines . . • • • • I,:9> 120
Medals (science) . . . . • • 2°7
Military Academy i22
Military College of Science . . 122
Mint ■ • • • • • 49, 4°4
Naval Auxiliary Service .. .. 120
Naval College .. •• .. 119
Naval Engineering College .. 119
Naval Reserve . . . • . . 120
Naval Special Reserve . . . . 120
Naval Staff College . . 115, 119
Naval Volunteer Supplementary
Reserve . . . • • • • • 120
Navy • • • • 53, II4> 117—20
Fleet  in, n?-8
Reserve and Auxiliary Forces . . 120
See also Defence
Observer Corps .. . • 127, 128
Ordnance Factories .. .. 115
Pavilion, Brighton • • • • 225
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
576
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal—contd.
Society 59, 201, 205, 207,
Ulster Constabulary
Royalty Theatre
Rubber industry
Rubber Technology, College of
Rugby
League
Union
Rule Committees
Rules of Court
Rumford medal
Page Page
Runcorn . . . . . . . . 182
209, 214 Rural:
.. no amenities, preservation of 185-6
• • 233 Community Councils .. 265-7
. . 320 districts:
. . 168 councils . . .. .. 70, 71
256, 3°3 population . . . . 16, 17, 20
. . 498 Industries Bureau . . 265-6
. . 498 Industries Development Committee 266
56, 93 Music Schools Association .. 240
87* 93 Preservation Councils . . 185-6
. . 207 Rutherford High Energy Laboratory 217
§ SECAM see Broadcasting, colour
transmission
Sadler’s Wells Theatre . . 233, 241
Safety:
Council, British . . . . . . 460
in Mines Research Establishment 460
measures . . . . 458-62, 464
training centres . . . . 459-60
See also Agricultural, workers,
Civil Aviation, Mines and
Quarries, Railways and Roads
Safety of Drugs Committee . . 149
Sailing . . . . . . .. 505
St. Andrew’s Ambulance Associa¬
tion .. . . . . 132, 152
St. Andrews University .. . . 165
St. Dunstan’s . . . . . . 140
St. Fagan’s Castle Museum . . 225
St. Helens .. .. .. .. 256
St. John Ambulance Brigade 132, 152, 177
St. Vincent de Paul, Society of . . 132
Salford:
College of Advanced Technology 168
Hundred Court . . .. . . 86
Salisbury . . . . . . . . 234
Salmon fishing . . . . 346, 504
Saltire Society . . .. . . 232
Salvation Army 132, 176, 197, 198
Sandhurst . . . . . . . . 122
Sandwich courses (technology) . . 169
Satellites 205, 211, 217-8, 390, 481, 484
Savings . . . . 248-9, 405-6
Banks .. .. .. 405-6
National . . . . . . . . 405
Scholarships see Education
School Health Service . . . . 163
School Meals Service . . . . 163
Schools see Education
Science:
and Technology, National Lend¬
ing Library for . . . . 219, 230
Department of Education and see
Education
museums . . . . 219, 224, 225
promotion of . . . . 201-22
publications .. 206, 207, 219, 222
See also Research
Scientific:
and industrial instruments in¬
dustry . . . . . . 257, 302
Scientific—contd.
and Industrial Research see Re¬
search, scientific and industrial
co-operation:
Commonwealth Scientific Com¬
mittee, British . . . . 221
Commonwealth Scientific Offices,
British . . . . .. 221
government and industry 201, 209,
212, 220
between industry and univer¬
sities 201, 205, 209, 210-11, 3x8
with overseas countries 205, 209,
217, 218, 219, 220-22
Film Association .. .. .. 237
Policy, Advisory Council on 203, 204,
209, 2X1
Scientists:
advisory to Forces 117, 121, 124
migration .. . . .. .. 209
number employed .. .. 209
training of . . . . 166, 209-10
Scilly, Isles of . . . . L ?o
Scooters see Cycle and motor cycle
industry
Scotland {see also subject headings)
area and counties . . .. . . 1
Association for the Preservation of
Rural . . . . . . . . 186
Government departments ..61-3
Agriculture and Fisheries 61-2,
185, 214, 215, 263, 333, 342, 346,
461
Crown Office . . . . . . 63
Development . . 62, 70, 228, 263,
337. 372
Education 62, 156, 157, 158, 159,
160, 161, 162, 168, 227, 271, 494,
495
General Registry Office (Depart¬
ment of the Registrar
General) . . .. 8, 62
Home and Health 62, 128, 130,
145, 149, 205, 328, 346
Information Office . . . . 62
Lord Advocate’s
Record Office . .
Registers of Scotland
language
Minister of State for
. • 63
62
.. 62
8, 20-1
45, 61
INDEX
577
Page
Scotland—contd.
national galleries and museums
of  225
National Library of . . . • 230
Parliamentary Draftsmen for . . 63
population 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20
press . . • • 488—9> 49°> 491
Secretary of State for 27, 46, 54,
61, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 92, 93, 94,
99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 106, 107,
108, 128, 143, 144, 146, 152, 156,
175, 180, 181, 184, 185, 187, 192,
213, 215, 229, 275, 281, 289, 291,
333, 334, 339, 34°, 347, 367, 494,
495
Scotland Yard .. .. ..no
Scottish
Academy, Royal . . . . ■ • 226
Academy (music), Royal . . . . 240
art galleries and museums . . 225
Artists, Society of . . . • 226
Central Library . . . . ..231
Council (Development and In¬
dustry) . . . . 237, 266, 423
Country Industries Development
Trust . . . . • • • • 266
Criminal Record Office .. ..no
Daily Newspaper Society .. 491
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 41
Health Services Council . . . . 146
Industrial Estates Management
Corporation .. .. • • 264
Land Court . . • • 90, 34°
National Buildings Record . . 228
National Institute for the War
Blinded . . . . • • • • I4°
Newspaper Proprietors’ Associa¬
tion . . . • •• •• 491
Office, definition of . . . . 61
Omnibus Group . . . . 363, 372
Standing Committee (parliament¬
ary) .. •• • • • • 41
Statistical Office .. .. • • 267
Tourist Board .. • • • • 512
Typographical Association . . 492
Valuation Advisory Council . . 76
Scunthorpe .. ..  255
Sea Cadet Corps .. • • 120, 177
Seamen:
conditions of employment 357, 461,
462
number . . . • • • 3S2, 35^
organisations .. • • • • 355
qualifications .. • • • • 357
Search and Rescue Organisation . . 125
Secretaries of State see relevant
Ministries
Select Committees see Parliament,
committees
Selection, Committee of (parlia¬
mentary) . . •. • • • • 41
Service trades . . • • • • 439
Severn, river . . . . • • 4, 293, 375
Page
Sewerage . . 55, 62, 73, 144, I45> 291
Sex-ratio see Population
Shakespeare Theatre Company,
Royal  233, 234
Shareholders . . . . . . . . 261
Sheffield 19, 20, 233, 257, 296, 307,
308, 375, 44°, 460
University . . 165, 209, 210, 318
Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navi¬
gation .. .• •• •• 375
Shellhaven .. . . . • • • 279
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts 88-9, 90,
94,150
Shetland Islands 1, 5, 338, 344, 345
Shipbuilding and Marine Engineer¬
ing 255, 256, 257, 258, 263, 306-7,
353, 354
British Ship Research Association 306
Shipowners Associations . . ■ • 354
Shipping . . . • • • 352-6o
Advisory Panel . . .. •■356
and Seamen, Registrar General of 355
Chamber of
chartering . .
coastal
companies and lines
conferences
cross-channel services
earnings of
353, 354
• • 355
353, 364
353-4
• • 355
359, 363
352, 417-8
employers’ and employees’ organ¬
isations ..
employment of
exports
Federation
fishing vessels
on inland waterways
insurance . .
liners, passenger . .
medical advice, service for
354-5
• • 353
• • 307
• • 354
• • 345
374-5
354, 410-11
353
390
merchant fleet, composition 352 3
merchant navy .. 118,120,355,
356-7
Navy see Royal Navy
ore carriers . • • • • • 354
organisations .. • • 354-5
ports 255, 256, 257, 344, 357-9
propulsion . . . . 204, 307, 353
radio communications . . 389-9°
relations with Government 263, 355_6
safety . . • • • • 356, 461
tankers and terminals 118, 278, 307,
353, 354, 360
tonnage . . • • 3°7, 352, 353
tramps . . • • • • 352, 353
weather reports for .. • • 39°
Shooting see Game and Rifle shooting
Shop stewards . . • • • • 460
Shops 22, 434, 435“9, 457, 458-9, 462
mobile .. • • • • 437_8
multiple stores . . 434, 435, 437
number of . . • • • • • • 434
self-service . . • • • • 437
supermarkets . . • • • • 437
578
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Shops—contd.
turnover 435, 436
Show jumping . . . . . . 507
British Show Jumping Association 507
Shrivenham (R.M. College) . . 122
Sickness benefit . . 135, 136, 137
Silo subsidy .. . . . . . . 336
Sikoe 343
Silver ware . . .. .. . . 308
Silviculture see Forestry
Sizewell . . . . . . . . 284
Skelmersdale . . . . . . 182
Ski-ing  501
Slade School of Fine Arts . . . . 227
Slough . . 21 r, 217, 368, 463
Slum clearance 55, 73, 187, 188, 189-90
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smallpox see Vaccination
Smoke control . . . . 145, 185
Soap production . . . . . . 310
Social distinctions . . . . . . 23-4
Social Sciences see Human and
Social Sciences
Social security services 131, 133-44
expenditure on . . 131, 397, 400
reciprocal agreements with other
countries .. i33_4, 514
Social service:
National Council of . . 132, 141
Scottish Council of .. 132, 141
training of social workers 132-3
Council for Training in Social
Work . . . . . . . . 132
voluntary organisations 131-2, 140,
141, 143
See also National Health Service
and National Insurance
Social Survey, Central Office of
Information . . . . . . 205
Society of Friends . . 132, 197, 198
Soft drinks industry . . . . 317
Solicitor General . . . . 46, 56
Solicitor General for Scotland 46, 63
Solicitors . . . . 94, 95, 96, 97
Sonar equipment . . .. . . 118
Sondes Place Research Institute . . 213
South-East Asia Treaty Organisation in
South of Scotland Electricity Board
see Electricity
South Uist .. .. .. .. 115
Southampton 182, 225, 236, 255, 306,
3°9, 358, 359, 360, 481
University . . . . . . 165, 210
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space research see Research
British National Committee on . . 217
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (nasa) . . . . 218
Steering Group on . . . . 217
Speaker:
House of Commons 34, 35, 36, 38-9,
195
House of Lords . . .. . . 34-8
Page
Special constables .. 108, no, 130
Special Orders Committee . . .. 42
Speech and Drama, Central School
°f   235
Speed limits .. . . . . 372-3
Spenborough . . . . . . 256
Speyside Research Station .. . . 218
Sports . . . . 22-3, 494-510
equipment industry .. 320-1
Springfields Laboratory . . . . 216
Staff colleges (armed forces) 115, 130
Stafford . . . . . . 303
Stag hunting . . . . . . . . 502
Stamp duty see Taxation
Stamp trading . . . . . . 438
Standard of living . . 23—4, 179, 250-1
Stanlow . . . . . . 279, 280
Stansted . . . . . . 182, 383
State see Monarchy and Parliament
State Management Districts (liquor) 54,
65
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 49,
59-60, 232, 260, 291, 514
Statistical Tables and Charts
Agriculture and Food
Aid to overseas countries
Balance of Payments
Bank Advances
Birth and Death
Defence
Earnings
Elections . .
Employment
Expenditure
324, 325, 326
•• 432
. . 428
•- 403
10-11
113, 114
455, 456
37, 38
269, 295, 444, 445
245, 250, 251, 295, 397,
399, 400
4i4,4i5,4i6
• . 348
273, 277, 282
4i4, 4i5, 416
269, 295
Exports
Forestry
Fuel and Power
Imports
Industrial Production
Insurance . .
Investment
Newspaper circulations
Population
Postal
Production and Income
Retail Trade
Revenue
Savings
Scientific research costs
Social Insurance Contributions
Statistics:
abstracts and digests of . .
application of data
See also subject matter
Statutory bodies
Statutory Instruments
Statutory Publications Office
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelwork plant industry
Sterling and sterling area 242, 253, 416,
417, 422, 427, 428, 429, 430
Stevenage .. .. 182,211
. . 410
247, 258
487-8
18, 19-20
.. 386
246, 250
434, 436
250, 397, 399
. . 248
. . 202
. . 136
266-7
1
.. 259
. . 42
.. 58
300-1
INDEX
579
Page
Stirling . . •. • • I6s> 37°
Stock Exchanges .. .. •• 4°9
Stockport .. .■ •• •• 256
Stoke Poges . . .. •• •• 213
Stormont Laboratory . . • • 341
Stoke-on-Trent 20, 255, 296, 318, 463
Stranraer . . . . •• • • 359
Strategic goods exports . . . . 423
Strategic Reserve .. .. .. 112
Stratford-on-Avon . . . . 232, 236
Strathclyde University . . . . 165
Street parking . . . . • • 373
Street traders . . •• • • 435
Strikes and lock-outs . . 454> 47°
Students:
from overseas . . .. 172-4
National Union of . . .-174
See also Education and Universities
Submarines .. m, 116, 118, 119
Subpoena see Law
Subsidies see Agriculture and Housing
Sugar:
Agreement, Commonwealth . . 336
Beet . . 325, 327, 334, 335-6
Page
Sugar—contd.
British Sugar Corporation . . 327,
335-6
Sunbury-on-Thames . . . . 280
Sunday Mirror Children’s Art
Exhibition . . . . . . • • 226
Sunderland . . . . • • • • 257
Supply Committee of 40, 43, 392-3
Supply Services . . . . 392, 393
Supreme Court of Judicature 86, 87, 90,
93, 96
Supreme Court of Judicature (North¬
ern Ireland) . . . . . . 90
Surface Water Survey Centre . . 291
Surtax see Taxation
Sussex University of . . . . 165
Swansea .. 165,257,358,359,360
Swimming . . . . • • • • 5°5
Amateur Swimming Association. . 505
Scottish ASA . . . • • • 5°5
Swindon . . . • • • ■ • 255
Sylvester medal . . . • • • 207
Synthetic fibres 257, 258, 310, 312-3
Synthetic rubber . . . . 258, 309
T Table Tennis .. •• •• 510
Tankers and terminals see Shipping
Tanning . . . • • • • • 3H
Tariff policy . . .. 398,419-21
Tate Gallery . . . . • • • • 224
Taxation 52, 55, 133, 251, 39L 392,
395-9, 401-2, 511-2
Customs and Excise duties 52, 398-9,
402, 419-21, 513
double taxation agreements 398, 512
estate duty . . 55, 397, 398
income tax 55, 249, 396-8, 511-2
Special Commissioners of . . 92
local see Rates
motor vehicles . . 396, 397, 399
for non-residents . . . . • • 398
PAYE   135, 398
profits tax . . . . 55, 396, 397, 398
purchase tax 397, 398, 399, 5I3
stamp duties . . 55, 396, 397
surtax . . • • 55, 249, 396, 397
Taxicabs (London) . . . . • • 375
Teachers see Education
Technical:
Assistance . . . . • • i73> 432-3
Assistance Programmes, British . . 173
Co-operation, Department of 6o, 67,
155, 214, 221, 45°
Development Capital Limited . . 220
Education see Education
Information Service . . . . 271
Technological Awards, National
Council for . . . . . . 167
Technologists, Membership of Col¬
lege of (MCT)  170
Technology see Education, Research,
Universities and relevant industries
Tees-side . . .. •. 257, 359
303:
Telecommunications:
overseas
private
satellites
telegraphs
telephones
Telex
Television 23
advertising on
Advisory Committees
audience research . .
Centre
colour systems
films
international
pay television
press and . .
programme companies
receivers, industry
for schools
205, 388, 389, 390
. . 389
205, 390, 481, 484
387-8
. . 205, 388-9
..388
389, 475-8, 480-4
478, 482
478, 483
..483
. . 481
. . 483
236, 481
483, 484
. . 482
• • 485
• •478
• • 3°3
171-2, 480, 482
Society for Education in Film and 237
standards conversion . . . . 481
studios . . . • • • . . 481
See also Broadcasting, Independent
Television and Licences
Tennis . . • • • • • • 510
See also Lawn Tennis
Ten-pin bowling . . . • • • 24
Territorial Army .. •• 114, I23-4
Territorial Army Emergency Reserve 114,
124
Test matches
Tests (motor)
Textile industries
machinery industry
Thames:
Conservancy
389, 499
 373
. 210, 242, 256, 258
295, 3IO-4, 4i5
• • 299
• • 289
58°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• • 363
.. 486
484, 491
486, 488
. . 280
•• 359
363, 372
Utilisa-
• • 35°
•• 350
Cor-
• •35°
. . 296
■ • 258, 317
3i7, 397, 399
..132
• 310
. 187
• 215
Page
Thames—contd.
Navigation Service .. • • 358
river 4, 255, 279, 280, 323, 360, 370
Theatres .. .. 24, 233, 234, 235
clubs and professional associations 234,
235
See also Drama
Thermonuclear research see Nuclear
energy
Thomas Cook and Son
Thomson D. C., Group
Thomson Foundation
Thomson Organisation
Thornton
Tilbury
Tilling Bus Group . .
Timber:
Advisory Committee on
tion of Home Grown . .
Growers’ Organisation
Home Grown, Marketing
poration . .
Tinplate industry
Tobacco
revenue duty
Toe H
Toilet preparations industry
Tollymore Park
Tolworth Laboratories
Tools industries:
hand . . . . .. .. 308
machine . . . . 210, 256, 298
small (engineers) . . . . . . 300
Torquay . . . . . . . . 233
Torry Research Station see Aberdeen
Totalisators .. . . . . 506, 507
Tourist:
information . . .. 389, 512
trade . . . . .. 22, 419
Town and country planning see
Planning
Town Councils see Local government
Town Development Schemes . . 183
Townswomen’s Guilds . . 25, 171
Toy industry .. . . 320-1
Tractors .. .. 298,331,343
Trade . . .. 242-4, 413-42
Board of 45, 60, 181, 227, 237, 238,
263, 264, 267, 409, 423, 424, 430,
43L 433, 434, 438, 439, 44°, 44L
447
internal
overseas:
airborne ..
area distribution
balance of payments 252-3
carried by aircraft
composition
exports 413, 414, 415-8, 421-5, 428
financing of .. . . 426-7
Government assistance to 423-5
imports . . 242, 413-6, 419-23
invisible transactions . . 352, 417-9
433-42
• • 382
416-7
427-31
. . 382
414-6
Page
Trade—contd.
overseas—contd.
tariffs .. 398, 399, 419-21, 422-3
value and volume of . . 413-8
re-exports .. .. .. .. 417
restrictive practices, control of
271-2, 442
retail .. .. .. 434-42
wholesale . . . . , . 433~4
See also individual industries and
Investment
Trade fairs . . . . . . .. 425
Trade Unions 453, 454, 464, 466-8,
47°, 472
affiliations
Civil Service
educational facilities
local government service
musicians . .
political fund
press
seamen
theatre
Trades Union Congress
Scottish
TUC Educational Trust
Trading Agreements:
Registrar of Restrictive
Traffic:
air . . . . 379, 380, 381, 382, 383
467
68, 467, 47i
. 467, 468
467, 47i
240
468
491-2
355
234
270, 467-8, 471
468
468
272
canals
congestion ..
London
Management Unit
Northern Ireland .
ports
rail and road
sea ..
wardens
374, 375
22, 373-4
22, 375-6
•• 373
376-7
357, 358, 359
22, 212, 360-1, 362,
365, 37°, 37L 372
•• 353,357
i°9, 373
Training schemes for industry 168,
169-7°, 271, 447-5°, 451-3,
459-60, 473-4
Training schools (Northern Ireland) 104
Training Within Industry (twi) 459-60
Transoceanic cables .. . . . . 390
Transport . . , . . . 352-85
administrative reorganisation 361-2,
363 4
air  377-85
Boards 259, 363-4, 365, 367, 374, 375
consultative committees . . . . 364
Docks Board, British . . .. 359
Holding Company . . 363, 372
Hotels, British .. . . . . 366
inland waterways .. . . 374“5
London .. 22, 362, 363,364, 375-6
Ministry of 61, 204, 215, 263, 346,
355, 356, 357, 358, 361, 363-4, 367
37°, 372, 373, 374, 461
nationalisation, legislation 360-4
Northern Ireland . . .. 376-7
police . . . . . . . . 107
INDEX
581
Page
Transport—contd.
rail . . 361, 362, 363, 365-7, 376-7
research . . . • • • 212, 370
road 361-2, 363, 370-4, 377, 461
safety measures . . 61, 356, 372—3
sea .. .. •• •• 3S2—6°
statistics . . 352, 353, 354, 356, 357,
358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 364, 365,
366, 367, 368, 370, 372, 374, 375-6,
377
Tribunal . . . • • • 92, 364
Users’ Consultative Committee . . 364
Travel see Tourist trade and Work,
travel to
Travel Allowances . . . ■ • • 422
Trawsfynydd .. • • • • 284
Treasure trove . . . . • • 95
Treasury 50-1, 58, 65, 67, 156, 181,
225, 228, 233, 263, 268, 275, 281,
364, 379, 393, 394, 4°i, 4°2, 404,
407, 422, 43°, 47i
bills 401, 407
Chief Secretary to . . • • 5°
Counsel . . . . • • . . 84
Solicitor’s Department .. . . 58
Treatment of Offenders . . 98-106
Page
Trent navigation .. . . • • 375
Tribunals:
administrative .. .. ..91-2
Civil Service Arbitration . . 471
Council on . . . . . . 92
Industrial Court . . . . 469, 47°
lands . . . . 76, 92, 34°
mental health . . . . 149-5°
Scottish Land Court . . 9°, 34°
transport . . . . . . 92, 364
Trinity House, Corporation of 356, 359
Tropical Medicine Research Board. . 155
Tropical Products Institute. . . . 212
Trustee Savings Banks . . 405, 406
Trusts, National . . 186, 229—30
Tuberculosis:
eradication of bovine .. • • 341
prevention and treatment of i49» I52
Twickenham . . . . . . • • 498
Tyne Police . . . . . . 107, 108
Tyneside and Tyne ports 17, 20, 77,
257, 303, 366, 370
See also Newcastle upon Tyne and
England, north east
Tyne-Tees Television . . 223, 478
Tynwald Court see Isle of Man
UHF (ultra high frequency) broad¬
casting .. 481
UKAEA see Atomic Energy
Authority
Ullapool . . • • • • • • 344
Ulster:
Architects, Royal Society of . . 229
Academy of Arts, Royal .. • ■ 226
Drama Festivals, Association of . . 235
Folk Museum . . .. • • 225
Group Theatre . . . . • • 234
Museum . . .. • • • • 225
Savings . . . • • • • • 4°5
Special Constabulary .. ..no
Transport Authority .. . • 376
Underground railways . . • • 375
Unemployment .. • • 142, 264-5,
446-7
benefit . . 133, I36, 137, I38
in Northern Ireland .. . . 447
See also Employment
Unit trusts . . . . • ■ 409-10
Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches . . . . • • . . 198
United Free Church of Scotland . . 198
United Kingdom:
area and composition 1, 16—17, 19—20,
27
citizenship .. . . • • • • I6
geography .. .. • • • • I~7
United Nations organisations:
contributions to . . . . 53, 433
relations with 51, 53, 54, 56, 60, 99,
173, 220, 433, 484
Technical Assistance . . i74> 433
United Power Company . . . . 213
United States:
defence co-operation in, 115, 116,
126
educational and research co¬
operation i73, I74> 217, 220
financial aid from . . 253, 418, 429
private investment in UK 253, 43°
Universities 106, 157, 164, 165-7, I7I,
173,208-11,214,219,225,
230, 231, 232, 235, 343-4,
35i
agricultural degree courses . . 343
building programme . . . . 166
Central Council on Admissions . . 165
clearing house scheme . . . . 165
degree, diplomas and certificates 162,
166, 169, 170, 343-4
departments of education . . 167
drama clubs and societies . . 235
expansion . . • • • • • • I66
extra-mural courses . . . . 171
finance . . • • • • I65, I66
Forestry courses .. .. •• 351
halls of residence . . . . .. 166
medical and dental schools . . 146,
154-5
museums and libraries 219, 225, 230,
231
new  165
presses .. . • • • • • 232
Privy Council committees for . . 44-5
research 166, 167, i73> 208—11, 214
scholarships and research fellow¬
ships . . 165, 167-8, 173, 209
sport .. 498, 500, 5°2, 504
students . . . • 165-6, 1^2, 173
582
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Universities—contd.
technological education in 167, 209-10
See also individual universities
University Film Council . . . . 237
University Grants Committee 165, 166,
208
Unmarried mothers . .
Urban districts:
councils
population . .
Urdd Gobaith Cymru
Urmston
Page
• • 151
7i, 72
17, 19-20
•• 177
. . 280
VHF (very high frequency) broad¬
casting   479, 483
VTOL (vertical take-off and landing) 306
Vaccination . .
Valuation for rating . .
Valves, industrial
Vegetables, processing
Vegetation
Vehicles industries . .
Vending machines, automatic
Ventilation equipment
Veterinary:
Laboratory, Central
Service and research
surgeons
Victoria and Albert Museum
Victoria League
150, 152
55, 75-6
. . 301
• • 316
.. 6
255, 256, 258,
304-b
• • 437
• • 3°i
.. 171
• • H9
512-3
224-30
3-12, 15
215, 34i
215. 34i
•• 34i
224, 226
•• 174
Village Colleges
Virological laboratories
Visas . .
Visual Arts
Vital statistics
Vocational guidance and training 448-9,
450, 45 L 452
Voluntary organisatiqns:
child care . . . . . . . . 143
civil defence .. . . . . 128
education .. . . . . 171, 174
prisoners’ aid . . . . 101, 102
welfare 132, 139, 140, 143, 151, 154
youth services .. 174, 175, 176-7
Voting:
in House of Commons . . .. 39
in local government elections . .71-2
in parliamentary elections ..36-7
w WVS see Women’s Voluntary Service
Wages and salaries . . 22, 68, 75, 249,
454-7
negotiations 464, 469-70, 471, 472
statutory regulations . . . . 469
Wages Boards and Councils . . 469
Wales (see also subject headings):
administration . . 27, 45, 49, 53, 55
area and counties .. .. . . 1
Council for . . . . . . 27
Council for the Preservation of
Rural . . . . .. . . 186
Development Commission . . 266
Development Corporation 266, 423
holidays, statutory . . . . 458
industry 257, 266, 276, 279, 284, 296,
297, 307, 312, 358
language . . . . . . 8, 20-1
Local Government Commission 77
Minister for Welsh Affairs 27, 45
National Library of
National Museum of
population . .
press
University of
Wallace Collection
Wallingford . .
Wallsend
Walton on Thames
Wantage Laboratories
War pensioners . . 54
Warburg Institute
Warren Spring Laboratory
Warrington . .
Warwick, University of (Coventry).
Washington . .
Watch committees (police) . .
. . 230
. . 225
17, 18, 19, 20
489, 490
..165
224-5
. . 211
257, 370
. . 279
. . 216
57, 139-40
.. 227
205, 212
. . 182
165
182
107
Water:
Committee, Central Advisory . . 289
Scottish, Advisory . . . . 290
Conservancies, Thames and Lee. . 289
pollution .. . . . . 212, 291
polo  505
power see Electricity, hydro-electric
Research .. .. 211,212,291
Board, Pollution . . . . 291
Laboratory, Pollution . . 212, 291
Resources:
Board . . . . . . . . 290
Committee . . . . . . 291
sources of . . .. 288, 289, 290, 291
supply . . . . 73, 145, 288-91
Waterways see Inland waterways
Waterways Board, British 363, 374-5
Watford .. . . . . . . 211
Watson House research centre . . 288
Ways and Means, Committee of .. 40
Weapons see Defence, weapons
Weapons Group (UKAEA) . . 216
Weather . . . . . . 4-5, 6
bulletins for ships . . . . 390
forecast services . . . . 53, 205
Weaver river . . . . .. . . 375
Wedgwood china .. .. ..318
Weedkillers . . . . . . . . 220
Weights and Measures . . 441, 514-5
Welbeck College . . . . . . 122
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled . . 132, 140-1
centres . . . . 140, 141, 150
children .. .. .. 142-4, 151
in civil defence . . . . . . 129
family . . . . . . 131, 142
Foods Service .. .. .. 150
INDEX
583
Page
Page
Welfare—contd.
industrial . . . • • • 462-4
mentally ill • • • • 149_S°
mothers .. •• •• I5I> I52
old people . . . . • • I4I> I42
overseas students . . .. i73_4
prisoners and probationers 101, 102
services . . .. • • 140-2
war pensioners . . . • 13 9_4°
See also National Assistance and
National Insurance
Wellcome Trust . . . • 207, 210
Welsh:
Affairs, Minister for . . 27, 46
Board for Industry . . • • 267
Board of Health . . . • • • 54
College of Advanced Technology 168
Folk Museum . . . • • • 225
Grand Committee . . • • 41
language . . • • 8, 20-1, 159
League of Youth . . . . • • *77
National Opera Company . . 241
National School of Medicine . . 165
Tourist and Holidays Board . . 512
Welwyn . . • • • • . . 182
Wembley . . • • 497, 5°°, 5°6
Wesleyan Reform Union .. . . 197
West Burton . . . . • • • • 283
West Drayton . . • • • • 384
West Lothian . • • • I82, 258
West Riding see Yorkshire
Western European Union . . . . in
Western Hemisphere Exports
Council . . . • • • • • 425
Westfield (Fife) . . • • • • 287
Westminster Press . . • • • • 486
Weybridge . . • • • • 215, 341
Whaling . . ■ ■ • • • • 34&
Whipsnade Zoo . . • • . . 219
Whisky industry . . . . 258,
White City . . . . • • 5°6, 5°7
Whitechapel Art Gallery .. • • 226
Whitehaven . . . . • • • • 233
Whitley Councils . . . • 68, 75, 471
Wholesale trade see Trade
Widnes . . • • • • • • 256
Widows’ benefits and pensions 136, 137,
138, 139
Wight, see Isle of
Wigmore Hall . ■ • • • • 239
Wildfowling Association . . • • 5°3
Wilkins lectureship . . . . • • 207
Wimbledon . . • • • • 499, 5°6
Windscale . . . . • • 216, 284
Winfrith . . • • • • 2I^> 2^4
Wire broadcasting . . . • • • 482
Wires and cables (insulated) industry 304
Wolfson Research Professorship . . 207
Wolverhampton . . 16, 255, 488
'Y Yacht:
racing . . . • • • • • 5°5
Squadron . . . . • • •• 5°5
Women:
in Armed Forces
employment
114, 120, 123, 126,
127
443, 444, 445, 446, 447,
448, 454, 456, 457, 458,
462-3
456-7
22, 443
• • 489
11-12, 15
25, 171
. . 226
• • 177
. . 126
123, 128
. . 120
120, 125
• • 25
• • 25
equal pay for
housewives..
periodicals for
proportion in population
Women’s :
Institutes . .
International Art Club
Junior Air Corps . .
Royal Air Force . .
Royal Army Corps
Royal Naval Reserve
Royal Naval Service
Rural Institutes
Scottish . .
Voluntary Service (wvs) 128, 132, 152,
154
Woodland owners’ associations . . 350
Woodlands . . . . 6, 348-9, 350
Dedication Scheme . . • • 35°
Woodstock (Kent) .. . • • • 280
Wool:
Industries Research Association . . 311
Marketing Board, British . . 335
Textile Export Corporation,
National . . • • 311-2
Woomera .. •• H5> 217
Worcester . . • • • • 240, 387
Work:
hours of . . • • .. 22, 457~8
travel to . . • • • • . . 22
See also Employment and Labour
Workers:
manual . . 23-4, 446, 454 5; 456
professional, managerial and
clerical . . 23-4, 272, 446, 447-8,
456-7
Workers’ Educational Association . . 171
Workers’ Educational Trade Union
Committee . • • • • • 468
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes 25
Works councils . . • • • • 469
Works Managers, Institution of . . 272
World Council of Churches . . 200
World Data Centres . . 211, 217
World Health Organisation (who) 215,
220
• • 215
508
Worplesden field station
Worsteds see Textiles industries
Wrestling
British Amateur Wrestling Associ¬
ation .. •• •■ •• 5°8
Wrexham . . • • • • • • 257
Wylfa . • • • • • 284, 293
Yachting Association, Royal . . 5°5
Yarmouth . . • • 255, 344, 345
York . . . . 223, 225, 240, 257
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
584
Page
York—contd.
university . . .. . . . . 165
Yorkshire . . 16, 20, 77, 293, 298, 299,
314, 323, 486, 488
West Riding 20, 256-7, 311, 314
See also individual industries and towns
Young Christian Workers . . . . 176
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . 177, 325
National Federation of . . . . 177
Scottish Association of . . . . 177
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca) . . . . 132, 176, 501
Young offenders see Juvenile delin¬
quency
Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion (ywca) .. .. 132, 176
Youth:
and Sports Council (Northern
Ireland) . . . . . . . . 176
Clubs:
National Association of . . 176
National Council for Catholic . . 176
Employment:
Council, National . . . . 451
Page
•• 45i
•• 4Si
177, SOI
175
Youth—contd.
Employment—contd.
Executive, Central
Service and Committees
Hostels Associations
leaders
National College for the Train¬
ing of  175
orchestras . . . . .. . . 240
organisations, voluntary 120, 124,
127, 176-8, 495
Scottish Standing Conference
of Voluntary
Standing Conference for Wales
Standing Conference of (North¬
ern Ireland) . .
Standing Conference of National 176
Service . . . . . . I75~6
Development Council .. . . 175
services . . . . . . 174-8
Standing Consultative Council
on (Scotland). . .. ..175
Theatre, National . . . . 234
See also Children
176
176
176
2 Zebra crossings
Zenith (reactor)
. . 373 Zoological Gardens . . .. .. 219
. . 216 Zoological Society . . . . .. 219
(90010) Wt. 1530 K.256 11/64 Hw.
S.O. Code No. 70-701-0-65
19
2
Ife/kfr
"iunbar
K
>W
fthflburgh
ft / ** f
■ J'l I ^ \ I
/ c j* I ** fi' I
J 'Zf \ J; J ^
f^Cchppbeltown J Cr^
M Olj
Mulfof ‘ fir^ /Gijvan
Kintyre i /
4> / ]/
^
[Peebles.
Coldi
'str*on£
\Galashiels
St. AbS’s Head
s-% r \
JEyemouth
'&erwick-ut>on-Tweed
zjjveedmduth
jHotyl.
I | \ Vv^orth Sunderlandi
ENGLAND & WALES
Scale 1:2,000,000
10
20
30
40
5D Statute Miles
10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Kilometres
Canals
Ayr}
0Selkifkr^ The \hevidt
Z**
• ' ""t i >>YNoRTHUMBBRLAN^
'^^dlingiTdirfZ-/
Jldthbury
\lkwicks
lAmb/e
 Railways' ^
(Passenger Services)
Shipping Routes
(Distances in Nautical Miles)
3210 Heights in Feet
1 [
Larne ^Strantyr*
/Newtohr
[Stewart):
i\
§
mmfriesA
"fynan'
(/png town']
’ Haltwhfstle
.Mlingtilf&W}' V
NeWMtleeWynemoul*\
SoutlTSmelcJs
W— } 't; ^
In. irtBTAND
Ja/ <
I o 1 ,
Downpatrick.
^Mull of
.Galloway
Pt. of Ayr^
1.1 OF MAN /^dRamsey^ J
Peel/ Sme(e 11 '203&
Douglas i
XUMBER't^ND \nm
Skiddaw \'x (tjCross^F&H-
Port Erinsr-^r
Calf of\Man o^^TZastletown
&&il/otf)
Kirkcudbright
stalls A r^^^T^0Km*D
Egremont^ ^/ffiLksheorf rr_
j/rswrift, Windermere
Ravenglasif ^Cjerei^
% \J /
■'v UlverHonq
Barrowl^V
Moreca
Jxr Hamburg4?Z
Durham^
)\ , Hi
. Bbrnard i®e
yy^Castie
(enjdal
Ins
under land \
Chester le Street
i5eohan|i Harbou\
Hartlepool \
&West Hartlepool^
j&edcar \
1 lolnesbrough''
ngtpn i xKettle Ness
PJchcaohd/York Moors
Beda leX^oNortha Ilerton)
Cc ° Pirikenna
N
0
K
T
H
IRISH
SEA
'Lytham^St. Annes
Southport]'
'QWf
\[ %y\Ripon,
yv&R
Scarborough
\
if i ley \
V
Wolds3^f:Tm^orou8^ Head
Bridlington \
\Horhsea
Market~q%v'5r,e'
yp bun Laoghaire
To_Dy^Q" ^-'Amlwch
FormbysPvt.
Li verpooj-1 -- Bodtl
u7 ''' rr\LlarPo^
HolyheatfcA’-—
/ 'Holy I.
Liverpddj^ nf
Birkenhe«fe
Caernarvon
Bay
vp DENBIG
-aemarvon f±
BraicH-y-Pwll,
To Hamburg 382
L i n H
)l^r^S(feHK<ffJLincoln ^
^e/<f
coj Cemmaes Hd.
 iTo Rosslare 55
iStrymble Hd^
fcSiP^
M St! Dav/d’afPEMBfROKE
-v
\Haverfordwi
Milford £/;
St. Ann’s Hd.
Cardigan°wyr\
Bay Bonh
Aberystwyth,
Aberayron^
New Qua/o ZARdIl^AN
\Mablethorpe
~C 5te Bkegness
Gibraltar Pt.
-fok ,
tont|®n
Yarmov
Pembroke^
LinneY 1
Bristol to (for/: 225
Worms Hd.
Fyrthcawi
Bri
Bristol ^Aianne^f ~ ^ Westoi
, . i I. llfracombe^J%!y30tf~-y--
Lundy I. Norte Pt.^^^
[Hartland Pt.Qddeforci
y
Padst0l
Trevose Hd
/Echo®
Hoiswprthyl
1 /esTpr j ^e^omPton ’
r^sj'tmoorEw.
rprincetowr
weringho/n
I S:?Krofher
Sandringham^/
vJxPqkpnMdfi
(King’s Lyrf/^
>4lch«vO Rh
yiMe /viejtexTX ujwaffhm.
no i 0Ra^eyf,Qfep5ndon0 /I^TfietTofd
gHUNTS  
.. ™ js^iWorfioia^E^sputhioid;
=GA.lHB‘j^^^^^ee(j/iam /yiorj^ts^ AldetJurgt
F-j/52
arwich |
The Naze'
cton-
^/v. on-Sea
Sea /./
Sblithminster
^ontyPry
super-Mare
~'^l inehpsd—-a
xmoetc^Du nke py^\
arnktapfeZeacon\707 £
Bamptoi H
Tiverton? / bid
%ryury
r ..Dover
Folkestone A
fy'dd 'ff/
Calais^1
Tidmouih
Yxmouth Weymoub
$eJ^m%uTWe BV
dPaignton
aonmou-thVrixh<,m
\Xin£sbridge
^Portland Bit
r 4...
Swonoge^e^Aee,
^.reeacbyHiad
'k/i.' M londor?^201
entijor. ^ '
<astingPun^n^sJ\
Bexhill L^^X.Gris Nez
ast bourne
cvt^
3 Boulogne/^
5?/
’Hetstoh
F
Lizard Ptr C?rJl
J
“■ ^ -'f0 Montrea
New
York
c
H
>1
^1
E
l
t /N 5
-H-
\ |e Treporp
St. Valery
Dieppe
J
i /
i j -
Alcierney
i:
i /
i /
//
GrrnSeW^ark
Pq^Qj. p
CHANNElJ ISLANDS
(British)
jersey
f.|He//er
Caen
WEST FROM GREENWICH
I FC
Continuation northward
on the same scale
Fair Isle
Unst(
North
Ronaldsay,~
Sula Sgeir
■ Rona
| Shetland Ad
Hillswtck
I Islands st.9
Magnus
B. ,
Papa Stour—.
/Yell.
Lsif'
Fetlar
Q&urrovoe
s Sule Skerry
' Stock Skerry
Y J^Westray
Rousay/>-viEdayyj \f
O RkSj eIy £
'Zetland.
ra ] B 7
JFpula
ScallovfcM
Ijerwick
ij %|Noss
i^iBressay
StromnesS
Old Man of Hoy/^7x^Sc«ipJ i o
RoraSl1TS\0!£^H'>cO»Burray,^
Hd- H^TpSouth'te
O,, ^ SWona Ron^ldsay
ruMjSanday
^?Stronsay
Orkney
\lslands
C. Wrath
st I fs?*.
/Gallan Hd..
b
\r
& V* 4
rXarloway
Butt of Lewis
/tort of Ness
^Barvas )
kjTolsta Hd.
J,o& TiuHpan Hd,
\Vo^
ro,
Lo'c/i
sf'''
(Kjfnlochbervj£
"3j0o/, Foinaveiv
^Vr2%0 • /. B. Hope
Handa I.qT',v,Sj
Pfarr
Tcdguk-Z
-^O/. ^S t ro , Pe n 11 a n d Skerries
ACj(&7lQS‘n^t^feclnsby
o/Ln4
|r~w-^gayY Castletowny rTsv'; y \
n\ Hallarkr° S^Vatterf'nrfa/^
f ^-tN'oss Hd
Fair Isle
L J? w i s
_/Eye
Peninsula
Pt.of
StoerCN>^
Lochmver yj
•N Si 886 ’L.
L- Res0/-Wr2iava3j
^Scarp%%^.
West E. rLT 2622
Taransayv
^L.Erisort
£n
-ftafailari.
Kebock Hd
“LSReTir
Rhu Coigach^^t. H
I 1^*/]
t, Summer Is..B.More ^pjaacr
3040
fecouj^ff S'!! T/iH/^R lA D
LnNaver^^A jW,
BTf^lTBreck J
^Llnchnadofp^h
.Shin
^AITHNESS/^j^
SUIbsver''
Latheron aJ
3—'Zybster
Vunbeath
.A.
.'’a
TarMc
r$h
\\
'’ant Is.
'•n„
L-B
°c/,
Rjudh’Re
Melvaig
Loiga
1438-^-
’Cd^L . Qykel
orven
SS'^l13
Ki/c|onoSSK ywriedale
Ord of Caithness
hlelmsdale
wthmore
(Brora
N
S
T
H
m
Ard an
Runair
. rvrt. S
\£madel <- ^ Trodday
^ Rudha "
Danish s &Hunish^\ I r, . D<. / k.'—IL-v^bH
^ X i°« ■> f^ed Pt./ Maree^.-^!?
% / \\. W^J///ofioo/
p^Teanfech ^Ben Dearg
3483 \ 3547
InvershirQ Bonar Br.^^orhOCh
V __ oir..^rh Firth
Ku/cardme
. VRpnnijA * . -/-> • -
teweVL^ROS5 &/qROMARTY
' 0111 /TTarhat Ness t
~/Portmahomock
. 1
Gairfdtsn |j
iN/ire
Lossiemouth
3429
PJorth£§^mWd/ Vatemish ^
Monach
Is.
vUist
Bale i
*' share
(U
Benbeculal
VUu/g
nRonay
f^sayE '
_r4&^vWiay
L. B ^Xdd&fn&ecula Sd. ^
N/sr
3 ^SoUtRo
Rudha j Bfrlhor Lc
Ardvuley|^72034
S-' I 'jLothboisdale^
r V i.Boisdalep
^vyEnskay
n» Barra^
-i-Tor^Beinn Eighe
D\ Eobk 3309
The||#>r^
Storr)^
^ TH 236011
X\L) un vega rn
* ^ Portree^
Bratfiffye-
L.E>r®,C \ a Broaiffirdt-fs' ^kvx   
fCuM Hills , e JHlr,
PCrimterfy'
.i BurgheadK-, . ,
1 Findhywg—
\\
->a,Torridon
j S^/e/dai^^TDamh
' \ Beinn Bhai
•2936
{Forres
Rothes
\ MORAY
CW//- S°ay’ » /-t
Canna_J ^ ^ /\rm '7°^
^rS°/-k3l5)faig
nn'W§>^e~LlZ/ortros
Acfinasheenro^tf2^'1~ f
^A]R^
|(11
VV^f "Y, o-SrrwC^c..   W 1 ^V^annich k yyt)S^f Nv
■xc,ton y^TJ^CaiSi OdJwrJh
i^aPK *'r> |
jr-Buckie^-^g^SBurghy
5rVd.\fi
I'Vij-v itromeferrv rr-<v^f3^~(U|'<
~|VfcdblD>
l^'P^S-l^/^^cholsh ^ /^Pj
KyLerheMc^ B&t^
/U^wr B.skitheall^S
—-n-^rw- neveroY.Jtirriff
KelivN^VT' NeWc
Pjf /\ Deer ^^rfh^OABdchanl
. nunvy Cruden Boyo/ / 1
^fjBANFF ^ ABERDEEN /^\VEHbn / /
y—>cl o0id- Pity i
Insch meldrum dLf ,/
.368 -Inyerurie^ / TeYbur2h j
viemore
Cairn
> k>—da:
. . CarryMor 1
SN ^36
/ X/wotbcjorr^}
Mor\Jen
Alford
Hill oLFare
tP\
00
^Castlebay
Vat
“tersay
^Odray
8.
iMingulay
Berneray
a/Ta Hd.
Banchory
i \~y )y,K^.' E^s-sjav^cir.^n^l ^w^a,m„ra,
i^4P/C.Lochy ^2^7 -'
'Gulvain'^ ^Vy ,cE «0ch yfl..) c<Da/whinrl'ev a/' ^ Lochnagar.3786(
I ^ 7 / JL *'5*304. v C • pGttQTCO
b e F/I Ben Aldpf/^k^umocljter 330>6. a'Ghip^S c^jfcfi0 A
^Aberdeen
JUirdleNess
rRortfethen
(Stonehaven
L. BlilA
Ardnamurchan Pt.^ /;/Stront/on^'^J^
4406 ^rrei^^^rfcM
** ' "af w Kinloch
Coll.
| Gunna
Tiree^yv
o> 'ft
Toberffi^Xr ^^2423^'
^0V
Skerryvore‘
T L A N T I
m ^
Staffa1
lona<7A
s'Derv'0%. ^s"*” L°ch-
'• U|7aMW_|^y LochdorhpP^ -J^^!yB.Cruachan
'~~^sS°T—vP7 y'r^yr.ilninver vy;
RoJJf L i 3X
[B^orliCTi
*^,Z6raeV^#(ion EdzelitfP A Inverbervie Q\\
fair AMI Sir o7\S D%CV'0hThaven
, 0Kitpmhael KirriL f
j^.A=rrc=>wr~--354y -^^pPithchry { \\4a Suia ¥^Montrose ~
a2%J')?lli°Ji=^?8o//in/u/^NAiytfr^3 — /Frioclftieim -/■$
Forfar / ^Red Head
(Ronnocha
Rr
Abetfeidy^
m
Er<"a'
f'1.
Torran
Rocks
Liaingj
Scarba Pv
V v‘
A a n e DunkelmA*. CoubajdC^fp , _
VA, S# I T H
3224 Avchteraraern/^uChtemitXffty°_ qrffoif' r; 'v\.Fife Ness C p U
.  a ^allandk^^^J(\\\^l^CFmapPpPirktoiPof Jtrp'il ^ C P
CpfVT Arrochar))j'Bdh3Ynont?^==/^?^ i^S^^^-Lf^T^^^Anst'ruther
AXrbrdath
.dee^ rnaustie
i&ypoifieih !
%0buo£hty Ferry Bell Rock
P! , /N 0 R \r H
jt. Andrews
Dubh Artach
c
ynrrucrh
tnveWJ/Sdachur^.
*j\ . ,y/ AVCA^ VI U°/7 Bt
/) . ^ } fv jaCrinan V/ r“. \ ff//
roinncav/A t- / L- y /<? P'-7 Garelcfthheffi
Coprifr^ lW j/p/CSjrOd^head
\A/dlussd/_«
'v<rd/jAii^kaZ^t.lia . , < iu “v-—
 _Ki rkcaldy-"—^\ck::-9Pminnf
loy&VBurntisIphd Untori ''°/o "''-A
S ^.Dunbar -sfApB
RpT6^
/erModdj ngtort^Qockburrisppth
dt.Abps Hd,
610
/ «l. of May jo Copenh°te-—
Oronsays
L, Tarbertf
jOtter Ferry tev i
An Tighnabrpaichjl
0 c
Nave„
E A N
Coul Pt.<
'Port
(Askaig
lay
^R57l/ /• [p' \ri
i( Fapf' L.Caoliy 7"arbert AEE'
,d ^ of J uc® iporty \0,
Lrfighouse
Wunooh
RhinnP&4/)\ Pon
Pt Ellen«
V- xO0 /
\-pY/ \QrilW) U l iXVLorgK RENFREW^?
Gigh^? / , fjyzxk
iL/ngP7 StevS^ ^SfothU-
^tKv V>PL \\ n RE
crpotohintofM^X’ \ )- 2 Louder
JeeSes^^TN'^
Mull of Oa Glenbarrt
jtooo- } 'KitA/cF
\ Arran^ ^l0^ V > \
Lm/oshmr^ Troori\% V^ouchfoe
I 'rS Prestwick)?
wanonx^o? ^ ^ /PeebleSo} x \ \
nCTk
y '°L
-Horn
Hd.Jn-'
.;>WMalin Hd.
."Co/J
m
Carndonagn
MovilleoAd
.Xqi
K? <" C>
cp<£LJP~ „
Bushmills9
A""" . ^Rattilin'^
o
C5l
E "«L. Mull's.^'
Fair | y-of Kintyre
-vHd.
Vo-j • v—</7p
Campbeltown / /;tL
Vb," ■
s H
MuJrkirk
q '^Cumnock
Doug/f^A ^Yorrow^?^
i «P Si)
PRathLlleJ ( buncrajfa.A^AAx
• ErritaK RairAhoniJCG) _/>>' ii Lfl>. >
7246<r y \
Lett^jjkenny ip&ndonderfyjGarvagh 0 A
leraine
DOkEGXT^ R0p6oe^-t
Uluesjad^^ L,ff°rdjf>Strabarieyi
Batlybofeypy-^-fl^ Spef^'
•22|IJ? Castle? | ^°o
MM Co.
flaudykQunglven
Ballybastle <F
Trostan J
1817 jCiishendall
tylyrponey op±more
X  dlCarnlough-
\KeeciNTRIM ArQenarm
\ Broughsnane'
^Quthend /“X
<P/ Ballantrae,
Glasgow W ^ W c'ralg SS^J
Mm
Jtp i
O 67^ /
Corsewall.Et 
^ 'i New
1Lucei
>"ib
-vlo^derryV'^B“llymeL few.
i \ I VG,T-0 W N
Glenluce
.. r -u • ^PThornhill « ( c^a
fTffs'S D\V M F E SX
/M^t NewV50'^ -
Y QtUowaydt Maxwelltown^-p^ ,-«■
^ KiRRcimBRifcHT y Vum'&r\ Gretna
New ADbeyoly JWfanf^Green
Criffell. aowne0&
t^Slte* fjr^Antrim
NORtt(EB^JJrtREKk^D I
rjmagh Cookstown ^ , Lodgh/ 'oelfa4t/
0 S/P%J J JE Nfghfc
A/nrt<ztA\A/n \
t> Stranraer I
; N? -c
PortpatricIS
fl
Gotehowse ttalbeattley
nx/iY
Bangor i
yDondghad'ee
oNev^townird?
o/S-o {Ards\ i
Comb&ha 3 G/tey Abbe/1
&6WS L Sugf°r? Veninlula
Jerjygona.^
N^igt°
V' \ luce Boy Qsrliestowiv,
P>A Wmborr?
of Fleet
A
0 f ef%, 'Htr — J 'sc 1 r* * OJ-
rTZpLpshJlramore \ TYRONE ^oy St^r^^isburii
r 0 jFintona Duhgannon
Mull ofGalloway
Ltxbmaben„)\ Langholmfi SA
Lockerbie
V^Ecdefechaji
s%f
iKfrkaxIbright A
Abbey Hd. S°
Md ryp0%e^^s Skiddaw 'Penritin
Burrow Hd. 1 ^n cs I
Workington
Whitehaven
I /
a 'at ^ v bje^h. jrmu —-- v v'''^PrNdPe o^"r—f-~\: PArtaferryi
SSW.AGH <£g*ATV#®.^rma8l%E<DSwN W&gM ;
Belcoo lEnniskillen^rfcinccL'o&B Tanderagee] Ao?fA&Doyynbatrick° Jr S?;
ARMAGH
Uppei^^
ErneCi.
4^fr7l^'8tas!»
6"',^agh^ Vv&i^xT"” "• ?'
' " ' ^ ,iiGullipnj\po/nt X'u, S°st/e •?/
Pee/
k ^s» *ie/t|sp&i^eW„ ^BaaaKjBgK^
°nard
/Douglas
{Castletown
WearbeAdSK _
Ippleby sv
'x
SCOTLAND
AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
Scale 1:1,600,000
>0 .0 10 20 30 40
l/Anrrirk KMeshaMraRafr Cavan , InniskeerfC- . L__.
WohilL’ \ c£% 2 Bcfilieborouonfo mc^"^5s.i.OUTra ^ d ■
Calf of Man
. 0
~io 0
/ rT I S H
\ 7* a *1x1 1 /
O ;
23 /
Q.'
E 7l|
    50 Statute Miles
>0 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Kilometres
Canals
_ Railways
(Passenger Services)
.. Shipping Routes
(Distances in Nautical Miles)
. 3058 Heights in Feet
5
3
North
Ronaldsay
Sule Skerry
Stock Skerry
Rousay Eday
^fo 5
Stromne
Old Man of Hoy
Wrath'
frerdjen oV
^ thc
\lslands
-ss^a// if
South/^
Ronaldsay
A/o,, Pentland Firtf, °ld H?ad
 sSo "4 V’St'rorrw V^^Pentiand Skerries
C/f7/„ Ay r''vn 0’Groats /
\roats
"'uncansby
Hd./,
jpSV'*
\\.
erburghj ^p,attra^
jad^Bdchan
ro,Tl0 fsJess
/
intore
=%On / /
DyceV^\berdeen
M Girdle Ness
^e7 A
_^r, /7Poriiethen
ianchory // / 1 \
iattock
1555
INCARDINI
3 Stonehaven
^ ' "''Vfc. Fettercairn / ,0
£dzefe° 0 Inverbervie ^c
'■j -1°^ °]ohnshaven
e Brechhrjw' e°Cel<i/-k
lontrose ^
,'V
Sir Norman
Haworth,
Science,
1937
Sir Robert
Robinson,
Science,
1947
Sir Howard
Florey,
Medicine,
1945
Dr. Patrick
Blackett,
Science,
1948
BRITISH WINNERS
of
NOBEL PRIZES
for
SCIENCE
Dr. Boris
Chain,
Medicine,
1945
SirAlexander
Fleming,
Medicine,
1945
Sir Edward
Appleton,
Science,
1947
Professor
Cecil
Powell,
Science,
1950
Sir John
:ockcroft,
Science,
1951
r. R. L. M.
Synge,
Science,
1952
Dr. Frederick
Sanger,
Science,
1958
Dr. John
Cowdery
Kendrew,
Science,
1962
Sir Cyril
Hinshelwood,
Science,
1956
Dr. Max
Ferdinand
Perutz,
Science,
1962
Professor
Maurice
Wilkins,
Medicine,
1962
Lord Todd,
Science,
1957
r. A J. P.
Martin,
Science,
1952
Sir Hans
Krebs,
Medicine,
1953
Dr.’P. B.
Medawar,
Medicine,
1960
Dr. Francis
Crick,
Medicine,
1962
Professor
Alan
Hodgkin,
Medicine,
1963
Professor
Andrew
Huxley,
Medicine,
1963
